S/PV.8313

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8313th meeting

Tuesday, 17 July 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Dah
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Michon
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Clay
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (5/2018/649)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-22694 (E)
*1822694*

S/PV.8313

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

including the Office of Counter-Terrorism, are
supporting dialogue on countering terrorism and
preventing violent extremism, and have been
advocating for the involvement of more women and
youth in those efforts.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2018/649)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/649, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the f loor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: I am honoured to be here today to
introduce the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/649) on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.8156), positive
developments, in particular on the democratization
front, have been competing with the volatile security
situation, in particular in the Sahel and the Lake Chad
basin. The spillover of the Malian crisis is increasingly
affecting Burkina Faso and the Niger. Terrorist groups
continue to cause devastation throughout the region,
despite ongoing counter-terrorism operations. The
complexity of recent attacks is a worrying outcome of
West African and Sahelian Islamic groups reinforcing
their linkages. The expansion of extremist activities
has had a devastating impact on local communities.
Local insurgencies are also spreading, exacerbating
intercommunal
conf licts
and
undermining
State authority.
Allegations of human rights violations by security
forces are particularly concerning as they undermine
our collective efforts. I call upon Governments of
the region to prevent such violations and to bring
perpetrators to justice. UNOWAS and its partners,
2/11

17/07/2018

In the Lake Chad basin, despite gains made by
the Nigerian armed forces and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, Boko Haram’s Islamic State’s West
African Province remain active. Attacks in south-east
Niger have recently increased, including on 1 July with
the killing of 10 soldiers from the Niger. The trend of
Boko Haram using female suicide bombers continues,
and reportedly almost one in five suicide bombers is a
child. The most recent attacks on a Nigerian military
garrison in Yobe state and the ambush of a military
convoy in Borno are the most recent manifestations of
the threats still posed by Boko Haram.
There is a need to provide increased support to
diplomatic, security and humanitarian responses
to Boko Haram in a holistic manner. To that end,
UNOWAS is providing technical support for a joint
summit of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of
Central African States, on 30 July, as called for by
resolution 2349 (2017).
The severe depletion of Lake Chad has led
to
environmental
degradation,
socioeconomic
marginalization and insecurity for 45 million people.
An estimated 2.3 million people remain displaced by
the aggregate effects of insecurity, weak governance
and climate change. I urge Member States to support
the humanitarian response to the Lake Chad crisis,
which remains critically underfunded, as well as the
revitalization of the Lake Chad basin.
Violence between farmers and herders is
increasingly a major security threat in the region
and risks morphing into the terrorist attacks that
have defined the security landscape. Farmer-herder
conf licts are becoming more sophisticated and
deadlier, especially in Nigeria’s Middle Belt. During
four days in June, new spates of attacks and retribution
killings between herders and farmers in that region
resulted in scores of deaths.
Let me stress that any military response to
security challenges in the region needs to be matched
by the implementation of comprehensive strategies
linking security and humanitarian interventions to
development and human rights initiatives. There is
18-22694

17/07/2018

S/PV. 8313

Peace consolidation in West Africa

also need to increase our collective efforts to address
the challenges facing the Sahel region with actions
that combine politics, security and development. In
that regard, we have repositioned the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS) and
developed a United Nations support plan to mobilize
resources for the 10 UNISS countries. I call on Member
States, partners and other stakeholders in the Sahel
to provide desperately needed financial resources to
the region.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea increased during the
reporting period. Drug-smuggling and the trafficking
of small arms and light weapons, including by terrorist
groups, pose major security threats. I welcome the
ongoing efforts of the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in West Africa and the Multinational
Maritime Coordination Centre to strengthen their
operational capabilities. I also note the efforts of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
establish a framework for enhanced cooperation with
the Maghreb and Sahel countries in the fight against
trafficking and transnational organized crime.
The demarcation of the Cameroon-Nigeria border
and the pillar construction continue to face challenges
due to insecurity in areas affected by the presence
of Boko Haram and unrest in the English-speaking
regions of Cameroon. Nevertheless, pillar construction
is expected to resume at the end of the rainy season.
The period under review saw an upsurge in
popular discontent in the region, manifested through
often violent demonstrations calling for political and
economic reforms. The sometimes violent conduct
of security forces, notably in dealing with popular
demonstrations, has also fuelled political tensions.
The commitment of countries of the region and
support from the international community will be key
to ensuring the effectiveness and accountability of
security sector institutions as part of broader security
sector reform efforts.
Several countries continue to struggle with
justice, national reconciliation and human rights
challenges. Among those is the concerning number
of high-profile arrests, judicial prosecutions and
convictions against political and civil society actors.
We must collectively continue to urge Member States
to provide an enabling environment for the exercise
of the freedoms of expression and assembly, which
are critical to consolidating democracy and good

governance. In a recent positive development, Benin
and Burkina Faso abolished the death penalty, which
makes nine countries in the region that have ended
capital punishment.
Since my last briefing, the region has continued on
a positive trajectory of democratic elections with local
elections in Guinea, local and municipal elections in
The Gambia, and presidential, legislative and local
elections in Sierra Leone. While they were well
organized and voting took place in a mostly peaceful
atmosphere, the critical pre- and post-electoral phases
were marred by tensions. Let me commend the role
of the electoral observer missions of ECOWAS, the
African Union, the Commonwealth, the European
Union and the International Organization of la
Francophonie in defusing tensions.
Looking forward, we continue to closely
monitor the situation in countries with forthcoming
elections, such as Mauritania, Nigeria and Senegal.
The continuing political crisis in Togo has already
caused the suspension of the parliamentary elections
that were due to take place in July. We welcome
ECOWAS mediation efforts to facilitate the peaceful
resolution of the political impasse. In some countries
of the region, including Nigeria, UNOWAS is working
closely with ECOWAS and other partners to support
the establishment of national peace architectures that
can provide a systematic and inclusive approach to the
prevention, management and resolution of conf licts.
Democratic gains in the region are not immune to
reversal. There is a need for democratic consolidation
through genuine processes of national reconciliation,
job-creating growth and inclusive sustainable
development. That should be the focus of our
international engagement.
In conclusion, let me assure members of the
Security Council of the continued commitment of
UNOWAS to working with all stakeholders and
development partners in the region to promote peace
and stability in West Africa and the Sahel.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Chambas

for

I shall now give the f loor to those Council members
who wish to make statements
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation thanks Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head

18-226943/11

S/PV.8313

Peace consolidation in West Africa

of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) for the quality of his briefing
on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/649), fully
briefing us on the latest developments in the region
and the activities carried out within the framework of
the UNOWAS mandate.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the encouraging progress
made in the region, particularly in the areas of
democratic transition and governance, since the
previous report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1104).
However, we remain concerned about the persistence
of the multifaceted and complex challenges that
threaten the stability and development of the subregion
and the Sahel.
Indeed, in addition to terrorism and violent
extremism, the region is also exposed to transnational
organized crime, cross-border armed groups and the
intensification of violent conf licts between nomadic
herders and farmers. Moreover, the relative weakness
of State institutions, which impacts the provision of
public services, is exacerbating the already difficult
living conditions of millions of people in the region.
In order to mitigate the damaging consequences
of those phenomena, it is important to adopt a
comprehensive approach involving local populations
and the Governments of the States concerned, regional
organizations and the United Nations with a view to
working collectively to find lasting solutions.
One of the major obstacles to the development of
the region remains the insecurity caused by terrorist
groups, such as Boko Haram, Islamist groups, acts of
piracy and armed robbery of the population. Initiatives
to address those threats would therefore benefit from
being accelerated and strengthened. My country
supports and encourages the States of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to continue to take
the measures necessary to ensure that the Joint Task
Force reaches its full operational capacity. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s personal
commitment to supporting the operationalization of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. I therefore urge donors to
deliver on their financial pledges, which are essential to
the ability of the Multinational Joint Task Force to play
its full role. Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the
efforts of the Task Force, the intensified interventions
of which have cut Boko Haram’s operational resources
and scope of action in the Lake Chad basin.
4/11

17/07/2018

With regard to security governance and the political
situation, my country welcomes the progress made in
security sector reform in The Gambia and Burkina
Faso. Мy delegation also notes with satisfaction the
peaceful democratic transition in Liberia, as well as
the recent credible elections held in Sierra Leone. In
view of the upcoming elections in several countries of
the region, my country echoes the Secretary-General’s
appeal to national stakeholders to work together
to ensure a level playing field and create a climate
conducive to the organization of peaceful, inclusive
and credible elections.
While the economic prospects of all West African
countries are encouraging, more remains to be done
to offset the low purchasing power of populations
linked, according to the African Development Bank,
to high levels of income inequality. In the Sahel,
too, economic indicators do not inspire optimism. In
addition, inequality, unemployment and the lack of
opportunities further undermine the stability of the
area. That is why my delegation endorses the analysis
of the Economic Commission for Africa, which
advocates addressing the root causes of the crisis,
ensuring the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and offering investment
opportunities in the Sahel.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
alarming figures noted in the Secretary-General’s
report challenge and call on us to pool our efforts to
find solutions to the plight of the 6.9 million people
in situations of food crisis in the Sahel and the
2.3 million people displaced in the Lake Chad basin.
Moreover, the resurgence of conf licts between farming
communities and herders, especially in periods of
transhumance, amplifies regional instability. With
regard to the last point, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the
initiative of UNOWAS and the Economic Community
of West African States to develop a regional action
plan on transhumance.
My delegation believes that only concerted,
planned and coordinated joint action can effectively
contribute to the stabilization of the Sahel region.
In responding to the Sahel crisis, the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS) will
help support development processes, promote good
governance and improve security. In that context, the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel (2018-2022)
aims to support efforts under way in the region to
achieve sustainable development and realize the 2030
18-22694

17/07/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063. My delegation therefore urgently calls for the
effective recalibration of UNISS, which will help us
to emphasize the area’s assets, on which its future
will depend, while looking beyond the challenges
it currently is facing. Moreover, gender issues, in
particular women’s role in peace processes, remain
relevant, given the first-hand accounts we heard on
the subject during the Security Council debate on
women, peace and security in the Sahel on 10 July (see
S/PV.8306).
The mission led by Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed to South Sudan, Chad and the
Niger clearly attests to women’s determined call for
their inclusion, representation and participation in
peace processes, decision-making and governance
mechanisms at all levels of society. My delegation
therefore believes that it is important to encourage
the countries of the region to create the conditions
necessary for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) through the development and implementation
of their national action plans, with a view to robustly
involving women in conf lict prevention and resolution,
as well as peacekeeping.
A reading of the Secretary-General’s report
sufficiently provides us with insight into the security,
humanitarian, governance and development issues
prevailing in West Africa and the Sahel. In that
regard, my country welcomes the work of UNOWAS
and fully supports the activities of the Special
Representative in the region. As a relevant preventive
diplomacy tool, UNOWAS contributes significantly to
crisis management and mitigation, while promoting
dialogue and the implementation of reforms in the
region. My delegation therefore firmly encourages the
continuation and strengthening of the good offices of
UNOWAS within the framework of frank and fruitful
cooperation with national and regional partners,
with a view to creating collective momentum aimed
at sustaining peace and development. Côte d’Ivoire
reaffirms its full support for the work of UNOWAS
and assures the Secretary-General of its support for his
initiatives to achieve the goals of peace and sustainable
development in West Africa and the Sahel.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Côte d’Ivoire will continue its cooperation with
the delegation of Sweden on drafting a presidential
statement on the activities of UNOWAS to be submitted
in the coming weeks.

S/PV. 8313

Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation expresses its gratitude for the convening
of this meeting and the important briefing by
Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas.
Peru is deeply concerned about the violence,
the insecurity, the presence of terrorist groups and
criminal organizations, and the grave humanitarian
crises affecting tens of millions of people in the Sahel
and Lake Chad basin. We note that the root causes of
the threats to international peace and security in those
regions include poverty, the lack of development,
climate change and insufficient State presence and
capacity, among other factors, which fuel one another
and are exploited by actors whose interests lie in
fostering conf licts. We express our appreciation to and
support for the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) in its efforts to prevent a
deterioration of the situation and in offering its good
offices to various parties to the conf lict. In particular,
we would highlight three areas of work in which we
believe that its efforts are essential to promoting
sustainable peace in West Africa.
First, with regard to the political sphere, UNOWAS
is called on to support the holding of free, fair and
inclusive elections in Mali, Mauritania and Nigeria,
which will depend to a great extent on fostering a
stable environment to achieve the broad participation
of citizens, especially women, young people and all
political entities. UNOWAS is also playing a key role
in post-electoral situations in The Gambia, Guinea and
Sierra Leone, where reducing tensions and preventing
the emergence or worsening of political crises are
necessary. The same applies to Liberia, where it has
also been called on to support the transition following
the closure of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Secondly, concerning security, we underscore the
support that UNOWAS provides to the countries of West
Africa in terms of security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for
former combatants; promoting dialogue; and conf lict
prevention and resolution relating to the control of
land at the local level.
Thirdly, with regard to development, addressing
the root causes of conf lict requires fostering
sustainable development in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which entails
eradicating poverty, encouraging economic growth,
justice and the rule of law, empowering women and

18-226945/11

S/PV.8313

Peace consolidation in West Africa

addressing the effects of climate change, among other
goals. To that end, UNOWAS is called on to play a
key role in ensuring that various efforts, initiatives
and actors, particularly those deployed on the ground,
maintain political and operational coherence, while
ref lecting and responding to the circumstances, needs
and priorities of every particular case. UNOWAS
cooperation with the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as with
other relevant United Nations agencies and subregional
organizations, is also important. In that regard, we
highlight its support for the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.
In conclusion, while expressing our support for
the vital role played by UNOWAS, we emphasize
the need to provide it with the political and financial
support that it requires to fulfil its important functions
and mandates.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWAS).
We begin our statement by highlighting the work
and efforts of UNOWAS, headed by the Special
Representative. It is necessary to underscore the work
being done to strengthen the connection linking good
practices, interactive dialogues, preventive diplomacy
and strengthening cooperation and information-sharing
among stakeholders, which have enabled peace and
security initiatives, as well as national ownership
and inclusiveness, to pave the way for consolidating
peaceful solutions and good governance in West
Africa. We commend the electoral processes and the
peaceful transitions of power being realized in The
Gambia, Sierra Leone and Liberia, which illustrate
the people’s ownership and creation of institutions to
end divisions and disagreements. We underline all the
work done by UNOWAS in every one of those cases.
We believe that, in order to continue on the path of
stabilization, the participation of each and every member
of the international community is required. To that end,
we include the roles that the United Nations, as well as
regional and subregional organizations — including
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Group of Five for the
Sahel and other partners — have to play.
6/11

17/07/2018

Despite that work, we are nevertheless aware
that great challenges remain in the areas of security,
governance, the rule of law and development in West
Africa and the Sahel. As a main factor, violent conf licts
have put the institutions of the countries of the region,
and, consequently, their populations — 150 million
people in all — at serious risk. We reiterate that
it is crucial to look into the structural causes of the
conf licts that have profoundly affected the volatile
security situation in the region.
In that connection, we will tirelessly continue to
make the point that the consequences of interventionism
and regime-change policies following the 2011 conf lict
in Libya were among the causes that destabilized the
Sahel, entailing chaos, terrorism, militarization and
the tragic repercussions that continue to this day. The
transfer of armed groups from Libya to the Sahel has
also allowed the transfer of high-calibre weaponry
being used currently to perpetrate attacks against
national security forces, United Nations troops and
personnel and civilian populations, in general.
Therefore, we cannot disregard the fact that the
Sahel region suffers from increasing instability and
insecurity due, as has been mentioned, to the presence
of terrorist groups and violent armed groups and to
criminal activities and transnational crime, which
in turn pose a serious threat to the most vulnerable
groups of the population. The crisis and the various
conf licts have a direct and indirect impact on civilians,
in particular women and children. Violence not only
restricts their freedom of movement and economic
activities, but also jeopardizes their lives and their
future. The recruitment of children by armed groups
continues and the participation of women in the
dialogue and conf lict resolution stages of conf licts
has been stymied by their low level of involvement in
dialogue leading to agreements. It is vital that women
be included at all stages of the processes of dialogue
and agreement.
The comprehensive implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is therefore
crucial. We commend the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel (2018-2022), which we believe will
strengthen synergies in addressing regional priorities.
In conclusion, we urge all States to address the
issues faced by West Africa and the Sahel through
regional and subregional multilateral cooperation
and dialogue, and to work to strengthen measures to
18-22694

17/07/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

effectively combat and eliminate violence of all kinds.
Bolivia reiterates its full support for the regional
and subregional architecture that serves to address
conf licts in Africa because it believes that African
vision, wisdom and culture must be ref lected in the
implementation of each initiative to bring about lasting
peace in the region.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First and foremost, we would like to reiterate
our gratitude and support for Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas and his entire team for their good offices and
ongoing efforts to bring about lasting peace in West
Africa and the Sahel. We would also like to thank him
for his briefing on the situation in the region, based on
the comprehensive and detailed report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2018/649).
It has been exactly six months since we addressed
the situation in the region of West Africa and the Sahel
for the first time as non-permanent members of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8156). It is with great regret
that we note that the peace and security landscape
remains bleak, owing primarily to instability and the
increase in the number of terrorist threats and attacks
in the region, which fuel criminal activities and
transnational organized crime, such as trafficking in
human beings. Such activities are a source of serious
concern and pose a threat to economic, social and
political stability in the Gulf of Guinea region, and this
to Equatorial Guinea.
Threats from groups such as Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad basin — which, incidentally, just attacked
and occupied a military base at the northern tip of
Nigeria near Lake Chad — and the growing number of
security challenges faced by Mali and its neighbouring
countries must not be viewed as isolated threats or
problems of concern only to areas directly affected;
they must be addressed holistically as a threat to the
entire African continent. That is why it is essential
that national parties and international partners pool
their efforts and generate synergies in the quest for a
lasting solution. It should be recalled that the violence
of the terrorist group Boko Haram has unleashed an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis in the area that has
resulted in millions of forced internal displacements
and caused many to leave their homes. The crisis has
led to an increase in the number of people who are
severely food insecure and deserves the full attention
of the Security Council.

S/PV. 8313

The report of the Secretary-General refers to a
situation that is also of concern to my Government.
The violent clashes between nomadic pastoralists in
northern Nigeria and sedentary farming communities
in central and southern Nigeria have intensified in
recent years and are spreading southwards, threatening
the security and stability of the country. Such clashes
are becoming as dangerous as the Boko Haram
insurgency itself in north-eastern Nigeria. Equatorial
Guinea therefore urges Nigeria’s central Government
and local Governments in the areas affected to work
together to take immediate steps to bolster the security
of pastoralists and farmers, enhance mediation,
conf lict resolution, reconciliation and peacebuilding
mechanisms, and initiate long-term efforts to reform
livestock management practices.
The political tensions that various countries of
the region are experiencing, in some cases as a result
of internal disagreements or electoral disputes, must
always be addressed by prioritizing a peaceful solution
through inclusive, constructive and objective dialogue
between the warring parties, and, if necessary, with
the mediation of international institutions. \
The Council must also reiterate its full support for
the communiqué issued at the ministerial meeting of
the African Union Peace and Security Council on the
situation in Mali and the Sahel, held on 27 June. The
communiqué highlighted the following, inter alia: first,
the importance of achieving an early resolution to the
crisis in Mali through efforts to ensure lasting peace
and security in the Sahel; secondly, the importance of
seeking a lasting solution to the long-standing Libyan
crisis as a key element in responding to the situation in
the Sahelo-Saharan region; and thirdly, its appreciation
for the initiatives of the international community, in
particular the regional economic communities, the
United Nations, the European Union and other bilateral
and multilateral partners, and their sustained efforts to
promote peace, security and development in the Sahel.
Moreover, my country welcomes the collegial
efforts of the entire United Nations system to
recalibrate the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and further advance its implementation
with a more integrated and cross-cutting cross-pillar
approach. Such efforts will undoubtedly help marshal
additional resources for the Sahel and ensure that
the assistance of the international community is well
coordinated and that it complements and supports the
countries of the Sahel.

18-226947/11

S/PV.8313

Peace consolidation in West Africa

In conclusion, I should like to welcome and
congratulate Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw of Mauritania on
his appointment as Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel. Equatorial Guinea highly
appreciates his efforts in drafting the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel, whose main objective is to
change narratives in the Sahel and mobilize additional
resources and support for the immediate and long-term
needs of the region, in line with the United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In that regard, we strongly call on the
international community, the United Nations and all
private economic actors to become fully involved and
respond by investing in the Sahel.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would also like to join
others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Chambas for his comprehensive
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
and the progress made in the past six months in the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. We commend Mr. Chambas and
his team for the excellent work they have been doing
in the areas of conf lict prevention, mediation and good
offices to sustain peace in the region. We take note
of the overall political, security, humanitarian and
socioeconomic trends in West Africa, the Sahel and
the Lake Chad basin during the reporting period.
On the political front, in several countries of the
region we welcome the positive developments in the
areas of constitutional and security sector reform
that aim at improving governance and consolidating
democracy. Furthermore, the conduct of peaceful
elections and democratic transitions that were seen in
Liberia and Sierra Leone have also been encouraging.
The role of UNOWAS in support of the upcoming
elections in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania,
Nigeria and Senegal will be vital for facilitating
peaceful, inclusive and credible electoral processes in
those countries.
On the security front, assymetric terrorist attacks,
maritime piracy, transnational organized crime,
and trafficking in persons, arms, drugs and natural
resources continue to cause serious challenges. It
is important that the Security Council continue to
support the regional initiatives to address the impact of
terrorism and transnational organized crime as well as
strengthen border security. It is in this context that we
8/11

17/07/2018

welcome the efforts and commitments of the countries
of West Africa and the Sahel aimed at fighting
terrorism and transnational organized crime through
the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational
Joint Task Force. We commend the Multinational Joint
Task Force for its successes in the fight against Boko
Haram in the Niger and Nigeria, thus reducing the
group’s operational capacities and geographical reach.
On the other hand, we have also observed the rise
of piracy, armed robbery and other criminal activities
in the Gulf of Guinea, which has indeed been a
matter of serious concern not only for Equatorial
Guinea and other countries of the region but also the
wider international community. There is therefore
is a need for greater mobilization of regional and
international cooperation and for lessons to be drawn
from experiences in fighting piracy and other criminal
activities off the coast of Somalia and other important
international sea lanes, taking into account the specific
challenges being faced in the Gulf of Guinea.
Climate change, food insecurity, forced
displacement, unemployment, inequality and lack of
opportunity continue to threaten the socioeconomic
stability of the region as well as its humanitarian
prospects. It is in this context that we underscore the
importance of complementing the security response
with a comprehensive and coordinated development
and humanitarian approach in order to address the
root causes. In this regard, we wish to emphasize in
particular the importance of stepping up efforts aimed
at ensuring the full implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We welcome
the recalibration of the Strategy, in line with the
needs of the people of the Sahel and with national and
regional priorities, in close collaboration with partners
and countries of the region through the development
of the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. We
also welcome the appointment of Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw
as the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser for the
Sahel and his efforts in the development of the United
Nation Support Plan in working towards changing the
narratives on the Sahel as well as in mobilizing further
resources and support for the region’s immediate and
long-term needs.
Of course it would have been useful if we had had
the opportunity to hear the African Union perspective
today. The African Union has stressed the need for
African ownership of initiatives in favour of the
countries of the Sahel countries and reaffirmed the
18-22694

17/07/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

importance of the Nouakchott process in the promotion
of peace and security in the Sahel-Saharan region.
In this context, strategic consultations were held in
Nouakchott, within the framework of the efforts aimed
at harmonizing the various initiatives and promoting a
shared strategic vision for facing the challenges in the
region. The African Union Peace and Security Council
also met at the ministerial level in Nouakchott and
adopted important decisions in this regard.
Finally, the coordination of efforts with the
African Union on the Sahel is of absolute importance
in the light of the foregoing developments, and we hope
that we will have another opportunity to hear from the
African Union, although we understand today that we
were not able to do so for various reasons.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas
for his insightful briefing on the Secretary-General’s
semi-annual report on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and recent developments in West Africa
and the Sahel (S/2018/649). I would like to express my
appreciation for Mr. Chambas’s important contribution,
as well as that of UNOWAS, to advancing peace and
security throughout a vast region.
We also commend the close cooperation with
regional and subregional actors, which is extremely
vital to having an effective impact. Such collaborative
efforts have yielded the latest positive political and
economic developments that we have witnessed in
West Africa. In this vein, we call upon UNOWAS
to continue its work on strengthening post-electoral
stability and drawing close attention to the upcoming
elections across the region. At the same time, several
challenges, including the increasing threat of terrorism
and violent extremism in West Africa and the Sahel,
with their linkages to transnational organized crime,
continue to affect stability in the region.
Kazakhstan welcomes an increase in national and
regional ownership of the issues and fully supports
regional initiatives to address the foregoing threats
through the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
and the Multinational Joint Task Force. My delegation
therefore commends the international partners for
mobilizing financial support for these initiatives.
At the same time, we echo the report’s
recommendation on the need for strong counterterrorism efforts to be fully compliant with

S/PV. 8313

international law, ensuring that operations are aligned
with broader regional initiatives and that they do not
harm local populations. Other growing concerns are
the increasing threat of conf lict between farmers and
herders, aggravated by the effects of climate change,
food insecurity, forced displacement, rapid population
growth and weak governance. Our delegation believes
that in order to effectively address these issues,
a military approach and humanitarian assistance
should go hand in hand with development efforts in
an integrated, complex and well-coordinated manner
reinforced by long-term sustainable funding.
Our efforts need to be focused on the structural
drivers of instability by reducing poverty, providing
basic services, creating better opportunities for
education and employment, strengthening local
governance and mitigating the impact of climate
change. While we welcome United Nations reform on
repositioning the development system with greater
coordination among various United Nations agencies,
we now have to go further and increase coordination
at the regional level so as to advance peace and
development on a comprehensive and efficient basis.
We therefore welcome the continued efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States to
advance the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, including through the development of the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, and stress
the importance of developing a similar integrated
approach for the Lake Chad Basin region.
Finally, we underscore the importance of
promoting the meaningful inclusion of women and the
effective integration of young people in political and
developmental processes. Kazakhstan will continue to
work together was the Security Council and key actors
to find a solution for lasting peace in West Africa and
the Sahel.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Putting
prevention up front is one of the main priorities of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, because in sustaining
peace, conf lict prevention is key, and with regard to
conf lict prevention, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) is playing a crucial
role in the region.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on UNOWAS (S/2018/649), in which the
activities were described and recommendations were

18-226949/11

S/PV.8313

Peace consolidation in West Africa

presented. We would also like to warmly thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas for
briefing the Security Council today.
UNOWAS is contributing to conf lict prevention
in many ways. Please allow me to highlight three
aspects that the Kingdom of the Netherlands considers
particularly critical: regional cooperation; early
warning and early action; and the good offices role
of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Chambas.
First, with regard to regional cooperation, security
risks transcend borders and so should cooperation
to curb them. We applaud the work of UNOWAS in
ensuring that conf licts are approached from a regional
perspective. We also welcome the positive steps taken
to strengthen security cooperation in the region, and
we join the Secretary-General in commending in
particular the Multinational Joint Task Force and the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in that regard.
Regional and national efforts are essential to peace
and security, yet they should not be limited to a military
approach. To sustain security, properly addressing
governance deficits and justice is equally important. I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for putting an emphasis on the rule
of law in his briefing earlier today. Accountability,
participation and inclusive dialogue are also imperative
in paving the way to sustainable peace.
The efficiency and legitimacy of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force depends not only on its swift ability
to respond, but also on the implementation of its
compliance framework. Moreover, as the European
Union recently highlighted, there is great need to step
up support to the national justice sector, as well as for
regional judicial cooperation. That alone will allow
for the transfer of suspects and evidence between
jurisdictions and ensure due process.
In addition to enhanced regional cooperation, we
applaud the efforts of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and UNOWAS to strengthen
collaboration beyond their mandates, connecting
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States. We look forward to a successful summit
at the end of this month.
Secondly, with regard to early warning and early
action, we congratulate Special Representative of
10/11

17/07/2018

the Secretary-General Chambas on the handbook
on conf lict analysis and welcome the cross-sectoral
conf lict analyses of UNOWAS. Those are important
tools in signalling threats to stability and security. The
attention UNOWAS is paying to conf licts between
pastoralists and farmers is particularly valuable,
especially against the backdrop of terrorist groups
and criminal networks increasing their cooperation
in the region. As the Secretary-General states, those
are becoming multidimensional threats affecting the
entire subregion. We support his call on ECOWAS
and its member States to find sustainable solutions to
that challenge.
As a threat multiplier, climate change intensifies
tensions between farmers and herders. It should be
taken into account as a root cause, as Ms. Hindou
Ibrahim of the International Indigenous People Forum
on Climate Change so passionately argued last week
in the Council (see S/PV.8307). We encourage the
United Nations to develop the necessary risk analysis
and assessment capacity on climate-related security
risks at Headquarters and on the ground in order to
provide to timely warnings to the Security Council
and adapt stabilization, humanitarian and development
programmes if necessary.
Thirdly and lastly, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Chambas plays a crucial role in
using the good offices of the Secretary-General in the
region. We commend his efforts and those of UNOWAS
as a whole, often in cooperation with ECOWAS.
In January, we discussed the importance of
peaceful and inclusive elections in Liberia and Sierra
Leone (see S/PV.8156). Six months later, we have
witnessed positive developments in terms of peaceful
democratic elections and transitions in both countries.
We commend Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Chambas for his crucial role in facilitating
political dialogue and ensuring peaceful transitions of
power. We welcome the continued use of the good offices
of the regional Office in view of the sustaining peace
agenda, in particular following the exit of countryspecific United Nations missions. Furthermore, we
support the Secretary-General’s recommendations
to enhance political dialogue between communities
through national peace architectures. Facilitating
political dialogue is particularly important given the
several upcoming elections in the region.
18-22694

17/07/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

In conclusion, whether it is regional cooperation
and the rule of law, early warning and early action, or
using the good offices of the Secretary-General, they
all contribute to peace and stability. UNOWAS deserves
the full support of the Council in its activities. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands expresses its gratitude
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General

S/PV. 8313

Chambas for his leadership and efforts and to his staff
for their outstanding work.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

18-2269411/11
