S/PV.7934

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7934th meeting

Monday, 8 May 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Ms. Gasri
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Townley

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-12790 (E)
*1712790*

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

children — who bear the brunt of the suffering caused
by a state of insecurity.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first public meeting of the Council for the month
of May, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf, of the Council, to her Excellency
Ambassador Nikki Haley, Permanent Representative
of the United States, for her service as President of
the Council for the month of April. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Haley and her delegation
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I welcome this opportunity to
engage with the Security Council on the occasion of
my Office’s thirteenth report on the situation in Libya,
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
At the outset, allow me to observe with profound
regret that the overall security situation in Libya has
deteriorated significantly since my last briefing to
the Council last November (see S/PV.7806). Reports
indicate that the country is at risk of returning to
widespread conflict. Such an outcome would not bode
well for the rule of law in Libya and would surely
aggravate a climate of impunity, which could in turn
lead to widespread human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law. As is often the case,
it is ordinary civilians — innocent men, women and
2/18

08/05/2017

It is in that context that the International Criminal
Court (ICC) now, more than ever, has an important
role to play in Libya. I am convinced that timely
and concrete action can make a tangible difference
to Libyan lives. With that in mind, and cognizant of
my responsibility to pursue the important mandate
conferred upon my Office by the Council, I remain
committed to prioritizing the Libya situation in 2017.
Since I last reported to the Council, steady
progress has been made in my Office’s investigations.
That progress has been achieved notwithstanding the
prevailing security situation in Libya, which continues
to prevent my investigators from carrying out their
work on the ground. Undeterred and driven by a firm
commitment to fulfil our mandate vis-à-vis Libya,
my Office continues to employ innovative methods to
collect evidence from outside of the country through
secure channels. Such efforts are made possible largely
by the cooperation of States and the ongoing assistance
of the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office. My Office
will continue to explore options for its investigators
to resume activities in Libyan territory in a safe and
secure environment.
As the Council is aware, an existing warrant
of arrest, issued under seal by the Court against
Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, has recently been
made public. Mr. Al-Tuhamy is the former head of the
Libyan Internal Security Agency, under Muammar
Al-Qadhafi. My Office has alleged that the suspect
is responsible for the crimes against humanity of
imprisonment, persecution, torture and other inhumane
acts, and the war crimes of torture, cruel treatment
and outrages upon personal dignity. These crimes
were allegedly committed by Mr. Al-Tuhamy as part
of Mr. Muammar Al-Qadhafi’s response to the events
of 2011.
In issuing the warrant, the Pre-Trial Chamber of
the Court found reasonable grounds to believe that the
Internal Security Agency led by Mr. Al-Tuhamy, along
with other Libyan military, intelligence and security
agencies, arrested and detained persons perceived to
be opponents of Mr. Al-Qadhafi and his rule. These
persons were allegedly subjected to various forms of
mistreatment, including severe beatings, electrocution,
acts of sexual violence and rape, solitary confinement,
deprivation of food and water, inhumane conditions of
17-12790

08/05/2017

The situation in Libya

detention, mock executions, and threats of killing and
rape in various locations throughout Libya.
At this juncture, the unsealing of the warrant
of arrest against Mr. Al-Tuhamy would enhance the
chances of its execution and would equally send an
important message to would-be perpetrators that the
Court remains seized of the situation in Libya and
continues to be active in carrying out its judicial work.
Furthermore, my Office has recently become aware
of reports that Mr. Al-Tuhamy is currently residing in
Libya. The victims of Mr. Al-Tuhamy’s alleged crimes
deserve justice and yearn to see justice done. State
cooperation with the International Criminal Court and
the Council is crucial to ensuring that justice for these
victims can be realized. I therefore urge Libya, first
and foremost, as well as all States — by they States
parties or non-State parties — to take immediate action
to verify Mr. Al-Tuhamy’s whereabouts and to take all
possible steps to facilitate his arrest and surrender to
the Court.

S/PV.7934

With respect to the case of Abdullah A1-Senussi,
as the Council will recall, in July 2015 the Tripoli
Court of Assize issued its judgment in the trial of
Mr. Al-Senussi, Mr. Al-Qadhafi and 35 other former
members allied with Mr. Muammar Al-Qadhafi in
relation to crimes allegedly committed during the
events of 2011. Mr. Al-Qadhafi was tried in absentia.
Both Mr. Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Al-Senussi were
convicted. The case of Mr. Al-Senussi is currently on
appeal before the Libyan Supreme Court.
On 21 February, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), in cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, issued its full report on the conduct
of this trial. The report acknowledges the challenges
inherent in prosecuting a complex case against former
officials in the context of an ongoing armed conflict
and political polarization. However, it concludes that
the trial fell short of international fair trial standards.

I equally hope to count on the tangible assistance
and cooperation of this body for the expeditious
execution of the warrant of arrest and for the timely
arrest and surrender of Mr. Al-Tuhamy to the Court.
What message does it send to the victims and the
perpetrators — indeed, what is the deterrent impact — if
ICC warrants of arrest are issued but not enforced and
the capture of suspects remains elusive? We all have
our respective roles to play and we must deliver on our
joint commitment to ending impunity for Rome Statute
crimes in Libya.

It is important to recall that the Appeals Chamber
of the International Criminal Court has held that
due process violations in a domestic trial must be
so egregious that the proceedings can no longer be
regarded as being capable of providing any genuine
form of justice to the accused in order for the case
to be deemed admissible before it. My Office has
thoroughly reviewed the report and is considering it,
along with the full Libyan trial judgment, within the
framework of articles 19 (10) and 17 (2)(c) of the Rome
Statute to determine whether new facts have arisen that
negate the basis on which the Pre-Trial Chamber found
Mr. Al-Senussi’s case inadmissible before the Court.

In my last statement here (see S/PV.7806), I briefed
the Council on my Office’s application to the Court’s
Pre-Trial Chamber for an order directing the Registry
to transmit the request for the arrest and surrender of
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to Mr. Al-’Ajami Al’Atiri, Commander of the Zintan militia, which had
custody of the suspect at that time. My Office has since
received reliable information that Mr. Al-Qadhafi
is no longer under the control of Mr. Al-’Atiri but
rather under the control of the Zintan Revolutionaries’
Military Council. I renew my call on the Government
of National Accord to take the necessary steps to
transfer Mr. Al-Qadhafi into its custody so that Libya
can surrender him to the Court in accordance with its
international legal obligations, the judicial rulings of
the Court, and the repeated calls of members of the
Security Council.

It is undoubtedly disconcerting to the Council that
the ongoing political instability and volatile security
situation in Libya have reportedly led to the widespread
commission of serious crimes. Reports of the continued
killings of civilians, abductions, detentions, torture
and sexual violence in Libya should be of great
concern to all of us. My Office continues to receive
and examine information from a variety of sources,
including non-goverrunental organizations and private
individuals, with respect to crimes alleged to have
occurred throughout Libya since 2011. I welcome
the submission of reliable information by concerned
groups or individuals regarding crimes that may fall
within the Court’s jurisdiction. In particular, my Office
continues to collect and analyse information relating
to serious and widespread crimes allegedly committed
against migrants attempting to transit through Libya.

17-127903/18

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

My Office is collaborating and sharing information
with a network of national and international agencies
on this issue.
I am deeply alarmed by reports that thousands of
vulnerable migrants, including women and children,
are being held in detention centres across Libya in
often inhumane conditions. Crimes, including killings,
rapes and torture, are alleged to be commonplace.
I am similarly dismayed by credible accounts that
Libya has become a marketplace for the trafficking
of human beings. The Council has itself expressed
concern that the situation in Libya is exacerbated by
the smuggling of migrants and human trafficking into,
through and from Libya. These activities could further
provide fertile ground for organized crime and terrorist
networks in Libya.
The situation is both dire and unacceptable,
demanding a concerted response on the part of the
relevant actors to address these serious trends of
criminality. I take this opportunity before the Council
to declare that my Office is carefully examining the
feasibility of opening an investigation into migrantrelated crimes in Libya should the Court’s jurisdictional
requirements be met. We must act to curb these
worrying trends.
Additionally, my Office has been closely following
events in Ganfouda, in Benghazi, where civilians have
reportedly been heavily impacted by protracted fighting
between the Libyan National Army and the Benghazi
Revolutionaries Shura Council. Reports indicate that
on or around 18 March, forces of the Libyan National
Army took over Ganfouda. Following this takeover,
disturbing video footage emerged that appears to show
Libyan National Army forces committing serious
crimes, including summary executions of detainees. I
would like to draw the attention of all the parties to the
conflict to the provisions of the Rome Statute relating
to the responsibility of commanders and other superiors
to prevent or repress the commission of crimes by their
forces and to submit any such crimes for investigation
and prosecution. My Office remains seized of the
Libyan situation and continues to monitor events as
they unfold in Benghazi and across the country.
I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the
excellent cooperation that my Office receives from a
network of States, organizations and entities. First and
foremost, I must again express my utmost gratitude
to the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s office, which
4/18

08/05/2017

continued to provide invaluable assistance during the
reporting period. I am also grateful to the individuals
and groups within the Libyan community working
tirelessly to promote and support the work of the
International Criminal Court, in the interests of the
victims and in the hope of building the future of Libya
on the pillars of justice and accountability.
I also note the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and look
forward to our continuing fruitful collaboration. I would
like to take this opportunity to publicly acknowledge
and commend the tireless efforts of Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
his team at UNSMIL, and to thank them for their
continued support. I would also like to express my
deep appreciation for the vital support that my Office
receives from several other States and organizations,
including the Netherlands, the United Kingdom,
Tunisia, Italy, the European Union and the European
Union Naval Force. There are a few States that have not
responded promptly to requests for cooperation, and I
respectfully urge them to do so.
With the Council’s indulgence, I would like to
stress one final point, which is the important issue of
the challenges that my Office continues to face where
resources are concerned. In that regard, I welcome
the initiative taken by the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, to issue a note verbale in November
2016, bringing to the attention of all States the need to
ensure adequate funding to support ICC investigations.
Without adequate resources, the Court’s crucial work
is hampered and its ability to affect the current climate
of impunity in Libya is diminished. I once again
respectfully urge the Council to promote the work of
the International Criminal Court in Libya by supporting
the United Nations efforts aimed at providing it with
financial assistance.
The Libyan people continue to strive for solutions
that can pave the way for sustainable peace, security
and prosperity in Libya. Justice and accountability
are indispensable in that equation, without which
we run the risk of the cycle of violence continuing,
further entrenching divisions within Libyan society
and ultimately making national reconciliation more
difficult to achieve. I am heartened by reports of some
recent positive developments in the political dialogue.
17-12790

08/05/2017

The situation in Libya

In conclusion, I would like to say to those victims
and victim-groups advocating for a more prominent
role for the International Criminal Court in Libya
that I am listening. To those who have expressed their
fears and disappointments to my Office — as well as
their hopes and aspirations for the future of a Libya
grounded on the pillars of justice where gross human
rights violations are distant memories — I say that their
calls for action are not falling on deaf ears. The Libyan
people have endured too much and have suffered for
too long. They deserve that deeper sense of safety and
security that society provides when it is fully immersed
in the protective embrace of the law. And while I am
under no illusions that the International Criminal Court
is a panacea — for it surely is not — I, along with my
team, am committed to playing our part.
I thank the Council and all those who are following
this meeting from inside and outside this Chamber for
their attention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
today on the thirteenth report of the Prosecutor of
the ICC to the Security Council in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011).
Egypt welcomes the Court’s efforts to ensure
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi’s return to the Court. The
Court is obliged to deal with Libya through the Libyan
authorities directly concerned, not through individuals
or entities who do not represent the Libyan State. In
that regard, therefore, we agree that all the necessary
assistance should be given to the Government of Libya
in order to ensure that it can meet its commitments to
the ICC. With regard to Abdullah Al-Senussi, we are
waiting for the study by the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC regarding the report drafted by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the trial in Libya, in order to
determine whether there are new facts in the case that
could put in question the evidence on which the Pre-Trial
Chamber based its decision that the Al-Senussi case
was inadmissible before the Court.

S/PV.7934

While we understand that the security situation
in Libya presents challenges that hinder the Court’s
conduct of investigations and he tcollection of evidence
on Libyan territory, we are pleased with the cooperation
that the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC has had
from the office of Libya’s Prosecutor-General.
With regard to information received by Libya’s
Prosecutor-General and the relevant Libyan authorities,
Egypt affirms that the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC should ensure that it comes from reliable sources
and that investigations do not focus only on crimes
alleged to have been committed by a particular party
or faction. The Court should investigate all crimes in
Libya that come under its mandate, including those
committed by terrorist organizations with the support
of various States that supply them with money and
weapons to enable them to commit such crimes. We
believe that the international community should help
Libya to ensure that it can develop a comprehensive
strategy for dealing with atrocities committed there and
to provide the Libyan authorities with help in meeting
their commitments to ensuring justice for the victims
and accountability for terrorists. That also includes
providing the Libyan Government with weapons and
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2214 (2015).
Lastly, we commend the efforts of Ms. Bensouda
and her Office to ensure justice and fight impunity,
and we intend to continue to cooperate with her in
that regard.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Can I start by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We feel that we are in very safe and steady
hands and look forward to supporting you in any way
possible. I would also ask the representative of the
United States to please convey our appreciation for
the effective way in which Nikki Haley and her team
conducted business in April.
I should like to begin by thanking Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and extending our
appreciation to the Office of the Prosecutor for its
commendable and tireless efforts.
Since the onset of the conflict in Libya, the civilian
population has borne the brunt of the violence, as the
Prosecutor rightly said. They continue to pay a bitter
price for the military escalation and security vacuum
in the country. The breakdown of the rule of law has
resulted in widespread human rights violations and

17-127905/18

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

abuses and breaches of international humanitarian law
by all parties to the conflict, including against children.
Those responsible must, of course, be held to account.
For this reason, the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
is essential, and I should like to make three brief points
in this regard.
First, the Office should be equipped to do the work
that is needed. Its call for adequate resources and for
the full backing of the Security Council and Member
States must be heeded. Let us not forget that the Council
decided to refer the Libya situation to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We must enable the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Court to carry out its mission.
Secondly, Sweden commends the efforts of the
Office for its work on ongoing cases, despite the
security situation making it impossible for the Office
to carry out investigations in situ. In this context, it
is encouraging to hear of the substantial support and
cooperation being extended to the Office by the Libyan
Prosecutor-General’s Office.
We take note of recent developments in a number of
cases. These include the Pre-Trial Chamber’s decision
that the request for Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s arrest should
be directed to the de jure Government. We appeal to
the Libyan authorities to facilitate the surrender and
transfer of Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the Court.
Regarding the case against Mr. Al-Senussi, we
would welcome the Prosecutor’s assessment on the
findings in the report of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and her views on next steps, if any, for
the Office in relation to this file.
In relation to the case against Mr. Al-Tuhamy, we
note the recent decision to lift the seal on the arrest
warrant and the reclassification of the warrant as public.
We hope that this will facilitate his speedy arrest and
transfer to the Court.
Thirdly, Sweden supports the intention of the
Office of the Prosecutor to continue to monitor
human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law in Libya. This includes
incidents such as those that took place in the Ganfouda
neighbourhood of Benghazi in March, including
allegations of executions of detainees, other killings
and desecration of corpses. The repeated targeting of
medical facilities continues to be of grave concern.
We are also alarmed by reports of arbitrary
detentions, torture and of women facing sexual and
6/18

08/05/2017

gender-based violence in migrant detention centres,
as well as in regular detention centres. We urge all
parties to provide for greater international access.
Sweden would also like to encourage the Office of the
Prosecutor to apply an integrated gender perspective
in its fourteenth report, including through the use of
gender-disaggregated data when possible.
We welcome the proposal of the Office of the
Prosecutor to assess whether crimes against refugees
and migrants fall within the jurisdiction of the Court.
We also welcome its initiative to explore possibilities to
investigate crimes related to networks engaged in the
trafficking of persons and the smuggling of migrants.
The situation in Libya remains one of concern.
Every effort must be made to find a political solution that
sets Libya on a path towards peace and reconciliation.
We are encouraged by signs of an increased willingness
by parties to engage in dialogue. All those who can
influence the situation must now engage constructively
to move the political process forward.
The United Nations has a key role to play and should
now urgently pursue a reinvigorated broad and longterm approach to the country. Therefore we welcome
the continued commitment of the Secretary-General to
addressing the situation in Libya.
The work of the Office of the Prosecutor and the
ICC will continue to be important and can make an
important contribution to post-conflict reconciliation.
Therefore, in conclusion, let me convey the full support
of my Government to Ms. Bensouda as she continues
her very important work.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Let me at the outset say that
we very much look forward to cooperating with
you, Sir, and your delegation, of course, during your
presidency this month. We already had the occasion
to do so in Colombia, which was a very, very
successful undertaking.
I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing to the Security Council.
As Vice-President of the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute of the ICC, I am particularly
conscious of her delicate task. Under her guidance, the
Office of the Prosecutor has made progress in many
different areas, and I would like to extend to her our
appreciation and our full support.
17-12790

08/05/2017

The situation in Libya

The situation in Libya was unanimously referred
to the Court by the Council through resolution 1970
(2011). We believe that the activities of the ICC can
bring positive developments, particularly if the Council
remains united and committed to supporting Libya,
its institutions and its people and helps to ensure that
justice is done in a fair and impartial manner.
We therefore appreciate and join in the
encouragement to the international community to
continue assisting the Libyan authorities to promote
justice and accountability. It is essential that justice be
part of the equation for stability and the consolidation
of institutions in the country. In this regard, the
cooperation extended by many countries to the Court,
including in the region, is a very positive sign.
However, we note with concern the financial
constraints mentioned by the Prosecutor and stand
ready to encourage voluntary contributions and any
appropriate discussions to consider the requirements
for justice to be rendered in this context.
I am grateful for the updated information provided
by the Prosecutor in her report and briefing. On the
case concerning Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, we note
with concern that the request for transfer to the Court
is still pending, and we encourage compliance with the
Court’s request.
On the case regarding Al-Senussi, we note that
appeal proceedings are still ongoing at the domestic
level and that the Court is continuing to closely monitor
the case.
As far as the recently disclosed case that
Ms. Bensouda has mentioned is concerned, we take
note of the information contained in the report and of
the request for the arrest and surrender of the fugitive.
Italy supports the request for information made by the
Prosecutor to all States.
We also would like to thank Ms. Bensouda for the
information about the investigation into allegations
of torture in Al-Hadba prison. We note that there has
been some progress since the last report, in November
2016, and we encourage the Office to continue to
monitor domestic proceedings to ensure that existing
international obligations regarding respect for the
human rights of detainees, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, are upheld.
I would like also to touch briefly on two other
specific aspects mentioned in the report. First, it is

S/PV.7934

important that dialogue between the Court and national
authorities continue, as well as their cooperation.
Secondly, with respect to human trafficking,
my delegation has consistently highlighted the
comprehensive approach that Italy is taking address
this scourge by tackling its root causes, dismantling the
business model of traffickers and saving lives at sea.
The activities of the networks of traffickers identified
by the Prosecutor in her report require urgent attention.
Not only must trafficking be stopped, but traffickers
must also be brought to justice and punished. The
slavers of the twenty-first century, as then Foreign
Minister Gentiloni put it in November 2015, must be
brought to justice, including at the international level
where appropriate. We are supportive of all efforts in
that vein and stand ready to cooperate with the Court.
We deplore the fact that the instability in Libya
has been hampering Court efforts to carry out its
investigations in the field. However, we are confident
that improvement can create conditions conducive to
allowing the Prosecutor to visit Libyan territory. In that
respect, let me stress once again the main message of
the Italian Minister for Foreign Minister, Mr. Alfano,
during his visit to Tripoli two days ago: there is a need
for a sustainable political solution to the crisis in Libya,
one based on the Libyan Political Agreement. That is the
sole framework in which solutions to the most pressing
issues can be found, and the Presidency Council and
the Government of National Accord, headed by Prime
Minister Serraj, are the sole legitimate executive
authorities of Libya, in line with resolution 2259 (2015).
In conclusion, I would add that the Council could
adopt a more structured approach in dealing with
international criminal justice issues, and with the
ICC in particular. In that regard, we favour a broader
discussion on the role that international criminal justice
can play in the activities of the Council — for instance,
by reinforcing the role of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals. The Council needs to engage
in a strategic reflection on the role of justice, including
the International Criminal Court, in the prevention,
restoration and maintenance of international peace.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to join others
in congratulating you and your delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. You can of
course count on our full support in what will certainly
be a successful effort.

17-127907/18

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

08/05/2017

We are grateful for the briefing by the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda.
She has our full support in the work entrusted to her.
We acknowledge that the work carried out by the Court
since 2011 is very sensitive and requires the cooperation
of all stakeholders in Libya in order to be able to fulfil
its mandate. That is all the more so when it is the Court’s
Prosecutor herself who has warned us of the possibility
that the crisis in the country may worsen. In that
regard, we call on the Government of National Accord
and the parties involved to do their utmost and facilitate
the use of the appropriate channels of communication
so that the Office of the Prosecutor can move forward
with investigations. Similarly, we urge the countries in
the region to fully support, and collaborate with, the
work of the bodies of the International Criminal Court.
We do hope that when the next report is submitted we
will see qualitative improvements in terms of the cases
under investigation.

legal assistance or review. Often, they face inhumane
conditions and horrendous abuse. Frequently, that is
at the hands of armed groups that have either direct
or indirect control over detention centres, including
official holding centres. That means that there is not
really any effective protection against abuse.

We take note of the reports that were submitted by
the Office of the Prosecutor on possible violations of
human rights and international law during the capture
of the district of Ganfouda in Benghazi in March. We
are deeply concerned about the reports of extrajudicial
killings, assassinations, arbitrary detention, arbitrary
trials and desecration of corpses in the course of the
progress achieved as a result of the political transition
and an internationally recognized Government. We
urgently and categorically appeal to all parties and
armed actors to stop all acts of violence, and we urge
them to meet their obligations under international law.
Likewise, we call for an investigation into those events
and the identification of those responsible so that they
may be brought to justice.

Finally, we would like to recall that, unfortunatley,
the tragic situation being experienced by Libya is a
direct consequence of regime-change policies, which
result in disastrous circumstances for millions of
innocent people. We call upon on all States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute in order to
ensure its universality and put an end to impunity for
these acts of violence, which are a threat to the welfare
of humankind.

Likewise, we are very concerned that the situation
of migrants has seriously worsened. According to the
28 April report of the International Organization for
Migration, there are more than 381,463 migrants of
more than 30 nationalities in Libya. Many of those
migrants are passing through Libya to reach Europe in
attempts to escape the insecurity afflicting the region.
Many of them are becoming victims of abuse, torture
and acts of sexual violence, in flagrant violation of
their fundamental rights. According to the report
submitted during the thirty-fourth session of the
Human Rights Council on 22 March by the Deputy
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Kate
Gilmore, migrants continue to be held arbitrarily in
Libya for indefinite periods without any due process,
8/18

We call upon the Office of the Prosecutor to
investigate those criminal acts and, as highlighed by
her report, whether or not there is a slave market in
migrants in Libya, and whether or not that is related to
transnational organized crime groups that directly or
indirectly finance such activity — as well as to ensure,
that being the case, that those persons are brought
to justice and account for their actions. For its part,
the Security Council should take the necessary steps
to ensure that the Office of the Prosecutor and the
International Criminal Court itself have the necessary
financial resources to deal with the cases referred to it.

Ms. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): On behalf of
my delegation, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Bensouda, for the presentation of her
thirteenth report. I wish to take this opportunity to
affirm the full support of France for the Prosecutor
and her team, for the International Criminal Court as
a whole and for the full implementation of resolution
1970 (2011).
From the various reports by Ms. Bensouda, we have
taken note of the prevailing insecurity and instability,
which have made it increasingly difficult for her to
continue her investigations. We welcome the support
of the Prosecutor-General of Libya, which makes it
possible to find innovative solutions and to continue
investigations remotely when the necessary conditions
for on-site visits are not always in place. France supports
efforts to facilitate the gathering of evidence and the
compilation of testimonies through secure channels.
17-12790

08/05/2017

The situation in Libya

Much remains to be done to end impunity in Libya.
That is why France believes that it has never been more
essential that the Security Council lend it support to the
Court, as well as to the efforts of the United Nations
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, to
reach a political compromise in Libya. In that regard,
we welcome the Secretary-General’s personal efforts.
We also extend our full support to Prime Minister Faiez
Mustafa Serraj and the Presidency Council to make
institutions more efficient and fully representative.
In addition to those general comments, we wish to
make three specific remarks.
First, France recalls that the continuation of the
investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor requires
the full cooperation of all stakeholders. In order to be
effective, that cooperation must be carried out in an
integrated way, while giving full weight to the principle
of complementarity. In particular, close cooperation
with Libyan authorities is essential to carry out
investigations in complete security, in accordance with
the mandate given to the Court by the Security Council.
In that regard, I would like to recall the November
2013 memorandum of understanding on the sharing
of responsibilities with the Libyan authorities, which
provides a relevant framework.
Furthermore, France believes it is essential to
strengthen cooperation with all States, whether or not
they are parties to the Rome Statute, in accordance
with resolution 1970 (2011), to ensure that requests
made by the Office of the Prosecutor can be answered
in the most efficient and timely manner possible. This
cooperation is all the more important in the context
of highly complex and transnational investigations,
which require a coordinated strategy. In this regard,
we welcome the cooperation of the Tunisian, Dutch,
British and Italian authorities, which was noted by the
Prosecutor in her statement.
Our second remark relates to the elements in the
report related to the ongoing investigations. France
believes it is essential that Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
be surrendered to the Court, in accordance with the
judges’ request. France calls on Libya to do everything
possible to honour this obligation and put an end to the
situation of non-compliance in which it finds itself. We
take note of the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber I,
in which the Chamber found that the Court was under
an obligation to comply with requests for cooperation
with respect to the only recognized Government and

S/PV.7934

not with respect to unrecognized entities, such as
representatives of the Libyan State. We therefore call
upon all entities concerned to allow the Government
of National Accord to respond without delay to the
Court’s requests.
With regard to the Abdullah Al-Senussi case,
France takes note of the assessment by the Prosecutor
in the report on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya issued in cooperation with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. France is pleased
that the Prosecutor is closely following this procedure
to determine if new elements are likely to challenge,
once again, the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber I to
declare the case inadmissible before the International
Criminal Court. With regard to the case of Al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled, we take note of the Prosecutor’s
decision to release the 2013 arrest warrant and call on
Libya and all States to cooperate in order to bring the
individual concerned before the Court without delay.
Thirdly, France wishes to revisit the views outlined
in the report of the Office of the Prosecutor. We note
the Office’s desire to continue to prioritize Libya in
2017 and to significantly expand its investigations into
crimes committed since 2011. We note the Office’s
desire to investigate crimes allegedly committed by
Da’esh, Ansar Al-Sharia and other terrorist groups,
but also atrocities perpetrated throughout the country,
namely, in Benghazi, and other crimes related to
trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants
and refugees.
In conclusion, what we see in Libya shows us
how the absence of justice fuels violence and makes
reconciliation more difficult. That is why the Security
Council unanimously referred the situation in Libya
to the International Criminal Court, as was recalled
earlier. We must provide the Court with the resources
necessary to achieve its mission. France, which
cooperates unreservedly with the Court, believes that
this is only possible with the support of the Security
Council, including in cases of non-cooperation.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to offer you,
Mr. President, and your entire team its heartfelt
congratulations as you assume the presidency of the
Council. We wish you, Sir, every success. As we did
in January 2016 during your first presidency of the
Council, my delegation assures you, Sir, of its full
support and cooperation. I would also like to extend my

17-127909/18

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

warm congratulations to my colleague Nikki Haley and
the whole team of the United States delegation for the
outstanding and very productive manner in which she
steered the Council’s work last month.
I thank the Prosecutor for her report and for the
detailed briefing she gave this afternoon, which sheds
harsh light on the very tenuous situation in Libya. I also
take this opportunity to congratulate her and her team,
once again, for their tireless efforts to bring justice to
the victims of international crimes. As a State party to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
Senegal strongly supports the Court’s mandate, which
consists in combatting impunity throughout the world,
including in Libya.
In this regard, we welcome the cooperation
provided thus far to the Court by the Office of the
Prosecutor-General of Libya in the course of the
ongoing investigation in the country and we encourage
it to continue in this direction. We would also like to
urge the international community in general and the
Security Council in particular to continue to assist the
Prosecutor as she continues to carefully investigate
these allegations and to bring those responsible to
justice. For their part, those actually in power in Libya
must fulfil the obligation imposed by resolution 1970
(2011) to cooperate with the Court and to promptly
bring to justice any individual who has been indicted.
In listening to the Prosecutor’s report, what is clear
is that the security situation remains very unstable
owing to fighting between different groups, but also
terrorist threats. This situation hampers the ability of the
Office of the Prosecutor to conduct the investigations
necessary in Libya. However, the Office continues
to make considerable efforts in order to execute the
arrest warrants issued in the case of Mr. Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. The Prosecutor has therefore reiterated
her appeal to the Government of National Accord for
the surrender of Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the
Court, following the Pre-Trial Chamber’s dismissal of
her request of 26 April 2016, with a view to obtaining
authorization to transmit the warrant issued against
Mr. Al-Qadhafi to Mr. Al-’Ajami Al-’Atiri, Commander
of the Abu-Bakr Al-Siddiq Battalion in Zintan, Libya.
Thi s would hold true even if, according to certain
recent information, Mr. Al-Qadhafi is no longer being
detained by Al-’Atiri, but is under the control of the
Zintan Military Revolutionary Council.
10/18

08/05/2017

Furthermore, in the case of Al-Tuhamy Mohamed
Khaled, the Office of the Prosecutor requested the
unsealing of the arrest warrants of 21 April, again
in anticipation of the Pre-Trial Chamber, which
subsequently issued a favourable ruling on 24 April. In
our view, this a significant step forward in the execution
of the arrest orders. All this sufficiently demonstrates
the Prosecutor’s determination to make progress as
quickly as possible on the situation that our Council has
referred to her, as well as the centrality of the struggle
for justice and the fight against impunity in her efforts.
The political situation in Libya remains complex
and the security situation remains fragile and unstable.
In order to overcome the Libyan crisis, we must take
into consideration and implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions on Libya, which are based on the
desire to find a peaceful, political solution to the Libyan
conflict. That is why Senegal welcomes the efforts of
the various interlocutors, such as the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, neighbouring countries, the
High-level Committee of the African Union on Libya,
the European Union and the League of Arab States. All
these efforts are essential to facilitating dialogue among
the parties in order to achieve lasting peace in Libya
and to put an end to human rights violations, including
the inhuman and abusive treatment of migrants in
detention centres.
Unfortunately, the frequency and the number of
such violations continues to grow, with ongoing serious
allegations of torture, slavery, trafficking in persons
and sexual violence. This requires the ongoing and
effective support of the Council and the broad and
committed support of the international community to
establish a stable security environment that guarantees
freedom, justice and respect for human rights.
In our view, strengthened and continuous
cooperation between the Security Council and the
ICC remains paramount if we want to win the fight
against impunity and for peace and security to triumph
because, as Benjamin Ferencz, the former Prosecutor at
the Nuremberg Tribunal, said,
“There can be no peace without justice, no justice
without law and no meaningful law without a
Court to decide what is just and lawful under any
given circumstance.”
It is in this spirit that my country, Senegal,
addresses Ms. Bensouda to state that we strongly
17-12790

08/05/2017

The situation in Libya

support her action. This is also why we call for the
necessary resources to be provided to her Office, and
beyond — to the ICC as a whole.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her important update on her
Office’s activity. We appreciate the way she is carrying
out her mandate and fully support her in it.
I would like to start with the situation in Libya,
which, as we just heard, is still extremely difficult,
with an ongoing political deadlock and an escalation of
tensions. We are dismayed that many warring parties
continue to commit serious crimes and grave violations
of human rights, including executions, killings,
abductions, torture, unlawful detentions, desecration
of corpses, and so on. The practice of imprisonment
without trial for an indefinite period of time, which is
outside the legal fold, continues to be widespread. A
telling example of this type of unlawful practice is the
detention of four Ukrainians who have been kept in
custody since August 2011 without any official arrest
warrant having been issued. My delegation strongly
believes that such an unacceptable situation should not
be allowed to continue. The Libyan law on justice in the
transitional period requires that the detainees, who are
civilians, be transferred to civilian authorities.
We believe that the difficult security situation
cannot be an excuse either for non-cooperation with
the ICC or for letting serious crimes be committed
during hostilities. Six years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1970 (2011), not for the sake of
holding regular briefings or repeating the mantra that
perpetrators of crimes against humanity in Libya have
to be held accountable. Rather, the situation was referred
to the ICC Prosecutor for a concrete purpose — to
deliver justice. In this regard, we would like to echo
Ms. Bensouda’s point that effective investigations and
prosecutions can be achieved only with cooperation
from States and other actors. It is worth recalling
that in resolution 1970 (2011), the Council urged all
States, including non-parties to the Rome Statute, as
well as concerned regional and other international
organizations, to cooperate fully with the Court and
the Prosecutor. Yet it is not just non-cooperation and
delays in responses to the ICC requests for assistance
that impede investigations in existing and new cases,
but also the climate of insecurity and impunity that
continues to stand in the way of investigative activities
in the country.

S/PV.7934

Under these circumstances, we fully support
the remote monitoring and investigations of crimes
committed in different parts of Libya that the Office
of the Prosecutor is carrying out through the gathering
of information from reliable sources. Still, much more
could be done to ensure accountability if ICC personnel
were able to work directly in Libya. We welcome
active cooperation between Ms. Bensouda’s Office and
the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office on this and
other issues.
We are also grateful to the Prosecutor for providing
additional information about the cases against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. In this
regard, we urge the Libyan authorities to facilitate the
transfer of Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the Court without further
delay. Justice needs to be done not only for crimes
committed by the previous regime; impunity must also
be ended for crimes committed by groups aligned with
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and by other
extremists and militias.
In this context, the international community must
continue to support the Libyan Government of National
Accord in its efforts to restore law and order in the
country. A comprehensive and lasting resolution of the
Libyan crisis will come only through a broad-based
political settlement, with the full commitment of the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord, the House of Representatives, the High Council
of State and other Libyan actors.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the ICC is
not just a venue for delivering justice for the victims.
It is also an effective tool for preventing future crimes.
We therefore join the call on all States to provide
full cooperation with the Court without exceptions
or preconditions, which would greatly contribute to
strengthening international peace and security.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to begin by
congratulating Uruguay on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the second time in its twoyear mandate, which it shares with Japan. We look
forward to working closely with you, Mr. President,
as a member of the same class. I would also like to
express my appreciation to Prosecutor Bensouda for her
briefing and report.
Japan is committed to the fight against impunity and
to supporting the International Criminal Court (ICC),
including the Office of the Prosecutor. Last month,
the President of the ICC, Judge Silvia Fernández de

17-1279011/18

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

Gurmendi, visited Tokyo and met with Prime Minister
Abe and other high-level officials of the Government
of Japan. In their discussions, they talked about the
importance of promoting the universality of the Rome
Statute, especially in the Asia-Pacific region. Prime
Minister Abe reiterated Japan’s support for the ICC and
expressed his hope that the ICC will play a greater role,
thereby contributing to the establishment of the rule of
law in the international community.
Japan welcomes the fact that The Gambia and
South Africa have decided to rescind their withdrawals
from the ICC. The ICC is an important organ in the
fight against impunity, and Japan strongly believes that
as many countries as possible should join, including
members of the Council.
Let me now turn to Libya. I would like to emphasize
that Japan continues to support the Presidency Council
and the Government of National Accord as the legitimate
authorities under the Libyan Political Agreement. The
Agreement is the key instrument to move the process
forward, and its framework should be upheld. Recent
dialogues between the key interlocutors in Libya,
such as the one between Prime Minister Al-Sarraj and
General Haftar, in Abu Dhabi, and the one between the
Presidents of the House of Representatives and the High
Council of State, in Rome, are important developments.
The ICC does not have its own enforcement
authorities. Therefore, its success depends heavily on
the cooperation of States. Without their cooperation,
the ICC cannot function effectively and justice cannot
be served. Against this background, we welcome the
fact that the Office of the Prosecutor continues to enjoy
good relations with the Libyan Prosecutor-General.
We strongly hope this relationship will yield positive
results in the near future. We commend the Office of
the Prosecutor for employing innovative methods to
make progress despite the difficult security situation.
Japan notes the recent unsealing of the arrest
warrant for Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled by the
Pre-Trial Chamber. As a State party to the Rome Statute,
Japan stands ready to fulfil its obligations under the
Statute and hopes that this unsealing will facilitate
enforcement by making all States parties aware of
the warrant. Regarding Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, it
is regrettable that he is not yet in the ICC’s custody,
despite various efforts by the Office of the Prosecutor.
We encourage the Government of National Accord in
Libya and the international community to cooperate
12/18

08/05/2017

fully with the ICC, pursuant to resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 2259 (2015).
The escalation of violence and ongoing instability,
especially in the southern region, are troubling and
are making it more difficult for the Prosecutor’s
investigation to progress. Japan is also concerned by
the deterioration of the human rights and humanitarian
situation in Libya. Human trafficking through and
from Libya, including the smuggling of migrants,
is particularly alarming. As Mr. Kobler mentioned
in his briefing to the Security Council on 19 April
(see S/PV.7927), human security is at stake, and it is
important that the Council remain fully engaged on
this issue. Adequate measures should be taken to hold
perpetrators accountable. There should be no impunity
on this matter. We are closely following the ongoing
work of the Office of the Prosecutor on a possible
investigation and look forward to further updates.
Let me conclude by reiterating Japan’s unflagging
support of the activities of the ICC. My delegation looks
forward to tangible progress on today’s agenda.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to express the readiness of my delegation to
fully support you in your endeavours.
Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate the
United States of America for its leadership last month.
We thank Ms. Bensouda for her support, pursuant to
Security Council 1970 (2011). We are deeply concerned
by the ongoing human rights violations committed by all
parties to the conflict in Libya. Abduction, the torture
and killing of civilians, as well as arbitrary detention,
continued unabated. It is also deeply troubling that
ordinary crime is widespread, primarily due to
lawlessness and the weakness of judicial institutions.
We recall the briefing delivered by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
Mr. Martin Kobler, just three weeks ago (see S/PV.7927),
on the current dangerous and uncertain situation in the
country, which forces the Libyan people to live in daily
fear for their security and safety. It is particularly the
vulnerable — including women and children, refugees
and migrants — who suffer tremendously due to the
ongoing crisis. All actors who continue to commit such
violations must be held accountable. Da’esh in Libya, in
particular, is responsible for abominable crimes, which
17-12790

08/05/2017

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7934

include summary execution of innocent civilians, and
it must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

have taken note of the Office of Prosecutor’s report and
update on the activities regarding the situation in Libya.

It is imperative to fight the widespread sense of
impunity in Libya through appropriate mechanisms,
and Ethiopia firmly upholds the principled position
of the African Union on combating impunity while
safeguarding the peace, security, stability, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Member States. In that
regard, building and enhancing the capacity of Libyan
State institutions, particularly judiciary and law
enforcement organs, to ensure the rule of law must be
a priority. The international community should support
all efforts that are anchored in the long-term strategy
of building State institutions and ensuring justice and
reconciliation, in order to foster an environment of
peace, security and stability.

The current security and political situation in
Libya continues to create a breeding ground for the
growing impunity of terrorist groups and armed
militias. Widespread violations and abuses continue
to be committed against civilians and vulnerable
populations. We take note with concern of the
information on increasing numbers of migrants,
smuggled or trafficked through Libya to Europe, who
have been inhumanly detained, extorted and sexually
assaulted — a serious violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law. We urge all parties
to refrain from unlawfully targeting civilians and
migrants, and call for those responsible for serious
crimes to be held accountable.

It is our conviction that the continued and widespread
violation of human rights cannot be sustainably
addressed until all Libyan political actors find a lasting
political solution for the protracted crisis. While we
note the latest reports of meetings between the major
Libyan political actors as a positive step, we urge all
Libyan actors to work constructively towards concrete
progress to address obstacles to the full implementation
of the Libyan political agreement. It is also important
that all Libyans work coherently and in a united manner
as the African high-level committee continues to call
for a nationwide reconciliation process that could
complement and reinforce the political process.

Kazakhstan believes that an effective and credible
Government is crucial to bolstering Libya’s commitment
and capability to restore and promote the rule of law,
to address impunity, to protect basic human rights and
to provide justice for past violations. To that end, the
international community’s support of Libya remains
vital to restoring stability and security throughout
the country. Such stability and security requires the
unification and rebuilding of all national institutions,
including political authorities, security and defence
forces. In that regard, we welcome the recent meeting
of Prime Minister Serraj with General Haftar in Abu
Dhabi, and consider that meeting as an important step
to advancing the political process in Libya.

In conclusion, the primary responsibility of
ensuring lasting peace and security in the country
remains in the hands of the Libyans themselves, and
we hope that all Libyan actors will seriously engage
with a sense of national vision, determination and in a
constructive spirit to end the crisis. We also hope that
the international community — including countries
of the region, the African Union, the United Nations
and other relevant partners — will continue to provide
coordinated support for those efforts.

Finally, we commend the remediation efforts of
regional organizations — such as the African Union,
the League of Arab States and the European Union, as
well as neighbouring countries — to support the Libyan
political process.

Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): First of all, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency and to assure you of
our full support and cooperation. I would also like to
convey our appreciation to the United States delegation
for their leadership during last month’s presidency.
I would like to thank Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, for her briefing. We

Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to congratulate Uruguay on taking
up the presidency of the Security Council. We will
continue to support its work and would like to thank
the United States for its leadership during the month
of April. We also thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
China is closely following the development of the
situation in Libya and supports the good offices of
the United Nations in Libya’s political transition. We
firmly support the Libyan people’s efforts to maintain
national unity and unification. We hope that all parties
in Libya prioritize safeguarding its national interests,
remain committed to a Libyan-led and -owned process

17-1279013/18

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

and begin an inclusive political dialogue as soon as
possible. Relevant Council resolutions and the Libyan
Political Agreement should serve as a basis of all
efforts, and disputes should be settled by negotiations
and consultations to find a solution acceptable to
all, promote national reconciliation, restore State
governance and realize peace, stability and development
as soon as possible. That is the prerequisite and basis for
judicial justice in Libya. The international community
should continue to provide support and assistance to
the country.
China’s position on the issue of the International
Criminal Court remains unchanged.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First and foremost, we would like to join the
expressions of heartfelt congratulations to the United
States on presiding over last month’s deliberations and
to Uruguay for assuming this month’s presidency.
We read the thirteenth report of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor on the investigation
of the situation in Libya. We see from the content that
progress n the main tracks of the Libyan dossier remains
weak. It would be hard to consider the unsealing of an
arrest warrant of Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, handed
down four years ago, as significant progress. Indeed,
it is probably further evidence that the ICC continues
to stick to a lopsided approach, focusing on only one
side of the conflict in 2011. Actual steps to investigate
the action of other sides remain absent over the past six
years. Not a single investigation has been opened on the
alleged crimes of the rebels. The Prosecutor continues
to demonstratively and without clear explanation shy
away from the consideration of the matter of civilian
casualties as a result of NATO strikes.
Regarding the situation in Libya after 2011, it is
surprising that the document lacks even the slightest hint
of an investigation of crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), while previous
reports affirmed that such an analysis was being
conducted. Alongside ISIL in Libya, there are other
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council.
That raises the question as to whether, from the point
of view of the Prosecutor, the atrocities committed by
those terrorists are not worth investigating.
For some reason, instead of analysing terrorist
actions from the standpoint of the ICC’s mandate,
the authors of the report enter the political arena in
considering the topic of anti-ISIL action in Libya. We
14/18

08/05/2017

should recall that Special Representative Kobler and
the members of the Security Council have frequently
acknowledged the success of the counter-terrorist
operations in both Sirte and Benghazi. In the report,
however, it is presented as if the suppression of ISIL’s
base had occurred only in Sirte, and even there with
only a partial description that is silent about the aerial
support from the outside forces. In other words, the
report gives the impression that there were no terrorists
in Benghazi. It is hard to call that a quality analysis.
We would like to caution against further attempts
to present the ICC’s Libyan dossier as a burden
imposed on it by the Security Council that presupposes
financial contributions from the United Nations. It
is not an accident that the note of 15 November 2016
from the Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya regarding
the financing of investigations in Libya makes a clear
distinction between the States parties to the Rome
Statute and other countries, which are invited to help on
a voluntary basis. The report’s conclusions omit such
important aspects.
On a separate issue, we would like to comment
on the liberal interpretation in paragraph 28 of the
report of the provision in resolution 2323 (2016) that
stresses the need for protection in Libya associated
with United Nations personnel. The report could lead
one to conclude that this extends to ICC investigators
as well, which is a stretch. Besides which, the ICC does
not have the authority to interpret Security Council
resolutions on this or any other issues.
To sum up, we would like to note that we have
voiced our opinions regarding the referral of the
situation in Libya to the ICC at previous briefings
by the Prosecutor, and they have not changed. With
regard to the political situation in Libya, the only way
to emerge from the crisis and unify the country and
its institutions continues to be through the broadest
possible inter-Libyan dialogue, under United Nations
auspices, with coordinated international assistance and
the active participation of the regional stakeholders.
Mr. Townley (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court for her briefing on her Office’s efforts
to pursue accountability for atrocity crimes committed
in Libya.
Stability in Libya through unity and leadership is
critical for many reasons, including to ensuring that
17-12790

08/05/2017

The situation in Libya

human rights violations and abuses can be meaningfully
addressed. That includes addressing reports of arbitrary
detention, extrajudicial killings and the exploitation of
migrants. We must work diligently to end impunity for
such violations and abuses in Libya, since that in turn
can reinforce the rule of law and foster stability.
Political reconciliation among all Libyan parties
remains key to achieving peace and realizing the goal
of a Libya that is stable, democratic and free from the
violence that continues to cause great human suffering
throughout the country. We are encouraged by the recent
meetings of Libyan leaders in Abu Dhabi and Rome,
as well as by the international community’s ongoing
support for the Libyan Political Agreement framework,
and we urge Libyans on all sides to work actively to
implement it. As Ambassador Haley told the Council
only a few weeks ago (see S/PV.7927), we need all the
Libyan parties and the country’s leadership to work
together to rebuild the country, engage in dialogue and
find a compromise. The road ahead will be challenging,
but the ongoing discord and conflict will have far graver
consequences for the Libyan people.
Moreover, violent extremism flourishes where
instability is prevalent. We remain deeply concerned
about the continuing terrorist threat in Libya, which
raises the potential risk of further atrocities. Although
we are encouraged by the recent successes in driving
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham out of Sirte
and Benghazi, we must ensure that terrorist groups
do not have the opportunity to establish themselves
and regain power in the absence of strong Libyan
institutions and leadership. The conflict in and around
Tamanhint airfield reminds us that the risk of division
and escalating violence in Libya requires our urgent
attention. At the same time, we must remain mindful
of the importance of complying with international law
during counter-terrorism operations.
The United States remains dedicated to pursuing
accountability for violations and abuses committed
during the 2011 revolution. In that regard, we appreciate
the continuing efforts to bring Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
accused of helping to orchestrate the murder and
persecution of hundreds of civilians, to justice. We urge
all the relevant Libyan actors to facilitate the transfer
of Al-Qadhafi to The Hague so that he can stand trial
for his alleged crimes against humanity. We welcome
the reports of Libya’s continued cooperation with the
Prosecutor, consistent with the Council’s calls for such
cooperation and Libya’s obligations under resolution

S/PV.7934

1970 (2011). We have also taken note of the Court’s
recent decision to lift the seal on an arrest warrant for
Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, who is accused of
being responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Libya. We stress the importance of working
to ensure accountability for such atrocity crimes and
thereby sending a vital deterrent signal in the midst of
ongoing violence that those who commit such crimes in
Libya will ultimately face justice.
The United States remains committed to supporting
the Libyan people as they struggle for peace, prosperity
and democratic governance. Accountability for crimes
in Libya will be key to enduring success in that
endeavour. We look forward to continued collaboration
with the Council in order to realize a better future for
all Libyans.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for her report and briefing today. The
United Kingdom would like to reiterate its support for
the work of the Prosecutor and for the role that the ICC
plays in bringing those responsible for serious crimes
of international concern to account.
Libya is in urgent need of progress towards full
political reconciliation, now more than ever. The scale
of the crisis facing the people of Libya is grave. It is a
crisis in which the fighting continues year after year,
and in which violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses continue
unabated. The people of Libya deserve a better future.
Establishing effective governance is key. Libya’s
legitimate political institutions must work together to
break the political deadlock that is prolonging instability
and the suffering of the Libyan people. Libya’s political
and social groups must seize the momentum offered by
the welcome meetings between Prime Minister Serraj
and Field Marshal Haftar earlier this week to lay out a
path towards Libyan reconciliation and unity. Security,
stability and prosperity can be achieved only when the
country’s leaders choose to get together and work out a
plan for the common benefit of the Libyan people.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Prosecutor’s
ongoing efforts to investigate alleged crimes, despite
the practical difficulties of conducting investigations
inside Libya. We remain deeply concerned about the
continued violence between armed groups across
the country, and particularly about the reports of
human rights abuses and violations by combatants

17-1279015/18

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

08/05/2017

in Benghazi and elsewhere, including attacks on
innocent civilians and medical facilities. There is no
justification for attacking medical facilities protected
under international humanitarian law. We note that
the Prosecutor is giving consideration to opening
an investigation into alleged criminal acts against
migrants in Libya. Such alleged crimes provide further
justification for tackling migration upstream so that
the international community can help to create more
opportunities in migrants’ home countries.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the Prosecutor’s
update on the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. We support her call to the Libyan
authorities to do everything possible to ensure the
transfer of Al-Qadhafi to the ICC and to consult the
Court on any problems that might impede his transfer
to The Hague. We look forward to the outcome of the
Court’s consideration of the report of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya on the domestic proceedings
against Mr. Al-Senussi.

We urge Members of the United Nations and
Security Council members that have not yet become
parties to the Rome Statute to do so, with a view to
making progress in combating impunity and protecting
all people on the planet from such heinous crimes,
which represent a serious threat to peace and security.
It is important, in that context, to enhance the role
played by the ICC as a mechanism to ensure justice
when national courts cannot do so. Accountability for
the most serious crimes, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, must continue to be a priority goal in the
work of the Security Council.

The United Kingdom commends the continued
engagement of the Libyan Prosecutor-General and the
Libyan representatives to the Court. We call on other
States and relevant international organizations to assist
the Libyan authorities in their efforts to build the rule
of law in Libya. We thank the Prosecutor for the update
on the allegations of torture committed against Saadi
Al-Qadhafi in Al-Hadba prison, and we welcome the
fact that one of the accused who had been returned to
his position at the prison has now been removed.
We also thank the Prosecutor for her briefing on
the case against Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, who is
wanted for war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Libya in 2011. We fully support the
Court’s call for cooperation from members of the
Council, Libya and all States to provide information to
facilitate the swift arrest of Mr. Al-Tuhamy and ensure
his surrender to the ICC. It is crucial that he and other
individuals responsible for war crimes in Libya not
become fugitives from justice.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom understands
the financial and resource constraints faced by the
Prosecutor’s Office and the need to ensure adequate
funding for the Court’s Libya investigations. We
are committed to working with others to ensure that
the Court has the resources necessary for its work,
while ensuring that the ICC budget is as streamlined
as possible.
16/18

We thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and we
commend her for presenting her thirteenth report on the
situation in Libya pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We reiterate our full support for the work of the ICC
and for Ms. Bensouda’s role in prosecuting those guilty
of serious crimes under article 5 of the Rome Statute.

With regard to Libya, unfortunately the latest report
does not give very encouraging signs. The authority of
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord continues to be challenged at the national level,
and the blockade imposed by the Tobruk House of
Representatives has not allowed for the provisions of the
Libyan Political Agreement to be fully implemented.
The multiple challenges facing Libya six years after
the civil war require swift and efficient responses from
its new authorities, which face the threat of Islamist
terrorism, a migrant crisis affecting hundreds of
thousands of people, a humanitarian emergency and a
severe economic crisis, among other serious problems.
In that context, it is necessary to work towards
reunification and reconciliation in the country so as
to prevent major bloodshed among its people and put
an end to the institutional crisis and to the military
conflict that have afflicted the country since 2011. We
must also make progress towards a genuine democratic
transition and lasting peace and stability as a basis for
investigating more effectively the atrocities that were
committed in that country, ensuring that the current
situation of generalized violence and impunity does
not worsen.
We are confident that the new Libyan authorities,
to the extent that they can consolidate their power and
17-12790

08/05/2017

The situation in Libya

gradually extend their authority to the entire territory,
will fulfil their commitment to ensuring justice for
the victims of these crimes and cooperate with the
Prosecutor of the ICC in identifying those responsible
and facilitating their handover to the Court for trial.
We urge the Government of National Accord
to apply the Court’s provisions to Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and ensure a trial with full guarantees to
Abdullah Al-Senussi and other individuals alleged
to have committed war crimes and crimes against
humanity before and during the 2011 civil war.
We are concerned about the fact that the Prosecutor,
despite having on previous occasions cited investigations
in Libya as one of her priorities for 2017, is still facing
budgetary problems in connection therewith.
In particular, and as Ms. Bensouda noted when she
addressed the Council in November 2016 (see S/PV.7806)
and in her most recent report, it is very important that
investigations be launched on attacks against migrants
and refugees in Libya, including acts of sexual violence
and crimes against minors. We therefore support her
request for the resources necessary for her to discharge
her mandate, and we call on all States parties able to do
so to provide the necessary funding.
In conclusion, Uruguay reiterates its recognition
of the work of the Prosecutor in addressing the crimes
committed in Libya, which will no doubt help to
enhance the rule of law and to establish a more just
and inclusive Libya that fully respects all its citizens’
rights, which for many years now have been violated.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
important briefing.
Allow me to take this opportunity to stress once
again Libya’s pursuit of complementarity between
national courts and the ICC to ensure justice and fight
impunity. Although Libya has not acceded to the Rome
Statute, it continues to closely cooperate with the ICC
and with the Prosecutor to achieve those goals.

S/PV.7934

We are well aware of the delay in the prosecution of
suspects. That was due, unfortunately, to the security
situation in our country. Despite the conditions under
which the Libyan courts and the Attorney-General
have been working, we stress their ability to fulfil their
commitments and guarantee fair and just prosecutions.
The Council is undoubtedly well aware that the
process of achieving justice cannot be limited to certain
cases or specific suspects but should include everyone,
regardless of the identity of the perpetrator or of the
victim. That cannot be achieved in the absence of
security, and security cannot be achieved in the absence
of an army and a police force in a situation where there
are numerous militias and weapons are plentiful.
To ensure justice for all, we stress the need for the
international community to support the Government of
National Accord and law-enforcement institutions, that
is, the army and the police, and extend State authority
throughout the territory. That is the sole guarantee
for fighting impunity, achieving justice for all and
protecting the independence of the judiciary, so as to
enable it to shoulder its responsibilities in a transparent
and equitable manner.
We also stress that the proceedings under way in
our national courts have given rise to a sense of justice,
which is the cornerstone of our national reconciliation
process and has had a positive impact on our stability
and security. However, exercising our national
jurisdiction does not necessarily mean that we will not
cooperate with the ICC. That is something that previous
Libyan Governments and the current Government
of National Accord have done through cooperation
between the Attorney-General and the Prosecutor of
the ICC in implementation of the 2013 memorandum
of understanding on the sharing of responsibilities with
the Libyan authorities.
It is well-known that human trafficking in itself
is a crime. Combating and ending it require close
cooperation between countries. It is also known that
this type of crime is perpetrated through transnational
criminal networks. We noticed in the report of the
Prosecutor and in reports of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and of other international
organizations that light is being shed on alleged crimes
that are a direct result of human trafficking, including
rape, arbitrary detention, torture and other crimes
against humanity. Indeed, we know full well that the
humanitarian situation of illegal immigrants in Libya is

17-1279017/18

S/PV.7934

The situation in Libya

tragic. As we have said before, this is a direct result of
the insecurity and the spread of militias and weapons.
However, we would have liked to see in the report a
mention of genuine preventive procedural efforts to fight
these criminal networks, whether in countries of origin
or destination. It is known that my country is a transit
country suffering from insecurity and chaos, which
affects our citizens and results in their displacement.
Had it not been for the presence of criminal networks
in countries of origin and destination, transit countries
would not have to experience such crimes and violations.
According to some media outlets, the ProsecutorGeneral of Catania in Sicily, Italy, accused some
European non-governmental organizations that
were saving migrants of being complicit with human
traffickers. That was stressed by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
last Sunday. We hope to see mention by the Prosecutor
in future reports of Court efforts to fight human
trafficking networks in both the north and the south of
the Mediterranean equally.

18/18

08/05/2017

Moreover, given the sensitivity of the subject
in Libya, we hope to see further cooperation and
collaboration between the ICC and Libyan authorities
on illegal immigrants. In that regard, we have noticed
that the latest reports of the Prosecutor fail to mention
certain topics that used to be a priority in previous
reports, such as internally displaced persons and
migrants. We believe it would be useful to brief Council
members on the latest updates in that regard.
In conclusion, we reiterate our hope for further
support from the Council to address the security and
administrative situation and to provide a conducive
environment for the restoration of the rule of law as
soon as possible. We look forward to further positive
collaboration and cooperation with the ICC to ensure
criminal justice, in line with Libyan sovereignty and in
full respect of our local legislation, including laws on
transitional justice and national reconciliation.
The meeting rose at 4.45pm.

17-12790
