S/PV.7922

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7922nd meeting

Wednesday, 12 April 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09858 (E)
*1709858*

S/PV.7922

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/315, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is honoured to present, on behalf of our other
penholders — the United States and France — a draft
resolution condemning the events of 4 April in the Khan
Shaykhun area of southern Idlib in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The events in Khan Shaykhun were the worst
of human acts. They have dominated the international
agenda over the past eight days. The events of that day
and the manner in which the victims suffered mean that
the Security Council must act.
When judging how exactly to act, we must recall the
Council’s determination in 2013, acting under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations and in multiple
resolutions since, to remove and destroy all chemical
weapons in Syria, and our subsequent agreements to
investigate any and all incidents of apparent further
use. We must also recall the Council’s determination
that those responsible for chemical-weapons use must
be held accountable. It is with those determinations in
mind that we put forward today’s draft resolution.
Our text condemns the events of 4 April in Idlib.
It expresses full support to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Factfinding Mission and the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, already charged
with investigating this and all such incidents, and
it emphasizes the need for full access by those
2/13

12/04/2017

investigators to relevant sites and recalls the obligations
of all parties in Syria to cooperate fully in that regard.
We believe that that is the necessary minimum response
required of the Council. We thank all Council members
that have helped to develop the draft over the past week.
We thank the United States as President for tabling the
text for a vote, and we urge all Council members to vote
in favour.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to inform the members of
the Security Council that during the course of the
negotiations that took place today in Moscow between
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Lavrov, and the Secretary of State of
the United States, Mr. Tillerson, we proposed to the
American side that we send a joint statement to the
Director-General of the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Mr. Üzümcü, asking him to immediately put
together an independent international mission for a visit
to Khan Shaykhun, where it is alleged that chemical
agents were used, and to the Shayrat air base. The United
States Secretary of State is considering that proposal,
and we expect that Washington, D.C., will offer it a
constructive response, given the current situation.
Given what I have just said and the fact that
tomorrow, on 13 April there will be a meeting of the
Executive Council of the OPCW in The Hague, where
all of these issues will be discussed, we feel that putting
the draft resolution to a vote today does not serve a
useful purpose.
The President: The Council is now ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Egypt, France, Italy, Japan, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan
The President: There were 10 votes in favour,
2 against and 3 abstentions. The draft resolution has not
17-09858

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

been adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The conflict that
has ravaged Syria has lasted for more than six years. For
the people of Syria, that must feel like an eternity. Here
in this Chamber, we get only so many moments to act,
only so many moments to show them that hope is not
dead, chances for the world to unite in condemnation
of war crimes. Today was one of those moments. What
happened in Khan Shaykhun last week was the worst
of human acts. United Kingdom scientists have now
analysed samples obtained from Khan Shaykhun, and
they have tested positive for the nerve agent sarin or a
sarin-like substance. We therefore share the assessment
of the United States that it is highly likely that the regime
was responsible for a sarin attack on Khan Shaykhun.
We recognize the need for a thorough, swift,
independent investigation. This afternoon, Russia’s
Foreign Minister also called for such an investigation,
yet Russia has vetoed a draft resolution that would
support that investigation. Russia’s messages are
mixed, and its aims confused. The Fact-finding
Mission in Syria of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Syrian people
need our political support, something that we as the
Security Council should have been able to give. The
United Kingdom will continue to give that support
and, regardless of today’s vote, the work of the OPCW
will continue.
We have once again encountered a Russian
veto — the eighth time that Russia has used its veto to
protect the Syrian regime. Today’s veto is even more
regrettable given that Russia was the architect of the
2013 agreement to dismantle Syria’s chemical-weapon
programme, an initiative that has demonstrably failed.
Russia cannot now possibly claim that it opposes the
use of chemical weapons. Russia has seen the same
pictures that we all saw just days ago in this Chamber.
How could anyone look at the faces of lifeless children
and choose to veto a draft resolution condemning
those deaths?
It is indefensible that Russia has chosen to protect
the perpetrators of those attacks rather than work with
the rest of the international community to condemn
them. When those images and videos were broadcast

S/PV.7922

across screens around the world, my team received a
message from another child — Bana Alabed, a 7-yearold Syrian girl from Aleppo who, with the help of her
mother, has given the world a window into the conflict
through Twitter. The message she sent was simple. It
was that we can make a difference. We must demand
justice for the children. She is one voice, but one that
echoes the views of millions of Syrians. Demand justice
for the children.
The heartbreaking truth is that a little girl’s plea will
not be heard in this Chamber. Not today. But regardless
of the veto today, we should trust those words. We
will hold the regime to account. We will continue to
work with our international partners to put an end to
any use of chemical weapons and to seek justice for
all the victims of these heinous chemical attacks. We
will gather at the OPCW in The Hague tomorrow to
discuss how best to support a credible international
investigation that establishes who was responsible and
paves the way to hold the culprits to account.
The catastrophe in Syria is not the way things have
to be. Yesterday, Foreign Ministers from the Group of
Seven (G-7) and key regional countries came together
in Italy to discuss how to move forward from last
week’s tragedy. They gave strong support to Secretary
Tillerson’s visit to Moscow today to discuss how Russia
could work with the international community to end
the tragedy of the war in Syria. Russia has the sort of
influence over the regime that could bring its use of
chemical weapons and barrel bombs to an end, and
could lead to a real ceasefire that would then lead to the
resumption of serious political negotiations on a political
transition. Those Foreign Ministers indicated that if
Russia took those steps, the international community
would be ready to work with it to bring peace to Syria,
defeat Da’esh and terrorism and reconstruct Syria. That
is the choice that Moscow has in front of it. The world
now waits to see if Russia will respond to the G-7 and
assume its responsibilities as a permanent member of
the Security Council to help put a stop to the Al-Assad
regime’s use of chemical weapons and to work with
the international community to bring this tragedy to
an end.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France is
devastated by the result of today’s voting. We deeply
deplore the fact that, thanks to another Russian veto, the
Security Council has been unable to agree on a simple,
balanced draft resolution condemning and seeking to
throw light on what happened at Khan Shaykhun. We

17-098583/13

S/PV.7922

The situation in the Middle East

nonetheless strove to engage in discussion of the draft
in good faith. We have failed yet again to measure up
to the responsibility that we have assigned ourselves
and to the fundamental values that we are supposed to
support and ensure respect for. Almost four years after
the Ghouta massacre in August 2013, the Council has
taken a terrible step backwards.
The attack on Khan Shaykhun would appear to
be the latest example of the abject duplicity of a hardline regime. Once again, everything about it points
to the Damascus regime’s clear responsibility for the
attack. Through it, the Syrian regime has crossed
another threshold of horror and of scorn for the most
basic standards and elementary principles of humanity,
which, as we have seen, it has continued to flout. France
has always said, not as an ideological statement but
because the evidence tells us so, that the Middle East
will never have peace and security as long as a regime
exists that is guilty of committing war crimes, indeed
crimes against humanity, in order to maintain its hold
on power. That regime slaughters its own population on
the pretext of fighting terrorism, while continuing to
fan the flames of Da’esh.
After the attack on 4 April, a military installation
of the Syrian regime that had been used for chemical
bombardments was destroyed by United States
air strikes. The American operation was a legitimate
response to a mass crime that could not go unpunished.
Bashar Al-Assad, as we have reiterated on many
occasions, bears full responsibility for this development.
Russia’s veto on 28 February (see S/PV.7893) of a
draft resolution (S/2017/172) aimed at punishing those
responsible for the chemical attacks committed several
years ago already represented a dangerous indication of
looming impunity. The massacre in Khan Shaykhoun
should have acted as a wake-up call to all of us about
our responsibilities. How can those who claim to be
committed to the non-proliferation regime and the fight
against impunity reject the evidence before them? How
is it possible to repeatedly and in such a systematic
manner evade the issue of the barbaric use of weapons
of mass destruction targeting innocent people? Nothing
can justify averting one’s eyes from such atrocities, or
dissembling, or attempting to assign blame elsewhere
and trying to impose counter-narratives on the world.
France will not resign itself to the notion of the
Council’s impotence that some seek to impose on it.
We will lend our full support to the work of United
4/13

12/04/2017

Nations and OPCW mechanisms, including in their
efforts to shed light on the circumstances of the attack.
We must also fully support the OPCW team responsible
for the inquiry into the initial Syrian declaration. Our
goal will continue to be the dismantling of the Syrian
chemical-weapons programme.
France will not accept impunity for those responsible
for the atrocities committed in Syria. We will spare no
effort to ensure that sooner or later the perpetrators
answer for their crimes. France will also work to
strengthen the non-proliferation regime, which is vital
for our collective security and which the Council has to
date always sought to uphold.
The initiative undertaken by France, along with
Mexico, on limiting the use of the veto in the case
of mass atrocities is aimed at precisely situations of
this kind. It is now clearly more topical than ever and
reflective of our concerns.
This tragedy is yet another reminder of the fact
that only a genuine political transition will allow us to
guarantee peace and security for the Syrian people and
a return to stability in the Middle East. We cannot wait
for other crimes to be added to the long list of abuses
committed by the Syrian regime, which no one, not
even its closest supporters, can justify any longer.
We cannot simply give up. We owe it to the
victims of this heinous chemical attack, and, more
broadly speaking, to all of the victims of the Syrian
tragedy. In that context, despite the fact that the veto
was wielded once again today, France solemnly calls
on all the members of the Security Council to come
together and set aside political divisions and national
interests in order to establish once again a complete ban
on chemical weapons and to help bring about, on an
urgent basis, a political transition in Syria, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Let us live up to our responsibilities before the
judgment of history.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
supported the draft resolution (S/2017/315) submitted
by the United Kingdom, France and the United States
owing to our interest in the Security Council carrying
out its responsibilities with regard to the crimes
committed against the Syrian people, particularly
given the fact that our Syrian brethren have suffered
17-09858

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7922

chemical attacks more than once. I reiterate that we
cannot accept any impunity for such crimes.

humanity, the incentive will remain to continue to
commit them.

We have supported, and will continue to support,
the principle of accountability for everyone proven
to have perpetrated such inhuman acts, regardless of
motivation. The Council must undertake all agreed
procedures aimed at determining the truth on the basis
of evidence and implement the relevant resolutions.
Accordingly, we express our extreme dismay at the fact
that we were not able to adopt the draft resolution and
thus have failed to send a message on the imperative of
determining what really happened in Khan Shaykhoun.

We will do our best to ensure that even in the
absence of a specific Security Council resolution, the
mechanisms in place work to clarify the facts and
responsibilities relating to the Khan Shaykhoun attack
as soon as possible.

However, I would also like to reiterate that the
failure to adopt the draft must not affect in any way the
objectives of the inquiry mission, on the basis of the
clear mandates contained in Council resolutions. Here I
call on all international, regional and Syrian parties to
cooperate fully with both international mechanisms, in
keeping with resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2298 (2016),
in order to achieve justice. This is the least we can do
for the Syrian people in the context of an issue that has
deeply polarized the Council.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy had hoped that the unity of
the Council would be preserved in ensuring swift action
following the latest horrors in the Syrian conflict.
As an elected member of the Security Council, we
feel a special responsibility to live up to the expectations
of the United Nations membership, which has entrusted
us with helping to maintain international peace and
security, a responsibility that today we were not able
to uphold.
We voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2017/315) in order to reiterate, first, our condemnation
in the strongest terms of any use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances, and,
secondly, our support for a full-fledged investigation
into the facts in Khan Shaykhoun by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
Fact-finding Mission and, as applicable, by the United
Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism. We call
upon the Syrian Government and all parties in Syria
to cooperate fully with the OPCW and the United
Nations so as to allow for the prompt conclusion of its
investigation into this heinous incident.
Thirdly, there is a need to fight impunity. So
long as no one is held accountable and faces tangible
consequences for war crimes and crimes against

It is deeply disturbing that international humanitarian
law and the international non-proliferation architecture
continue to be blatantly violated. Upholding respect
for these norms, including resolution 2118 (2013),
and the Chemical Weapons Convention, which is the
cornerstone of the international non-proliferation
regime, should have been a shared priority, one that
unifies us instead of dividing us.
The challenges of the Syrian crisis require strong
cohesion and cooperation on the part of the international
community. There is therefore no alternative to engaging
and trying to find common solutions. Italy remains
committed to working with the other members of the
Council and the other members of the international
community in doing so.
As I said this morning, the international community
has the duty to stop the horrendous suffering of the
Syrian civilian population through a political solution
and to bring back peace and hope for the future in
that country.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan voted in favour of the
draft resolution (S/2017/315) proposed by France, the
United Kingdom and the United States.
The reported use of chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhoun was an affront to humanity and a blatant
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Given the gravity of the situation, it is very important
for the Council to express its determination to address
this issue.
It is truly regrettable that we have witnessed another
instance of division in the Council despite the clear need
to address the incident. What just happened here does
not and must not affect the Council’s determination
concerning this matter. We must expeditiously
determine whether chemical weapons were actually
used, identify those who are responsible and hold
them accountable. Japan welcomes the opening of the
investigation by the Fact-finding Mission to the Syrian
Arab Republic of the Organization for the Prohibition

17-098585/13

S/PV.7922

The situation in the Middle East

of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and urges it to report its
conclusion as soon as possible.
The Syrian Government and all parties in Syria
have the obligation under resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2235 (2015) to fully cooperate with the OPCW and the
United Nations, including the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). In addressing the
continuous allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in Syria, Japan believes that it is increasingly important
to further improve coordination between the Factfinding Mission, the JIM and the Council so that the
Council can react more swiftly to the alleged use of
chemical weapons.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned by the use of chemical weapons
in Syria and firmly opposes the use of chemical
weapons by any country, group or individual. China
is aware that the Syrian Government has written
to the Director General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) requesting
that the organization send an investigative mission to
Khan Shaykhun and the Shayrat airbase to carry out an
investigation. China supports the OPCW and the United
Nations conducting a comprehensive, objective and an
impartial investigation into the relevant cases so as to
arrive at a conclusion on the basis of solid evidence
that can stand the test of time and be substantiated by
facts, thereby bringing the perpetrators of the attack
and other responsible parties to justice.
Preserving unity within the Security Council is of
critical importance to any solution within the context of
the Syrian question. It has been our long-standing hope
that the Security Council would speak as one voice
on the chemical weapons issue in Syria. We had been
working tirelessly for a draft resolution that would have
enjoyed the support of all Council members. China
highly commends the elected members of the Council
for their hard work in trying to reach consensus among
Council members. We deeply regret the failure to reach
such a consensus on the draft resolution. The attempt
to push through a draft resolution in which serious
division still remained among Council members was
destined to undermine Council unity and impair efforts
to seeking a political solution.
The draft resolution on which we voted contains
language that condemns the use of chemical weapons
that took place within Syria and calls for an investigation
into the relevant instances, which is language that
6/13

12/04/2017

China supports. Nevertheless, some other elements
of the text may well have been amended to secure
consensus. As such, China abstained in the voting on
the draft resolution.
The protracted conflict in Syria has caused massive
civilian casualties. A political solution continues to
be the only way forward to rid the Syrian people of
their suffering. Military means simply do not work
but only exacerbate the suffering of the Syrian people.
China calls on the relevant parties to stay the course
towards a political settlement and uphold the Syrianowned and Syrian-led principle, support the role of the
United Nations as the main channel of mediation, and
get behind the efforts undertaken by Special Envoy
De Mistura. We must step up all four parallel tracks,
namely preserving the ceasefire, seeking a political
solution, coordinating counter-terrorism activities and
providing humanitarian assistance so as to facilitate the
search by all parties for a solution that is acceptable to
all through the Geneva talks.
China hopes that the international community will
work in concert to play a constructive role in securing
a comprehensive, impartial and appropriate solution to
the Syrian issue without delay.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted against the
draft resolution (S/2017/315) on the chemical weapons
incident in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April. That outcome
was predetermined as we have consistently expressed
our categorical disagreement with the distorted nature
of the document, which, as events and consultations
unfolded, did not undergo the slightest change. Russian
concerns and priorities were ignored and brushed aside
under artificial pretences. The primary problem was the
fact that the draft resolution by the troika designated
the guilty party prior to an independent and objective
investigation. That approach is incompatible with legal
standards. Those members were aware of our concerns,
but, once again, put their unilateral and consequently
doomed draft resolution to the vote. Has it become a
national sport to intentionally undermine the unity of
the Security Council?
The strike on the Syrian air base, which was
undertaken before an international investigation was
undertaken, was in violation of international law and
lacked the approval of the Security Council. Voting in
favour of the Western troika draft resolution would have
meant legitimizing those illegal actions, which from the
17-09858

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7922

point of view of international law and common sense is
absolutely unacceptable. If our partners believe that it is
necessary to adopt a generic resolution on chemicals in
Syria, then we need to sit down together at the table and
seriously agree on a comprehensive document, in which
we will naturally include our assessments, backed by
facts, on the use of chemical weapons by terrorists. In
other words, we need to work on the basis of mutually
taking into account each other’s interests and concerns.

air base that was struck by missiles as soon as possible.
In our view, the goal of the visit to Khan Shaykhun is
to determine whether or not chemical weapons were
used there and, if so, what were the circumstances and
who could bear the responsibility for such use. A visit
to the Al-Shayrat air base is also necessary, because
that is how we can determine whether or not the toxic
substances allegedly used in the bombing of Khan
Shaykhun had been previously stored at Al-Shayrat.

If the goal of our Western partners in the draft
resolution was to react to specific events in Khan
Shaykhun, then, instead of adopting a one-sided
anti-Syrian bias, it should have aimed at ensuring
that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) be able to implement its mandate in
conducting an impartial investigation. That is precisely
the main difference between the Western and Russian
draft resolutions. The troika’s draft is vague about
the investigation; it routinely mentions the fact that
the OPCW Fact-finding Mission to the Syrian Arab
Republic will, at its discretion, determine the places
that it would like to visit. Incidentally, a big question
mark hovers over whether it would like to do so.

We underscore the fact that in line with the
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2118
(2013), all parties in Syria have to provide international
inspectors with free and unfettered access to the areas
of alleged chemical-weapons incidents. Damascus
has displayed, in its position statement on that point,
openness and readiness to cooperate. On 11 April, the
Syrian authorities approached the Director-General of
the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW, Mr. Üzümcü,
with an official request to send a mission to Khan
Shaykhun and Al-Shayrat. We need to make use of that
proposal by the Syrian authorities, instead of doing
what we did after the chemical-weapons attacks in
eastern Ghouta and Khan al-Asal, when people ended
up being afraid to carry out an investigation. There were
all sort of provocations there, and we almost got to the
point where some permanent members of the Security
Council were on the verge of armed attacks on Syrian
territory. Fortunately, reason prevailed.

The Russian document contains a clear mandate to
do that and in such a way as to leave one doubt that
every available resource and all means were exhausted
in preparing its conclusions, and, most importantly, that
there was a visit to the site at which the incident occurred.
We also insist that the staffing of the mission should be
decided based on a broad geographical diversity. The
results of the investigation must be credible.
It is of extreme concern to us that since receiving
news of the alleged use of chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhun eight days ago, no concrete steps have been
taken to investigate the incident through the relevant
international entities. As usual, the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission appears to be set up to work in remote mode,
without visiting the sites where the incidents occurred.
We believe that that amounts to a simulacrum of taking
action, which only discredits the OPCW.
After what happened, we are going to have to be
much more rigorous in taking a look at what the OPCW
and the Fact-Finding Mission do. We are convinced that
we need to have a full and immediate investigation.
The possibilities for such an investigation have
not been exhausted. In order to have one, however, an
international team of highly qualified specialists needs
to visit the area of Khan Shaykhun and the Al-Shayrat

Like the Syrian authorities, the general coordinator
of the opposition’s High Negotiations Committee,
Mr. Hijab, sent a letter to the United Nations with a
request to initiate an investigation at Khan Shaykhun
and said that he stood ready to help in the investigation,
which, for us, means providing safe access to the site of
the alleged chemical incident. In other words, we have
ended up with a very unusual situation where both the
Government officials in Damascus and the opposition
together are asking for an independent investigation,
while the OPCW is doing nothing, for reasons unknown.
But if we are to talk professionally, then, in order
to carry out an investigation by competent international
authorities of what took place in Khan Shaykhun, and
by that we mean first and foremost the OPCW, there
is no need for a new Security Council resolution, and
that is something that was being said during the past
week by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, except that he was putting a different spin
on those words. It turns out that for him a resolution
was necessary in order to predetermine the outcome

17-098587/13

S/PV.7922

The situation in the Middle East

of the investigation. We should not forget the fact that
our country was present at the inception of a unique,
unprecedented process of the chemical demilitarization
of Syria, which — and this has been acknowledged by
authoritative international organizations — was carried
out successfully.
However, some capitals still have an anti-Syrianregime slant. We are left with the very clear impression
that in actual fact the authors of the draft resolution
do not want to work with the people whom they have
sponsored and who feel very much at ease in Idlib
province. They do not want to fulfil their responsibility
to make sure that international specialists have free
and safe access. Once again, let me repeat, they are
afraid of an impartial investigation that could show that
there is a developed system for manipulating chemical
weapons. We have every reason to believe that after
Khan Shaykhun other provocations by extremists using
toxic substances could follow.
We once again emphasize that collective efforts
today should be aimed at supporting the peace process
using the Astana and Geneva platforms to strengthen
the ceasefire regime and jointly combat terrorism,
using a single standard. One of the first steps here
should be the launching of an impartial, unbiased and
truly independent investigation of the tragedy in Khan
Shaykhun, which necessarily includes travelling to the
place of the incident. Remote investigations must no
longer be used. We are looking forward to the specific
decisions that will be issued on that matter on 13 April,
namely, at the meeting of the Executive Council of the
OPCW on that date.
Once again I would like to ask speakers not to
insult and offend Russia in their statements. We have to
remain within some bounds of courtesy.

12/04/2017

an example regardless of any doubts now with respect
to how effectively it has been implemented. That is
why it is unfortunate and regrettable that the Council
today was unable to respond to the report of the use of
chemical weapons in Idlib on 4 April 2017.
We do not really believe that it would have been that
hard to reach consensus on a draft resolution, because
what the resolution was supposed do was to call for
was a thorough investigation to ensure accountability
based on the results of an independent, professional and
impartial process. There was certainly a possibility for
us to reach the necessary compromise on the sticking
issue that many of us had concerns about. What could
have easily resolved the issue was to turn to already
agreed language from previous resolutions. That
language is strong enough to convey the message and
ensure that the objective is achieved, namely, to hold
those responsible to account. We tried, as the 10 elected
members of the Council, to work towards that end. We
thank China for its readiness to look at the positive
aspects of that effort.
All parties undoubtedly have an obligation to
cooperate with the Fact-Finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
which was stated very clearly in the past. It would have
been easier to resort to the language that I referred to
earlier to achieve the necessary consensus, because no
one in the Council opposes the main thrust of the draft
resolution calling for an investigation. That is what the
wider membership of the United Nations and the rest
of the world expected from the Security Council today.
They are, no doubt, very sad that we have not been able
to send the right message.

The first is the unity of the Council. The rationale
for that is that the alternative, namely, division within
the Security Council, is counterproductive in any effort
to ensure the cessation of the use of chemical weapons.
It is also inimical to the peace process.

As we stated clearly last week, we were certainly
inclined to look at the draft resolution favourably,
because it simply requests that an investigation into an
incident that potentially constitutes a grave violation of
international law take place. Our hope and expectation
was that the paragraph in the draft resolution that caused
us and other Council members some concern would be
handled through consultations. It is really unfortunate
that the Council was not able to reach consensus and lost
the opportunity to send a powerful and unified message
to the world about the use of chemical weapons, which
represent an affront to all humankind.

Secondly, a major step was taken only a few weeks
ago in terms of removing chemical weapons from Syria.
That was a major achievement, which should serve as

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden has repeatedly
expressed its outrage over the abhorrent and unacceptable,
reported chemical attacks in Khan Shaykhun. The use

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): There are two points that
we have regularly stressed since we joined the Security
Council in connection with actions taken by the
Security Council on chemical-weapons matters.

8/13

17-09858

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

of chemical weapons is not only a clear violation of
international law, but also a threat to international peace
and security. We, as members of the Security Council,
have a responsibility to take action in response. That
should not be a polarizing issue. It is a core duty of the
Security Council.
As an elected member, Sweden has worked
tirelessly in order to ensure the urgent adoption of a
strong resolution that would condemn the reported
attack, support a prompt and thorough investigation
and hold those responsible to account. All efforts
to that end were exhausted over the past few days.
The Council had the chance to speak with one voice
against the illegal use of chemical weapons. Unity in
the Council would have strengthened the hand of the
ongoing investigations and sent a clear message about
this Council’s rejection of chemical weapons. We are
therefore deeply disappointed that it was not possible
to find such unity on an issue where there should be
common ground. We regret that the draft resolution
was not adopted because of a Russian veto. The Council
must come together so that those responsible for this
horrendous attack will be held to account. We will
continue our efforts in that regard.
We trust that the mechanisms in place will ensure
a rapid, full and impartial investigation to establish all
facts. We urge all parties and especially the Government
of Syria to cooperate fully in accordance with
resolution 2118 (2013). When the reports by the Factfinding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism on the
attack in Khan Shaykhun are available, this Council
must act unitedly upon those findings.
As was discussed this morning, we must, now
more than ever, intensify our efforts to reinvigorate the
political process led by the United Nations, revitalise
the ceasefire and ensure humanitarian access. The
only way to end the suffering in Syria is through a
transitional political process in line with resolution
2254 (2015).
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): To begin, Bolivia would like to
reiterate its robust condemnation in the strongest possible
terms of the use of chemical weapons. Such acts are
unjustified and criminal at all times, irrespective of the
pretext for the use of chemical weapons, whomever the
victims may be or wherever such an attack takes place.

S/PV.7922

Bolivia would also like to underscore the pressing
need for an independent, impartial, thorough and
conclusive investigation to take place into the events
that took place a few days ago in Syria. Bolivia voted
against the draft resolution because it believes that
the Security Council should not be used as a sounding
board for the propaganda for war or interventionism.
It should not be used as a pawn to be sacrificed in the
chess game of war. The draft resolution submitted
today was the result of negotiations from which some
members were unfortunately excluded. We would like
to draw attention to the fact that draft resolutions that
are not supported by consensus are being introduced.
We already know in advance that they will be vetoed
by permanent members of the Security Council. What
is the point of such exercises?
These draft resolutions seem to be used as an
instrument to influence the discussions that are taking
place between Russia and the United States in Moscow.
Is that perhaps the pretext for what happened today?
Is the Security Council being used as a pawn for such
purposes? Are those who put forward such proposals
really doing so for the benefit of the Syrian people or
are they doing so for their own political or military
reasons? We believe that it is a contradiction to submit
to the Security Council draft resolutions — making
use of multilateral tools — after unilateral steps have
already been taken.
Bolivia will make itself fully available to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and support its efforts as it pursues its required
investigation. We once again call for unity in the
Council. It is not just about supporting the peace process
in Syria and guaranteeing humanitarian access so that
aid can reach all victims of the terrible conflict raging
in the country. We also have to uphold unity in order to
fulfill our responsibility as outlined in the Charter of
the United Nations and by the international community.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We are confident
that there is no solution to the question of Syria
besides a political one. We should all make every
possible effort to ensure that we reach it. My country
is deeply concerned about and strongly condemns
the use of chemical weapons, which occurred in
Idlib province earlier in April. All interested parties,
including the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
should ensure secure and unimpeded access for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism so that

17-098589/13

S/PV.7922

The situation in the Middle East

it can carry out its investigation in a professional,
objective and fair manner, as outlined in its mandate in
resolution 2235 (2015).
We strongly believe that the Security Council, as the
single organ entrusted with maintaining international
peace and security, should preserve its unity at such a
critical stage. Elected members of the Security Council
worked hard to find a middle ground and ensure a
united, efficient approach to the issue. We express our
readiness to work further with Council members on
the compromised text. The world does not want to see
tensions and ineffectiveness characterize the Council.
Rather, it wants to see a unified and tangible approach
to carry forward the Astana and Geneva processes, all
in the interest of the Syrian people.
Finally, we call on all parties to exert greater political
will and unite through dialogue and compromise in
order to find a political solution to the crisis in Syria.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
would like to reiterate once more that nothing can
justify the atrocity that is the use of chemical weapons.
We are party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Senegal reiterates its condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun in
Idlib province. That is why my delegation naturally
supported the draft resolution submitted today by the
United States, France and the United Kingdom, seeking
to uncover the truth about the attack on a transparent,
unbiased and impartial basis.
Members of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral requested the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, through its Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, to pursue its efforts
to professionally pool and analyse the information
coming in in order to assign responsibility for the use
of chemical weapons and enable the Council to take
necessary measures. In addition to shedding light on
what happened on 4 April in the Idlib province, we
call for the spirit of consensus that prevailed when
we discussed resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2235 (2015),
which represent progress in the area of chemical
weapons in Syria. I would like to underscore the need
to find a political solution to the crisis on the basis
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015), which can promote a positive
outcome to the crisis.
10/13

12/04/2017

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): There
is a cliché that says that the first victim in war is
the truth. Although that applies to wars of any kind,
it is particularly true of this war. We have States and
non-State actors participating. Some States seem to
have been internationalnvited to participate, while other
States seem not to have been invited but consider that
they have every right to interfere. There are terrorists,
both blatant and disguised. There are dozens of armed
groups that supposedly stand for something. Some
claim to have religious affiliation. That, of course,
complicates everything, because if in a war somebody
thinks that God is on their side, then it is difficult to
persuade them to lay down their arms without being
considered an apostate or a traitor. In the twenty-first
century there still seem to be people that believe that
God is to be found wielding the barrel of a gun.
We voted in favour of the draft resolution because,
on the one hand, we firmly condemn the continued use
of chemical weapons in Syria. Secondly, the draft made
explicit the information required to conduct a broadranging, thorough and independent investigation.
We need to find the truth. A group of members of
the Council sought, throughout last week and in the
beginning of this week, to try to find a balance between
the different positions around this table, in order to
enable a broad and thorough investigation that would
bring us closer to the truth. Unfortunately, events
have come together in such a way as to prevent that
from happening, and once again the Security Council
has embarked on a process that resembles the novel of
García Márquez, “Chronicle of a Death Foretold”.
The privileges that distinguish the various Council
members calls to mind an expression from the novel
of George Orwell, “Animal Farm”, namely, that some
animals are more equal than others. That legal, but
dishonest, imbalance means that many members are in
a situation where they have to choose the lesser of two
evils in terms of the options before them.
We would like to reiterate our position and the
position of the 121 signatories to the Code of Conduct,
according to which those members in possession of
the right of veto must refrain from the use of such veto
when faced with war crimes, which the recent attack in
Khan Shaykhun clearly is.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Following the horrible
chemical weapons attack in Idlib in Syria on 4 April,
we have all had several opportunities to express our
17-09858

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

national positions on the matter. Today, Ukraine
voted in favour of the draft resolution condemning
that heinous crime and demanding its immediate and
thorough investigation. Any use of chemical weapons
is a flagrant violation of international law and a war
crime. The Security Council should therefore act
swiftly and resolutely in response to the continuous
massive attacks, thus preventing further attempts to
commit such abhorrent crimes, as well as eradicating
the chemical threat in the region. That has not
happened, and today I feel ashamed, because this
body has failed to do its job. It failed again today as
images of dying children lay in front of us, and at a
time when the world expects the Security Council to
act in the aftermath of a horrible crime. The vote was
a test of the Council’s credibility, and we did not pass.
What we have just heard from the Russian delegation
epitomizes that failure and is symbolic of the Council’s
inability to do the right thing, even in cases of the
most outrageous international crimes. The Council’s
continued inability to address chemical attacks in Syria
is leading to further impunity and sending a signal to
perpetrators that they can get away with murder. We
deeply regret that today the Council missed yet another
chance to fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations.
Despite the voting results, I commend the efforts
of those delegations that were involved in preparing
the draft resolution, which sought a comprehensive and
thorough investigation of that tragedy. We appreciate
the fact that a firm stance in defending and restoring
respect for justice and international law won the support
of the majority of Council members, notwithstanding
the attempts of some delegations to distort the facts.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Abdel Hamid Al-Youssef put his nine-month-old
twin babies in the ground last week. Each branch of
Abdel’s extended family reportedly got its own trench
to bury their dead. One family, 22 victims. Abdel held
his twins in his arms. He tried to keep himself together.
He tried to stop his tears. All Abdel could say before
putting his twins in their final resting place was “say
goodbye baby, say goodbye”. They were two of the
smallest victims of the Assad regime’s vicious and
barbaric chemical attack.
No one anywhere in the world should ever have to
face that kind of suffering. That is why the United States

S/PV.7922

of America, the United Kingdom and France put forward
today’s draft resolution. It was a step toward holding
the perpetrators of that chemical attack accountable,
and I thank those members who supported that effort.
But, with its veto, Russia said “no” to accountability.
Russia said “no” to cooperation with the United Nations
independent investigation, and Russia said “no” to
a draft resolution that would have helped to promote
peace in Syria. Russia once again has chosen to side
with Assad, even as the rest of the world — including
the Arab world — has overwhelmingly come together
to condemn that murderous regime.
Russia said that the draft resolution was biased
and that the Assad regime was not involved. The draft
resolution simply emphasized the information that the
regime is already required to provide to investigators.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
has told us many times that Assad has not provided the
access needed to investigate. We need to continue to
support the Mechanism’s role in further investigating
what happened on 4 April. If the regime is innocent, as
Russia claims, the information requested by the draft
resolution would have vindicated them. Unfortunately,
this was Russia’s eighth veto on the Syrian resolution.
The United States takes no pleasure in seeing Russia
isolated again in the Security Council. We want to work
with Russia to advance a political process for Syria. We
want Russia to use its influence over the Assad regime
to stop the madness and the cruelty that we see every
day on the ground.
Today’s vote could have been a turning point. Once
more, today’s voting could have served as the moment
when Russia saw that its interests do not lie with a
murderous dictator, but rather with the many countries
in the international community, including those all
across the Middle East, that want to end the conflict.
By its failure, Russia will continue to be isolated.
We urge Russia to join forces with the overwhelming
number of countries that are pushing for a political
solution. The international community has spoken.
Russia now has a lot to prove.
To Assad and the Syrian Government, I say that
they have no friends in the world after their horrible
actions. The United States is watching their actions
very closely. The days of their arrogance and disregard
of humanity are over. Their excuses will no longer be

17-0985811/13

S/PV.7922

The situation in the Middle East

heard. I suggest that they look at today’s vote very
carefully and heed our warning.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country condemns and rejects in the
strongest terms any use of chemical weapons and any
other type of weapon of mass destruction as a crime
against humanity that is to be reviled, immoral and
unjustifiable in any circumstance. The target for such
weapons is the Syrian people, who are still the primary
victims of the crimes of armed terrorist groups that did
not hesitate to use chemical weapons against them. Let
me stress to the Security Council that my country is as
eager as ever to uncover the real criminal responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
On the basis of these firm principles, my country’s
Government acceded to the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC), implemented all its commitments
under the Convention, and has made an achievement
unprecedented in the history of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) by ending
the Syrian chemical weapons programme in record time
and irreversibly, as certified by the statement of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
that was presented to the Security Council in June 2014.
As I told the Council this morning (see S/PV.7921),
in the context of its ongoing transparent cooperation
with the OPCW, my country sent a letter yesterday to
the Director General of the organization, calling on
him to send a neutral, fair and professional mission
to Khan Shaykhun and the Shayrat air base to find
out the truth of what occurred — comprehensively,
transparently and fairly. My country, Syria, stresses its
readiness to ensure the mission’s safe access to Shayrat
air base in order to ascertain whether sarin had been or
is stockpiled there.
As for the town of Khan Shaykhun, regrettably I am
forced to tell the Council that access to that town must
be guaranteed by the terrorist group Jabhat al-Nusra
and its associate terrorist organizations operating there,
via the Governments of States that support, guide and
direct that organization on the ground, foremost among
which are France, Britain, the United States, Turkey,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Israel.
12/13

12/04/2017

My country is the primary stakeholder in
uncovering the truth. In principle, we support any action
of the Security Council to attain such truth. However,
we object to draft resolutions containing sly political
language, prejudging the results of any investigation and
leaning towards leading the investigation to indict the
Syrian Government a priori, as did my colleagues the
representatives of the Britain and France earlier here.
The three Western States on the Council have become
used to incorporating similar language in previous draft
resolutions, leading to their misues later on by those
States to justify intervention in the internal affairs of
other States and military aggression against them, as
was the case in Libya and other countries.
Whoever reads today’s draft resolution (S/2017/315)
carefully will see that its true objective is not to
uncover the truth but to absolutely violate Syrian
sovereignty and exploit any information that could
have been collected through the draft resolution, had
it been adopted, in order to help armed terrorist groups
supported by the three States and their proxies in the
region to target the personnel, sites and capacities of
the Syrian Government and army, under the pretext of
looking for the “chemical Godot”, as was the case in
Iraq.
If the sponsors of today’s draft resolution do not see
any benefit in the mechanisms available at the OPCW.,
why do they not introduce another draft resolution to
end the work of the OPCW? They might, for instance,
clear out its archives and keep them in steel boxes that
will not be opened for 60 years, just as they did with the
archives of the inspection committees seeking weapons
of mass destruction in Iraq. My country did not use
atomic weapons against Hiroshima and Nagaski. My
country did not use chemical and biological weapons
against Viet Nam. My country did not use enriched
uranium against Iraq. My country did not test atomic
weapons against Algerians, alive, in the Algerian
Sahara.
On 31 March, in our talks in Geneva, I provided
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura with early and
documented reports about the possession by armed
terrorist groupss in rural Damascus, Idlib and Hama of
toxic chemical materials to be used as weapons against
civilians. I also warned him that the facts were falsified
and that the evidence and accusations were fabricated
against the Syrian Government, as on previous
occasions. I related this information to Mr. De Mistura
five days before the incident in Khan Shaykhun. As I said
17-09858

12/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

this morning, my country’s Government has addressed
more than 90 letters, the latest only one day ago, to
the various relevant United Nations bodies, including
documented information on the possession by terrorist
organizations, led by Da’esh and Jabhat Al-Nusra, of
toxic chemical materitals, including sarin, which they
obtained from Libya through Turkish territory, with the
full knowledge of the Turkish authorities.
The sponsors of today’s draft resolution know full
well that, since my country acceded to the CWC, the
resolutions of the Security Council and the OPCW
have been the sufficient and appropriate international
legal framework in that regard. I call on the rest of the
States members of the Security Council to use logical
and rational trial, seek clear and genuine responses to
the questions raised by this painful incident and by the
reactions of the United States, Britain and France. Let
us try to answer the following questions.
Why did the videos and photographs of the Khan
Shaykhun incident come only from organizations
claiming to work in the humanitarian field, whereas
they are directly linked to armed terrorist groups on
the ground. I refer here specifically to a group called
the White Helmets, which seems to have won an Oscar
for Best Actor. We have repeatedly provided the
Security Council with pictures, films and documented
evidence that members of that organization work under
the direction of the British intelligence services and are
funded by the United States and Britain. That is the
first question.
The second question is: Has anyone read the report
issued by the organization Swedish Doctors for Human
Rights, exposing the duplicity of the so-called White
Helmets?
The third question is: Is anyone here aware that
the British doctor of Pakistani decent, Shajul Islam,
who was with the armed terrorist groups on the
ground in Khan Shaykhun and was the main witness
in all the provocative media campaigns against the
Syrian Government, was imprisoned for 13 months in
the Britain, charged with terrorist acts, including the
kidnapping of British journalists in Syria? A terrorist
criminal becomes an eye witness, and this fabricated
media campaign is based on his testimony.
Furthermore, how can anyone who pretends to
seek the truth through international legitimacy assume

S/PV.7922

the right to perpetrate an act of military aggression
against a site that they claim to have been the origin
of aircraft that flew off to strike Khan Shaykhun with
chemical weapons?
I urge Council members to read the book entitled
The REAL Benghazi Story: What the White House
and Hillary Don’t Want You to Know, by Aaron Klein,
which details the coordination and mediation role
undertaken by the late United States Ambassador to
Libya, Chris Stevens, in operations to export weapons
and sarin from Libya to the States sponsors of terrorism
in Syria, first and foremost Turkey. I also invite them to
read a scientific report published by Theodore Postol,
an American professor working at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. It evaluates the White House
claims of the alleged events in Khan Shaykhun. He
believes that the information on which United States
officials based their allegations against the Syrian
Government points merely to a crater in a road north
of Khan Shaykhun. He concludes that these data seem
more consistent with the possibility that the munitions
were on the ground and notdropped from the air.
What does my colleague, the representative of
France, call the killing by French aircraft of 200
civilians in the village of Toukhan Al-Kubra in rule
Aleppo, on 19 July 2016? And what does my colleague,
the representative of the United States, call the killing
by American aircraft of 237 civilians in the town of
Al-Mansura, after they had fled Da’esh in the Raqqa
region.My delegation stresses that it is continuing to
implement all its commitments under the CWC and to
wage our war on terror, which will not stop regardless of
any political blackmail, media campaigns or shedding
of innocent blood.
In conclusion, my delegation thanks and expresses
its appreciation to the Russian Federation and Bolivia
for voting against the draft resolution today, as well as
those delegations that abstained in the voting, in their
conviction of the sinister objectives behind the draft
resolution, the most basic principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, and their belief
that such texts affect the credibility of international
action and institutions and threaten international peace
and security.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

17-0985813/13
