United Nations

S/PV.6137

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6137th meeting
Monday, 8 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Second report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2009/267)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-36192 (E)

*0936192*

S/PV.6137

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Canada.

Adoption of the agenda

It is so decided.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Second report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2009/267)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which she requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Bangura
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg of
Germany, Executive Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Von der Schulenburg to take a seat at
the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. John McNee,
Chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-specific

2

I invite Mr. McNee to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/267, which contains the second
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg and
Mr. John McNee. I now give the floor to Mr. Von der
Schulenburg.
Mr. Von der Schulenburg: In presenting to the
Security Council the second report (S/2009/267) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), I
would like to concentrate my introduction on four
issues. First, I want to speak about the significance for
peacebuilding of the joint communiqué between Sierra
Leone’s political parties. Secondly, I want to draw the
Council’s attention to the importance of the
forthcoming special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission for rallying international support around
one common development strategy for Sierra Leone,
namely, the Government’s Agenda for Change. Thirdly,
I want to highlight the new integrated approach to
peacebuilding by the United Nations family, namely,
the United Nations Joint Vision for Sierra Leone.
Finally, I would like to add a few words on UNIPSIL
itself.
Politicians do not have the luxury of choosing the
political events and problems that they are confronted
with, but they do have a choice in how to react to them.
For that reason, we rate politicians not so much by the
problems that they encounter but by the way they deal
with them. Measured by that standard, Sierra Leone’s
politicians deserve the highest praise for how they
handled the recent outbreak of political violence in
their country when they came together and signed and
committed to the joint communiqué on 2 April of this
year.

09-36192

S/PV.6137

We must all recognize the gravity of the sudden
eruption of the political violence and intolerance that
occurred in March. That was the most serious outbreak
of violence since the end of the civil war in 2002. It
brought to the surface deeply rooted historical
differences and emotions that continue to exist in
Sierra Leone. Those differences were fueled by a
general dissatisfaction among many Sierra Leoneans
that peace and democracy have not yet brought them
significant improvements in their daily lives, and in
particular by the frustrations that are felt by many
young Sierra Leoneans who have no jobs and few
hopes for a decent future. If continued unabated, those
disturbances could have easily spiraled out of control
and split the country between supporters of one party
another, between members of one ethnic group or
another, between the young and the older generation,
between northerners and southerners or between
citizens in Freetown and those in the provinces.
The joint communiqué between the two major
parties, to which other parties also later pledged their
support, has effectively ended the spiral of violence.
But the significance of the joint communiqué goes
much beyond that, as it recognizes the joint
responsibility that both the governing and the
opposition parties have in building a democratic and
prosperous Sierra Leone. In addition to re-emphasizing
national reconciliation and dialogue, the joint
communiqué therefore stresses multi-partisan support
for developing further Sierra Leone’s democratic
institutions — such as the Parliament, the justice
system and the national security services — as well as
for the need to create strong, credible and independent
national commissions in the areas of elections, party
registration, human rights and media supervision. The
joint communiqué further recognizes the need to
develop multiparty consensus on key national policies,
such as on youth integration and employment, on the
mitigation of regional rivalries, on the development of
an independent media and on fighting illicit drug
trafficking and international crime.
I believe that the joint communiqué, by
combining a call for dialogue with an emerging
multiparty consensus on core elements of Statebuilding and national policies, is the quintessence of
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. I also believe that the
joint communiqué could serve as a model for other
countries
that
are
in
similar
post-conflict
circumstances. For those reasons, we should all work

09-36192

together to make the joint communiqué a success and
to implement its various agreements in full.
I am therefore glad to note many encouraging
signals in Sierra Leone from all political parties that
they are serious in wanting to implement those
agreements. In an unprecedented move, the leaders of
all major political parties were invited to the recent
congress of the governing All People’s Congress,
where they pledged publicly to work together and to
put the interests of the country above those of their
respective political parties. In a sign of reconciliation,
President Ernest Bai Koroma visited the destroyed
party headquarters of the opposition. In return, John
Benjamin, the Chairman of the opposition party, visited
the political party headquarters of the governing party.
Leaders of all parties have repeatedly appeared
together in public debates, including on national radio
programmes, to call on all their supporters to work
together and to reject all kinds of political violence.
Regular multiparty talks have now started in Freetown,
and it is planned to extend them into the regions. The
youth wings of political parties are now meeting and
planning joint confidence-building events. In
consultation with the opposition, the President has now
set up an independent inquiry into allegations of
politically motivated sexual violence. We expect a
further independent review to be launched within the
coming days to look into the sequence of events that
led to the political violence in March.
I would also like to stress, in this context, the
support that the joint communiqué has received from
Sierra Leone’s religious communities, civil society,
women’s organizations and groups of artists. A call to
observe the joint communiqué’s agreements was made
by all religious communities at both Muslim and
Christian religious services around the country. Civil
society organizations have translated the joint
communiqué into local languages and distributed it
widely.
Most importantly, however, a group of 26 young
artists have formed the group Artists for Peace and
developed two popular songs propagating the message
of reconciliation and peace of the joint communiqué.
Their songs can now be heard all over the country on
radio stations and in youth centres. On 13 June, 40,000
young men and women from all parties will gather at
the national stadium to welcome the Artists for Peace
and to launch their tour around the country. There is no
better way to mobilize Sierra Leone’s youth around the

3

S/PV.6137

message for peace than through music, and I would
like to take this opportunity to thank the Artists for
Peace for their valuable engagement.
As a close observer, I witnessed the extraordinary
courage and determination with which President Ernest
Bai Koroma, the chairman of the main opposition
party, John Benjamin, and the leadership of the
political parties resisted the temptation to ride rising
emotions or give in to long-established patterns of
behaviour that re-emerged during the outbreak of
political violence. In many ways, these bold political
leaders decided to swim against the tide of polarization
that had gripped parts of the political spectrum in the
country, even within their own political parties. Allow
me to therefore take this opportunity to salute the
President, the leadership of the All People’s Congress
and the Sierra Leone People’s Party and Sierra
Leoneans in general for having chosen the way of
dialogue over confrontation and for having agreed on
such a far-reaching document as the joint communiqué.
Peacebuilding must be defined in Sierra Leone. It
cannot be done in New York or in any other place
outside the country. I am therefore pleased with the
new approach that the forthcoming special session of
the Peacebuildinq Commission for Sierra Leone
promised to take. At that session on Wednesday, we
expect Member States to support all major local
peacebuilding initiatives as an integrated package that
includes the political parties’ joint communiqué, the
Government’s Agenda for Change and the United
Nations family’s Joint Vision.
The special session will be a confirmation of how
the Peacebuilding Commission here in New York and
the Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Freetown can
mutually reinforce their respective responsibilities and
activities for the benefit of Sierra Leone. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank in particular the new
chair of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador John McNee,
for his foresight, vision and leadership in bringing this
special session about.
We anticipate that the special session will set a
clear strategic framework for development and
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone by adopting the
Government’s Agenda for Change as the core strategy
that will guide all future national and international
development efforts. For this purpose, the special
session is expected to call on all Member States to

4

support the Government’s Agenda and to adjust their
bilateral and multilateral assistance programmes
accordingly. With this decision, the special session will
help the Government replace the approximately 32
different and often unrelated national, bilateral and
multilateral
strategies
that
have
complicated
development efforts in the past. By rallying efforts
around
one
single
national
document,
the
Peacebuilding Commission will set the stage for a
successful Consultative Group meeting for Sierra
Leone that will be held in London on 18 and 19 of
November 2009, with the kind assistance of the
Government of the United Kingdom.
In Security Council resolution 1829 (2008) of this
past August, the Council requested that a fully
integrated peacebuilding office be set up in Sierra
Leone. To achieve that, we have developed a joint
strategy, the United Nations family’s Joint Vision for
Sierra Leone. The Joint Vision brings together
UNIPSIL and all the 17 United Nations development
and humanitarian agencies, programmes and funds that
operate in Sierra Leone. In parallel to the Agenda for
Change, the Joint Vision will cover a period of four
years, from 2009 to 2012, and envisages a total
financial envelope of $350 million.
With the Joint Vision, we have tried to break new
ground, to develop new, innovative approaches and to
establish joint implementation mechanisms. The Joint
Vision reflects the special requirements for
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone and combines the
political mandate given by the Security Council with
the development and humanitarian mandates of United
Nations agencies, programmes and funds into one
single strategy. With the Joint Vision we will present a
well-coordinated, transparent and integrated United
Nations approach to peacebuilding. The document
outlines how the United Nations family will comply
with the mandate of the Security Council, how we will
support the Government in its development efforts and
how our efforts will fit the wider development
activities that are carried out by our international
development partners.
In the Joint Vision we have not only agreed five
joint priorities and defined our joint benchmarks but
have also identified risks and outlined options for
mitigating those risks. With its 21 programmes, the
Joint Vision will provide for much more focused
interventions by the United Nations family and
establish clearer responsibilities for the preparation,

09-36192

S/PV.6137

approval and implementation of those programmes. All
those programmes are clearly aligned with the
Government’s Agenda for Change. The Joint Vision
includes a number of other innovative features, such as
the joint multi-donor trust fund, a joint outreach
initiative, a joint network of regional field offices and a
number of joint support services.
On Wednesday, we will present our Joint Vision
at the special session and appeal to Member States to
support us financially and politically. As the Joint
Vision is, in many ways, the embodiment of the
mandate that the Council has given us for creating a
fully integrated peacebuilding mission in Sierra Leone,
I hope that I can also count on the strong support of the
Council.
In September, the Council will have to decide on
a possible extension of our mandate, and I feel that this
may be the time to mention a few issues regarding
UNIPSIL that may help in guiding the Council’s future
deliberations.
UNIPSIL is now in its ninth month of operations.
By now, we have largely completed the build-up phase
and have developed a common peacebuilding strategy.
The emphasis has now shifted towards implementation.
In transitioning from the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone to UNIPSIL, we have
refocused our aims and reoriented our approaches in
order to create a less dominant and more service- and
support-oriented organization. We have reduced the
staffing levels from 350 to about 70 staff members, but
at the same time we have expanded our presence inside
the country. In order to enable us to provide sound and
reliable policy advice, we have increased considerably
the share of professional national and international
substantive staff and reduced the number of
administrative and support staff. To underline a change
in attitudes from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding
mission, we have moved to smaller and less costly
premises, which provide a friendlier and more
approachable atmosphere.
In building up UNIPSIL, we have also taken
great care to maintain the temporary nature of the
Integrated Peacebuilding Office. While we strive to
give UNIPSIL a more forceful, focused and substantive
configuration, we have, at the same time, tried to avoid
the temptation of constructing permanent structures or
creating long-term commitments that could inhibit a
possible exit strategy if and when this will be decided

09-36192

by the Security Council. For this reason, UNIPSIL
structures and approaches, through their integration
with those of other United Nations agencies, are
designed to facilitate a transition towards a more
regular development set-up under a United Nations
resident coordinator.
Allow me to end here by thanking the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone for
continuing to welcome UNIPSIL and me so warmly in
their midst. Sierra Leoneans are a peace-loving, gentle
and charming people who are so ably represented here
by their Foreign Minister, Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura.
I would also like to thank my colleagues from the
United Nations country team in Sierra Leone for all
their support and for the excellent team spirit that
exists among us. Finally, let me thank you, Mr.
President, and the members of this Council for your
patience in listening to me.
The President: I thank Mr. Von der Schulenburg
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador John McNee.
Mr. McNee: I welcome this opportunity to
participate in today’s meeting in my capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific
configuration on Sierra Leone. I think that regular
exchanges of views between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission foster greater synergies in
the work of both bodies.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General on
his insightful briefing today and his very effective
leadership of the United Nations peacebuilding
mission.
I would like to focus on several key
developments in Sierra Leone and, in particular,
highlight the findings of my recent visit to the country
and the preparations for the Peacebuilding
Commission’s high-level special session on Sierra
Leone. The engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission with Sierra Leone has centred on three
primary objectives: first, focusing attention on the
political and security developments in the country;
secondly, broadening the donor base and enhancing the
coherence of international support to Sierra Leone; and
thirdly, supporting new or improving existing activities
in peacebuilding priority areas. The Peacebuilding
Commission has received strong support for these

5

S/PV.6137

efforts from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) under
the leadership of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General.
The Commission’s advocacy and resource
mobilization efforts will culminate in a high-level
special session to take place in New York on 10 June.
That event will also mark a new phase in the
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission with
Sierra Leone and will align its work with the
peacebuilding elements of the Government’s Agenda
for Change.
In preparation for the special session, and in
order to assess at first hand Sierra Leone’s
peacebuilding challenges, I undertook a visit to the
country on 20 to 24 April. During that visit, I held
meetings with Sierra Leone’s leadership, including the
President, the Foreign Minister and other ministers,
members of the opposition parties, the diplomatic
community, civil society and the United Nations
family. In addition to extensive meetings in Freetown,
the mission also visited Makeni in the North and, with
the Foreign Minister, inaugurated a border post
between Sierra Leone and Liberia. The visits outside
the capital provided a useful opportunity to highlight
the importance of subregional cooperation and to
explore the challenges facing rural Sierra Leone.
The visit confirmed that the Government of
Sierra Leone, with the support of the United Nations
and other partners, has made commendable progress
towards
consolidating
peace
and
democratic
governance. However, as demonstrated by events in
March, Sierra Leone’s impressive democratic gains
remain fragile and could still be easily reversed. High
levels of youth unemployment, widespread corruption
and the growing threat of illicit drug trafficking all
raise the risk of relapse into conflict. More work is
needed to consolidate reforms in the justice and
security sectors, especially with respect to
strengthening the capacity and the performance of the
Sierra Leone police. Continued international support
for building the capacity of State institutions will also
be critical if Sierra Leone is to meet these challenges
and chart a path towards peace and economic
prosperity.
The Government of Sierra Leone is well aware of
these challenges and its own primary responsibility for
addressing them. The events of March, which represent

6

the worst cases of politically motivated violence since
the end of the civil war, were followed, as Mr. Von der
Schulenburg has just explained, by commendable and
timely action on the part of the President of Sierra
Leone and senior leaders of both main political parties.
International partners, and in particular UNIPSIL, also
played a key role by supporting the Government’s
efforts to restore law and order and facilitating a
successful outcome to the bi-party dialogue.
The joint communiqué signed by the two leading
political parties on 2 April provides a comprehensive
basis for improving inter-party dialogue, strengthening
democratic governance and reforming key national
institutions. Not only is the joint communiqué a
significant achievement for Sierra Leone, but it could
also serve as a helpful blueprint for countries in similar
circumstances. The joint communiqué unequivocally
demonstrates that political differences within
democratic systems can and should be resolved
peacefully.
Adherence to the agreements in the communiqué
will require not only the political will of both parties,
but also sustained support from the international
community. In a statement welcoming the joint
communiqué on 6 April, the Peacebuilding
Commission encouraged both political parties to
maintain the spirit of reconciliation that prevailed
during the bi-party dialogue and called on all
stakeholders to ensure timely and effective follow-up
to the joint communiqué.
It is also critical that the United Nations and other
actors continue to provide resources for the
implementation of the joint communiqué. In this
context, I would like to highlight the catalytic role
played by the Peacebuilding Fund, which has provided
timely financial support for the follow-up to the March
events.
In addition to maintaining momentum and
political support for the joint communiqué, the
Peacebuilding Commission’s special session will
garner support for the Government’s Agenda for
Change, which was launched by President Koroma in
May. The Agenda for Change is a robust national
framework for growth, economic development and the
consolidation of peace. It outlines a clear strategy for
national action and international support. As such, the
Peacebuilding Commission’s future engagement with
Sierra Leone will be aligned with the peacebuilding

09-36192

S/PV.6137

elements of the Agenda for Change. The Commission
will also continue to advocate for greater subregional
cooperation, including the strengthening of subregional
institutions and the promotion of gender equality and
human rights. At the special session this week, the
Commission will call on all Member States and
international partners to recognize the Agenda for
Change as Sierra Leone’s core national strategy and to
align their support accordingly.
The special session will also provide an
opportunity to highlight the work of the United Nations
family in Sierra Leone and to mobilize support for the
United Nations Joint Vision. In our view, the Joint
Vision represents an important innovation in the United
Nations approach to peacebuilding and provides a solid
basis for the Organization to achieve its integrated
peacebuilding mandate in the country. The
Peacebuilding Commission will also support resource
mobilization for the Joint Vision by launching a multidonor trust fund at the special session this week. I am
confident that the effective implementation of the
United Nations Joint Vision, under the leadership of
the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
will make a real difference in the lives of Sierra
Leoneans and in consolidating the country’s hard-won
peace.
Peace consolidation in Sierra Leone continues to
require collective and timely action. Both the highlevel special session of the Commission on 10 June and
the Consultative Group meeting to be held in
November
offer
important
opportunities
for
international partners to redouble their commitment to
Sierra Leone. I am confident, given the leadership of
the Government and the sustained support of the
international community — including that of the
Security Council — that it will be possible to address
the remaining challenges to peace.
The President: I thank Ambassador McNee for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra
Leone.
Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): First and
foremost, let me start by warmly congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June. I also want to
register my sincere gratitude to you for inviting me to
participate in this open debate on the second quarterly

09-36192

report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/267) on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL).
At the outset, I would like to convey the sincere
gratitude of His Excellency President Ernest Bai
Koroma, as well as of the Government and people of
Sierra Leone, to members of the Council for their
sustained engagement with Sierra Leone and for the
regular monitoring and stocktaking of current events in
the country, aimed at ensuring that the peacebuilding
process is on track.
My delegation’s appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-Moon,
for his comprehensive report on the activities of
UNIPSIL in the last four months. We acknowledge
with thanks his exceptional contribution to the task of
consolidating our hard-won peace and helping to put
the country on the path to sustained economic growth
and development. Our thanks also go to the Chair of
the Sierra Leone country specific configuration — the
Permanent Representative of Canada, Ambassador
John McNee — for his dedication and commitment in
building on the momentum nurtured and developed by
his predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, Ambassador Frank Majoor.
We deeply appreciate the commitment, dedication
and dynamism of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg,
and the entire United Nations family, as well as our
bilateral and multilateral partners on the ground, for
their invaluable contributions to the search for lasting
peace and stability in Sierra Leone.
The present report validates the Security
Council’s decision to adopt resolution 1829 (2008),
establishing UNIPSIL to engage the Government in the
implementation of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework. We concur with regard to
many of the challenges outlined in the report and
acknowledge that more needs to be done to continue to
lay the foundation for sustainable peace and
development.
We have come a long way, and clearly, the recent
globally acclaimed electoral processes the country
undertook in the last seven years since the attainment
of peace should not be seen as end in itself. We are
delighted to reiterate that with the support of the
United Nations family as well as of our bilateral and
multilateral partners the Government reached

7

S/PV.6137

significant milestones in consolidating peace. Security
has been greatly enhanced across the country, thus
providing an enabling environment for the population
to engage in their day-to-day activities to improve their
quality of life without fear or hindrance.
Many of the provisions of the recommendations
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission are being
implemented in order to address root causes of the
decade-long conflict that has left the nation with deep
scars. On the question of the constitutional review
process, the Cabinet has considered the report and
referred the issue to the relevant Cabinet subcommittee
chaired by Attorney General, as most of the remaining
aspects consist of matters relating to the entrenched
clauses of the Constitution. We have made significant
progress in promoting the fundamental principles of
human rights and restoring the supremacy of the rule of
law as prerequisites for political stability, economic
prosperity and social values in the society and for
promoting positive general change as the underpinning
theme of the Agenda for Change, a concise strategic
framework conceived by the President to achieve
quicker and sustainable results in our national recovery
and peace consolidation process.
The Agenda for Change highlights key priority
areas of intervention. These include, among other
things, investment in the energy sector, agriculture,
transport and communications, social policy aspects
such as the health and education sectors, and
infrastructure. This policy framework focuses on
private sector development and macroeconomic
stability. The Government also welcomes the Joint
Vision for the United Nations family and is also in full
support of the framework as a viable strategy
complementing the Agenda for Change.
The International Monetary Fund recently lauded
the Government’s economic and structural reforms that
have resulted in sustained macroeconomic stability, but
it lamented that it lacks sufficient fiscal space for its
development and poverty reduction programmes.
We are gratified by the collective decision of both
the Government and the Sierra Leone country specific
configuration to host a high-level special session on
Sierra Leone on 10 June to mobilize support and
resources for the implementation of the Agenda for
Change and the Joint Vision in the furtherance of goals
of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation
Framework.

8

The politically charged atmosphere that translated
into bitterness and violence between supporters of the
ruling All People’s Congress and the main opposition,
the Sierra Leone People’s Party, during the month of
March in Freetown and Pujehun District was certainly
a test of the endurance of our young and fragile
democracy. In this regard, the President sincerely
welcomed and gave his blessing to the timely and
calculated move by the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General to bring the two parties together to
sign a joint communiqué on 2 April 2009 in the
presence of the President, Cabinet ministers and
members of the diplomatic corps. That exemplary
innovative approach to conflict resolution has helped
enormously to reinvigorate our young and fragile
democracy, as well as the national reconciliation
process. As an immediate step, the Government has
since banned the radio stations that instigated the
skirmishes that led to the deterioration of the security
situation.
We deeply appreciate the Council’s continued
engagement with the subregion, in particular the Mano
River Basin, and stress the need to strengthen the
revitalized Mano River Union, first in its effort to
consolidate peacebuilding in Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Cote d’Ivoire, and secondly to support the democratic
transition process in the sister Republic of Guinea.
I would like to conclude my intervention by
appealing for the Council’s active participation at the
10 June high-level event at the required level. I also
want to reiterate our call for the Council’s continued
support, understanding and patience.
Finally, I wish to reassure the Council of my
Government’s
determination
to
maintain
the
momentum towards national recovery and peace
consolidation by striving to overcome the lingering
socio-economic problems of the country and to secure
its future development.
The President: I thank the Honourable
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): May I start by
welcoming Foreign Minister Bangura to the Council
today and thanking her for her very helpful briefing.
We also welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/267) and the briefing we have just received

09-36192

S/PV.6137

from his Executive Representative, Mr. Von der
Schulenburg. We also very much appreciate and
strongly support the work that Ambassador McNee has
been doing to prepare for the special session of the
Peacebuilding Commission on Wednesday. We
encourage all Member States to give that meeting their
strong support.
As we have heard, Sierra Leone is making
progress in dealing with immediate threats to its peace
and security. The President’s Agenda for Change
recognizes that development needs a stable, secure and
peaceful society. The combination of national
leadership and continued international support is
crucial to consolidate the gains that have been made
since the end of the war. Particularly crucial is the
progress made towards an effective, independent
security sector that has earned the trust of the public it
was designed to serve.
Security, good governance and the rule of law are
the bedrock upon which everything else stands or falls.
Thus the March outbreak of political violence was an
unwelcome reminder of the divisions that have scarred
Sierra Leone’s past and also of the role and power that
the media can have in fuelling political intolerance. We
commend Mr. Von der Schulenburg for the leading role
he played in marshalling the response of the
international community to those events.
The joint communiqué between the political
parties has given a clear focus to the political role and
profile of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). The task now is to
ensure that local institutions gain the political maturity
to assume such a brokering role in the future.
Perhaps it is too early to say whether a potential
return to conflict has been averted, or that the adoption
of a joint communiqué and the undertakings it
contained will provide a lasting solution to the
divisions and tensions that gave rise to the violence —
although of course we hope that they will. There has to
be sustained pressure for implementation of the joint
communiqué commitments.
Regarding UNIPSIL, we note with concern that,
as of the end of June, it will — it is hoped — still have
reached just over 70 per cent of authorized staffing
levels, and we would welcome some further
explanation of why that is and of what is being done to
ensure at least that relevant experts are in place in all
the key areas.

09-36192

Regarding the benchmarks, we note that they
have now been agreed under the 1+4 priority areas of
the Joint Vision. It is important that the substantive
unit responsible for each area gets down to work. It is
right that the benchmarks are challenging. We also
need to keep in the back of our mind the kind of
mission we want to move towards in the longer term
and how UNIPSIL may need to evolve towards that.
Current plans appear to assume a steady state through
to 2012, but what intermediate outcomes will tell us
whether UNIPSIL is on or off track?
The report sets out initial steps to integrate
United Nations agencies, programmes and funds and to
share facilities and costs. We welcome these, but we
would suggest that bigger challenges lie ahead. The
proposed sub-offices will be a welcome platform for
joint working, but they do not guarantee it. That
requires compromises and willingness on the part of all
agencies to adapt and buy into the common United
Nations Vision, particularly UNICEF and the United
Nations Development Programme. Any reluctance to
do so could ultimately undermine the whole United
Nations effort and risk it re-splintering into
uncoordinated, competing and often unfocused
projects. We would welcome hearing more about what
else can be done to lock United Nations partners into
the Joint Vision.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General for the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and
the Chairman of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission for their very instructive
briefings. I also welcome the presence among us of
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, and thank her for her
statement.
The improvement of the overall situation in
Sierra Leone is a source of satisfaction for us, even
though there were waves of political violence and
intolerance in March and April 2009 that call for
increased vigilance by the entire political class in order
to preserve the gains of the political and the
peacebuilding processes. In that vein, we welcome the
spirit of responsibility shown by the leaders of the
party in power and the main opposition party, which
has enabled the signing of the joint communiqué on
2 April 2009. We call upon them to respect their
commitments and to set up monitoring and early

9

S/PV.6137

warning mechanisms to prevent such incidents. We
also encourage the leaders of the main political parties
to continue the process of national reconciliation and
confidence-building measures and to ensure ongoing
consultation on matters of major political concern.
We wish to pay tribute to leadership of UNIPSIL,
with the help of some other countries, on the occasion
of those events and the negotiating process for the joint
communiqué. We hope the international community
will support the parties in the implementation of their
commitments, in particular the strengthening of
national institutions in charge of security, justice and
electoral matters, as well as the integration of
ex-combatants.
We are encouraged by the willingness of the
Government of Sierra Leone to promote the socioeconomic well-being of the people through good
political and economic governance and the fight
against corruption. From that viewpoint, we are
reassured by the statement just made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone.
Unfortunately, despite efforts by the Government
of Sierra Leone, the country still faces challenges
which could call into question the important gains
realized. Those challenges include in particular, and as
recognized by the authorities themselves in the Agenda
for Change, the vulnerability of the socio-economic
fabric of society, which has been accentuated by the
international financial crisis and the high price of basic
goods, to which is added unemployment and
underemployment of young people and renewed drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime. Efforts
must therefore continue to deal with those challenges.
In particular, we encourage UNIPSIL and international
partners to support the Government’s Youth
Empowerment and Employment programme.
We are confident that the good governance
policies undertaken by the authorities of Sierra Leone
enable them to mobilize the country’s natural resources
to finance the development projects. We call upon the
international community to continue to support the
Government as it implements its programme of
peacebuilding, reconstruction and economic recovery.
Post-conflict Sierra Leone is on the road to
recovery. It is thus comforting to note that in the area
of peacebuilding, significant progress has been made
on the ground with the contributions of UNIPSIL, the
Peacebuilding Commission and Sierra Leone’s bilateral

10

and multilateral partners. We encourage UNIPSIL to
continue to work in close cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission, which we call upon in turn
to support implementation of the Agenda for Change.
We hope that the high-level special session of the
Peacebuilding Commission devoted to peacebuilding in
Sierra Leone, which will take place in a few days time,
on 10 June, will enable the adoption of a joint strategy.
It is fitting to welcome the significant support
from the Peacebuilding Fund, which has enabled the
implementation of various projects. We also welcome
the financial support granted to Sierra Leone in the
framework of the implementation of the joint
communiqué of 2 April 2009.
Special attention must be paid to the
implementation of the Agenda for Change and the Joint
Vision of the United Nations system for Sierra Leone,
which, as the Council is aware, aim to bring together
economic growth and sustainable human development.
In order for the activities to support the people of
Sierra Leone to be more effective, we stress the
importance of close cooperation between UNIPSIL and
organizations and other subregional institutions, that is,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Mano River Union, international
partners and other United Nations missions in West
Africa.
We must also pay greater attention to the
following areas: support for economic recovery
programmes,
strengthening
the
capacities
of
institutions in charge of security and the fight against
drug trafficking and organized crime in Sierra Leone,
implementation of the recommendations of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, in particular through
ongoing support for the compensation programme for
victims of the conflict, and support for programmes for
good governance and strengthening of democratic
institutions.
No one can deny that the peacebuilding process
in Sierra Leone is progressing satisfactorily, but those
enthusiastic national efforts must continue and the
people and authorities of Sierra Leone must remain
deeply committed to assuming their share of
responsibility. We are convinced that the international
community, in particular, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, will accompany those
developments without hesitation, as ECOWAS and the
African Union continue to do.

09-36192

S/PV.6137

Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, to the
Council and by expressing appreciation for her
comments. I also would like to thank Executive
Representative Von der Schulenburg, for his report and
Ambassador McNee, Chairman of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his
briefing.
The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) was launched in
October 2008 as a pilot programme that reflected
evolving international community thinking about how
best to facilitate the transition from a successful
peacekeeping operation — in this case, the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone — to peacebuilding.
UNIPSIL and Sierra Leone have faced serious
challenges. Political intolerance, youth unemployment
and drug trafficking have combined in an explosive
mix in Sierra Leone. But the country is weathering
those challenges and continuing to consolidate the
peace that has endured these seven years since the end
of the conflict. UNIPSIL has proved to be an important
facilitator of Sierra Leone’s democratic transition, most
recently in its support of the national authorities
working to end political violence and in its mediation
between the two major parties that led to the joint
communiqué.
The United States congratulates Mr. Von der
Schulenburg for the contribution that he and his team
are making in Sierra Leone and for the value that that
contribution will have in informing the larger
international community’s effort to develop best
practices along the peacekeeping/peacebuilding
continuum. We also wish to express our strong support
for Ambassador McNee and for the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission in Sierra Leone.
I would like to make a few further points
regarding the situation in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations role there. First, even as we commend all
parties for achieving the 2 April joint communiqué and
endorse UNIPSIL’s ongoing facilitation of the dialogue
envisioned, we remind the two major political parties
involved, the All People’s Congress and the Sierra
Leone People’s Party, that the international community
looks to them to implement the communiqué. We are
encouraged by the response of Sierra Leone’s political
leaders and we welcome the goodwill gestures of
President Koroma and opposition leader John

09-36192

Benjamin. Such measures are important to achieving
long-term reconciliation. We are also encouraged by
the comprehensive vision for Sierra Leone’s future
contained in President Koroma’s Agenda for Change
poverty-reduction strategy.
Secondly, we would like to acknowledge the
work of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. As the
Court looks to the conclusion of the Charles Taylor
trial and to the final disposition of appeals for all cases,
the United States fully supports the Court’s efforts to
transfer its institutional knowledge to the Sierra Leone
authorities, as described in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/267). We believe it important to Sierra
Leone’s ongoing democratic maturation that all lessons
of the past be fully absorbed, and the Special Court has
much to offer in that regard.
Thirdly, I would like to refer to one aspect of
UNIPSIL’s mandate laid out in Security Council
resolution 1829 (2008), which emphasizes the need for
the United Nations system to support and cooperate
fully with UNIPSIL. We welcome in that regard the
finalization of the UNIPSIL and United Nations
country team’s Joint Vision strategy as a proposed
blueprint for the United Nations family’s future
involvement in peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. We look
forward to its careful consideration by the
Peacebuilding Commission on 10 June.
We are well aware of the many risks that face
Sierra Leone as it works towards lasting peace. In
conclusion, I wish to touch on one in particular —
drug-trafficking. We note with concern the increasing
reports of West Africa being used as a trans-shipment
route for the illegal narcotics trade. In that regard, we
welcome the important steps that the Government of
Sierra Leone has made to combat drug trafficking in its
territory. The recent convictions of 18 people for
smuggling more than 700 kilograms of cocaine into the
country send a strong message to drug traffickers.
Sierra Leoneans will not permit their country to be a
haven for drug criminals. We also welcome UNIPSIL’s
work to strengthen the Joint Drug Interdiction Task
Force.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I, in
turn, would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone for her statement, as well as
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sierra
Leone, and Ambassador McNee for their very

11

S/PV.6137

instructive briefings on the work of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) and of the Sierra Leone configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
The situation in Sierra Leone remains fragile but
is under control. Like the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2009/267), we welcome the fruitful efforts of
President Koroma and the Sierra Leonean political
parties to overcome their differences and to put an end
to the cycle of violence. The signing of the 2 April
joint communiqué is for us a key step in the
relationship between the ruling All People’s Congress
and the Sierra Leone People’s Party. That outcome is a
further example of the resolve of the people of Sierra
Leone to continue along the path of peace and
democracy.
We remain seriously concerned by the growing
drug-trafficking in the subregion and by its
destabilizing effect on the most fragile States. In that
regard, France welcomes the progress made by Sierra
Leone to strengthen its fight against that traffic and the
significant subsequent convictions. We would like to
see stronger cooperation in that area. France is ready to
support United Nations action to that end, which could
make good use of the expertise and assistance of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in fighting
drug trafficking in West Africa. Progress has also been
made in strengthening good governance, which is
crucial to the economic and social development of the
country. However, we remain concerned about the
issue of sexual violence.
The international community must remain
mobilized in support of the peacebuilding effort in
Sierra Leone. We welcome the fruitful cooperation of
the Government with the Peacebuilding Commission
and, in that regard, await with interest the outcome of
the special session to be held in two days. We
encourage Sierra Leone’s partners to maintain their
commitment to supporting the implementation of
President Koroma’s Agenda for Change and of the
United Nations Joint Vision for Sierra Leone, which
identifies the key objectives of the peacebuilding
process. In that regard, we welcome the development
of a range of benchmarks and criteria for the
implementation of that document.
In conclusion, we urge UNIPSIL to continue
along the path of implementing its mandate.

12

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We, too,
welcome the presence of Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, to whose
statement we listened very carefully. We also thank
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General in Sierra
Leone, and Ambassador John McNee in his capacity as
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission’s Sierra
Leone country-specific configuration for their briefings
this morning.
We are grateful for the work undertaken by
Mr. Von der Schulenburg in the very complex situation
in Sierra Leone. As this is the first time that
Ambassador McNee has appeared before the Security
Council in this capacity, we also wish to congratulate
him on having assumed the chairmanship of the
configuration and for the very active work that he has
carried out since assuming that job.
We believe that it is important to highlight the
efforts of the actors involved in fighting the socioeconomic problems that confront the country through
the implementation of concrete measures in the
economic and social sectors, in particular the launch of
agriculture and national production development
strategies, the youth employment scheme and various
programmes for police force training that help to
entrench the rule of law.
We also believe it important to underscore the
importance of launching the private sector
development strategy in order to promote commercial
activities conducive to socio-economic development
and job creation. Such endeavours will undoubtedly lay
the foundations for the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and boost the development of the population.
However, we would like to express our concern at
the various outbreaks of political violence and
intolerance that have had an impact on the nascent
democratic process in the country. We draw attention to
the role played by the media, in particular by the radio
stations of the political parties inciting violence. That
is a clear sign of the prevalent attitudes among the
main political forces of the country, and it seems to us
that monitoring the role of the mass media is crucial to
the peacebuilding process there.
In that regard, we also believe it essential to
implement the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, which are of great
importance to ensuring that the mistakes of the past are

09-36192

S/PV.6137

not repeated. Likewise, Mexico acknowledges the
positive work carried out by the Special Court and its
major contribution to transitional justice in the country.
We believe it imperative for the Government to
resume the unfinished process of revising the
Constitution through an exercise of transparent and
inclusive dialogue in order to achieve the ultimate
objective of consolidating the institutionalization of the
rule of law, human rights and the democratic system.
Conversely, we are also concerned by the fact
that in the context of globalization of organized crime,
Sierra Leone is increasingly being used as a bridge for
trafficking in drugs and the illicit arms trade. We
therefore feel that it is vital for the United Nations
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) to
bolster its assistance to the Government of Sierra
Leone in promoting dialogue and coordination with the
countries of the region in order to combat the illicit
trade in drugs and weapons by means of a focus on
shared responsibility in the face of a threat to the
security and stability of the region. That approach can
scarcely be successfully tackled without the support of
the international community.
My delegation awaits with interest the high-level
special session of the Peacebuilding Commission on
Sierra Leone on Wednesday, 10 June. We think that it
is of the greatest importance that this event may
enhance the international attention paid to Sierra Leone
in order to generate sufficient backing for the joint
communiqué of 2 April, mobile economic support for
the implementation of the United Nations Joint Vision
for Sierra Leone, and launch the United Nations
multi-donor trust fund. We also attach great importance
to the resolute support that can thus be generated for
the initiative to fight poverty and to promote
socio-economic development through the Agenda for
Change, which will guide the actions of the
Government until 2012.
The report of the Secretary-General before us
today (S/2009/267) describes the very heartening
political events of recent weeks, but also underlines the
fragility of conditions in the country. A leitmotif
throughout the report is the need, on the one hand, to
maintain a sustained effort to consolidate achievements
while on the other hand, to extend broad political
support for the initiatives launched out of Sierra Leone.
We think that it is essential for UNIPSIL to
continue to stand by the political dialogue given the

09-36192

signs of disagreement among the political parties and
of potential violence while, at the same time, backing
that process with the purpose of making progress in
national reconciliation and the consolidation of
democracy.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to welcome the
participation of Mrs. Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, at today’s meeting. I would
like to thank Mr. Von der Schulenburg for his very
useful briefing.
The recent outbreak of violence between the
supporters of the political parties in March reminded us
that the situation in Sierra Leone is still fragile.
However, the reconciliation efforts of the All People’s
Congress and the Sierra Leone People’s Party led to the
issuance of a joint communiqué on 2 April in order to
prevent the escalation of violence. We are gratified that
there is growing confidence that the culture of conflict
prevention is taking root in the country. We sincerely
hope that the trend towards reconciliation will persist.
We are also pleased to note that the Executive
Representative played a critical role as a mediator in
the course of the outbreak and supported the efforts of
the parties to conclude the joint communiqué. This
development clearly demonstrates that an appropriate
United Nations presence on the ground with strong
leadership will make a difference in the post-conflict
peacebuilding situation.
We firmly believe that political stability and
durable peace are achievable together with social and
economic development. The peacebuilding perspective
in pursuing development is of utmost importance for
the political stability of many countries, including
Sierra Leone.
To prevent a relapse into conflict, people must
feel and see visible changes in their everyday lives. We
therefore commend the leadership of President Koroma
for formulating the development strategy known as the
Agenda for Change. We sincerely hope that the priority
areas set forth in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/267) will be implemented effectively.
In particular, I would like to stress the great
importance of the problem of youth unemployment. It
is a serious concern because if it remains unaddressed
it could be a potential threat to development and
peacebuilding efforts. It is important to focus on the
creation of employment opportunities, using all

13

S/PV.6137

available policy measures, including bilateral and
multilateral actions. Conditions must be created for the
appointment of a Youth Commissioner to enable the
young generation to have hope for the future. It is also
important that the development strategy be carried out
effectively, through good governance and the
institutionalization of the rule of law.
Japan’s new partnership with Sierra Leone
focuses on assistance in increasing food sufficiency
through agricultural, rural and infrastructural
development in and around the capital. These efforts
are fully aligned with President Koroma’s initiative.
The global financial crisis most seriously affects
vulnerable countries, particularly those in post-conflict
peacebuilding situations. We should continue to
support
sustainable
development
and
peace
consolidation in Sierra Leone in every way possible.
In these efforts, the Peacebuilding Commission
has an indispensable role to play. We applaud and are
gratified by the fact that the Canadian Government has
accepted to chair the country-specific configuration for
Sierra Leone. We are grateful to the Chairman,
Ambassador McNee, for his personal engagement and
his first report to the Council today.
For the integrated peacebuilding strategy and
Joint Vision to bear fruit, the Peacebuilding
Commission’s monitoring and advisory role will be
essential. We are pleased that the integrated strategy
includes energy, specifically the supply of electricity,
as one of its five priorities. That is an innovation in the
peacebuilding strategy, which traditionally focuses on
security and the rule of law, inter alia. But people need
electricity to feel that peace has arrived. We hope that
UNIPSIL will continue to cooperate closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Sierra Leone on 10 June will be a good
opportunity to review progress and to identify future
challenges. We encourage the Government of Sierra
Leone and the international community to make the
best use of this catalytic role to mobilize necessary
political and financial resources, not only from
traditional conventional donors but also from new
partners.
The Security Council, together with the
Peacebuilding Commission, has the important
responsibility to support the efforts of the Government

14

and the people of Sierra Leone to make the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding a success story.
In conclusion, peace consolidation in Sierra
Leone will contribute to the stability not only of Sierra
Leone as a country and a people, but also of the entire
subregion. We strongly believe that regional
cooperation, with assistance from the United Nation
and the regional organization, the Economic
Community of West African States, is the key to
successful peacebuilding. In this effort, the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone plays a vital role. We very much hope that the
Secretariat will make an extra effort to speedily fill the
key vacant positions in the mission.
Regional cooperation is vitally important in areas
such as the fight against drug trafficking, the trade in
light weapons and organized crime. We hope to see
further developments in regional cooperation. Japan is
committed to playing a constructive role for the
stability and prosperity of the countries of the region.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First of all, I would
like to express our gratitude for the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone,
Mrs. Bangura, and to thank the Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, and Ambassador McNee of Canada for their
briefings.
The recent outbreak of violence revealed once
again that Sierra Leone continues to suffer from its
historical legacy and that the situation remains fragile.
But the events are also a warning signal for
peacebuilding efforts in Sierra Leone. They have
shown that there is still a major challenge for the new
and innovative approach the United Nations took in
Sierra Leone with the establishment of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL). None the less, in our view, the “one
voice” approach of the United Nations has contributed
positively to the determined manner with which Sierra
Leone can overcome this crisis. In this context, let me
also commend the personal contribution of
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg.
The violent incidents of March could have easily
jeopardized the progress achieved so far in Sierra
Leone. We share the Secretary-General’s positive
assessment of the prudent response by President
Koroma and the political leaders of Government and
opposition parties, which led to the signing of the joint

09-36192

S/PV.6137

communiqué of 2 April. We hope that the communiqué
will provide the necessary impetus to foster the
dialogue so needed between the two main parties. We
also hope the recent Government reshuffle will
enhance the work of the Government and help to
further improve the quality of governance.

violence against women. Access to justice needs to be
further improved, especially for women, and the
judicial system needs to be further strengthened. We
call on the Government to redouble its important
efforts to address these challenges, with the support of
the United Nations.

Ambassador McKee of Canada, the new Chair of
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, has welcomed the joint communiqué,
which represents a significant shared commitment
between the two largest parties towards the
consolidation of democracy and peace. Austria concurs
with him and the country-specific configuration of the
Commission. The communiqué contains the basis for
building a bipartisan consensus on important national
institutions and policies. The follow-up and
implementation merit our continued attention and
support. Closer cooperation in the spirit of partnership
between the Peacebuilding Commission and UNIPSIL
could also help restore and sustain stability.

Austria also commends Sierra Leone for its
efforts to maintain macroeconomic stability in spite of
the deteriorating global economic environment.
However, progress could be jeopardized by widespread
poverty, corruption and the high youth unemployment
rate. Continued efforts to integrate young people in the
workforce need to be strengthened. The high numbers
of unemployed youth with only limited or no hope for
a better future, and that hope subject to party
affiliation, continue to be a potential threat to political
stability. In that context, Madam Minister, we are also
very pleased with the contributions that the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization is
making to combat youth unemployment under the very
able leadership of your countryman, Director-General
Kandeh Yumkella.

The recent clashes between sympathizers of
different political parties have reminded us that
transitional justice and reconciliation processes should
be given high priority. The recommendations of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which also form
the framework for the deliberations in the
Peacebuilding Commission, have been crucial in
providing a road map in this respect. We welcome the
fact that the implementation of the reparations
programme as recommended by the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission has now started. The work
of the Special Court, under the leadership of its
President, Ms. Renate Winter, and the completion of its
work also merit our support. Its activities in the area of
prosecuting individuals for serious crimes will be a
milestone in this regard. The preservation of the
Special Court’s legacy domestically, including through
the Human Rights Commission, will be of very great
importance.
Austria notes with satisfaction the consistent
trend towards increased respect for human rights.
However, many challenges remain: female genital
mutilation and other forms of violence against women
are still widespread. Against that background, I would
also like in particular to commend the fact that the
signatories of the joint communiqué also agreed to
investigate all allegations of rape and sexual violence
against women during the events of 16 March and to
bring to justice anyone who has committed sexual

09-36192

The steps taken by the Government in combating
drug trafficking are very commendable. We believe
that cross-border organized crime should be addressed
through regional approaches. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) provide the framework for a long-term,
comprehensive and coordinated response to these
challenges.
With regard to the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, I would like to stress the important
contribution of the ECOWAS Convention on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and
Other Related Materials, which was ratified by Sierra
Leone as long ago as 2007.
Concerning the UNODC project proposal on
building institutional capacity to respond to the threat
posed by illicit drug trafficking and organized crime in
Sierra Leone, we welcome the readiness of Sierra
Leone to implement activities to fight trafficking and
corruption. We also consider the project proposal on
drug demand reduction in the context of youth
unemployment particularly useful and hope that it will
be finalized shortly.
Finally, allow me to draw the attention of the
Council to the follow-up of the Praia conference, held

15

S/PV.6137

earlier this year, and implementation of the ECOWAS
Action Plan. A draft programme concept of for joint
assistance by the UNODC the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Office for West Africa and
INTERPOL in post-conflict scenarios, including Sierra
Leone, was launched by the partners in Vienna last
April and was well received. The next launch is
planned in New York in mid-July, parallel to the report
of the Secretary-General on West Africa.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too welcome Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone. We
listened very carefully to her assessment of the
situation in her country. We are grateful also to
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL), which he heads. We also thank
Ambassador John McNee, Chair of the Sierra Leone
country configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for his statement.
We are pleased to note that Sierra Leone is
making
steady
process
on
peacebuilding,
notwithstanding the political crisis that arose in March,
triggering a wave of violence. The leadership of the
country has succeeded in returning the situation to the
path towards political stability. We highly commend
the actions of the Government of Sierra Leone in that
regard and note the constructive approach of
opposition leaders, as well as UNIPSIL’s mediating
role in facilitating a resolution of the crisis. We call on
all political actors in Sierra Leone to maintain a spirit
of dialogue and consensus as they work to overcome
their differences in the interest of addressing the
complex tasks they face in post-conflict reconstruction.
The parties must fulfil their obligations as set out
in the 2 April 2009 joint communiqué. In our view,
among the most important tasks are to strengthen the
country’s State institutions, first and foremost in the
security sector, and to resolve problems relating to the
reintegration of former combatants. The international
community must support the parties as they work to
implement these agreements along with other
programmes in the area of enhancing stability.
At the same time, we must not forget that the
primary responsibility for Sierra Leone’s future lies

16

with the people of the country themselves. We
welcome the completion of the work of UNIPSIL and
the Sierra Leone country configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on a Joint Vision for
peacebuilding. The Joint Vision’s priorities for building
peace in Sierra Leone are clear-cut, tried and tested
goals, and achieving them must be the focus of
UNIPSIL’s future activities. We highly commend the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission on Sierra
Leone and hope that the Commission’s forthcoming
special session will be productive.
We note the generally satisfactory results
achieved in implementing the 14 projects using
Peacebuilding Fund resources. We also note the Sierra
Leone Government’s progress in addressing key
challenges to stability in the country, in particular
corruption, illicit drug trafficking and youth
unemployment. We expect these endeavours to
continue.
Tackling well-known cross-border threats to
security is of continuing major significance for the
long-term stability of the situation in Sierra Leone and
in the region as a whole. In order to resolve those
problems, it is important to continue close coordination
between UNIPSIL and United Nations peacekeeping
missions in neighbouring countries through the West
and Central Africa Regional Office. Russia is prepared
to take an active part in the peacebuilding effort in the
country. We will continue to make every effort
necessary to contribute to successful results in
consolidating peace and stability in Sierra Leone.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like other delegations, I too would like to begin by
acknowledging the presence of Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, as well as to thank her for her
statement. I would also like to thank Mr. Michael von
der schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Ambassador McNee, in his
capacity as Chairperson of the Sierra Leone countryspecific
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission, for their statements. My delegation
would like to underscore some points that are of
particular attention for us.
First of all, with regard to reconciliation and
national unity, following the regrettable events in
Pujehun and Freetown last March, which led to a
political crisis, my delegation commends the

09-36192

S/PV.6137

committed and mature attitude of the officials of the
two major political parties intended to halt the violence
in Sierra Leone and achieve national unity. That has
also ushered in a constructive dialogue on fundamental
issues in consolidating the progress achieved with
regard to democracy. We hope that that very
commendable step will be followed by the
establishment of independent mechanisms to
investigate the incidents of political violence and the
alleged acts of sexual violence that occurred during the
crisis, with a view to preventing impunity.
Costa Rica also acknowledges the positive signals
emanating
from
the
Government
and
the
Anti-Corruption Commission, as well as the measures
taken against members of drug trafficking networks.
We once again urge the Government and political
factions in Sierra Leone to continue to work on those
and other cross-border problems by taking a
comprehensive approach and with the support of
regional bodies and the entire United Nations system.
We also commend the progress made in the
functioning of the National Human Rights Commission.
At the same time, we respectfully call on the Government
to continue its work to strengthen the observance and
promotion of human rights, especially those of women
and girls.
Costa Rica acknowledges the worthwhile efforts
made by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) in order to finalize
the Joint Vision of the United Nations system. We trust
that the political and development criteria will serve as
a key step in the process to consolidate peace in the
country, and in particular to provide support for the
implementation of the Agenda for Change. Likewise,
we hope that the special high-level meeting of the
Peacebuilding Commission to be held on 10 June will
produce the expected outcome and secure the necessary
financing.
Costa Rica joins the Secretary-General in
encouraging the Government and people of Sierra
Leone to take advantage of their significant natural
resources in order to create a strong economy as part of
the effort to achieve sustainable development.
Lastly, my delegation believes that the process of
revising the Constitution continues to be important
problem. In that regard, we are grateful for the
information provided to us today by the Minister for

09-36192

Foreign Affairs. We urge her Government to make
progress in that process.
Mr. Du Xiaocong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to welcome and
thank Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura. Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, for her presence at today’s
meeting. We would also like to thank Mr. Michael von
der schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Ambassador John McNee,
Chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings on the situation in Sierra Leone.
We are pleased to note that the national political
reconciliation and economic reconstruction processes
in Sierra Leone have made progress. Following the
conflict last March over local election disputes
between the ruling party and the opposition, both sides
demonstrated calm and restraint. Through international
mediation and dialogue and consultation, they were
able to prevent escalation in the violence. We
appreciate those efforts and welcome the joint
communiqué agreed by the two parties on 2 April, as it
is conducive to rebuilding mutual trust between them
and among political factions in Sierra Leone. We hope
that the communiqué will be observed and
implemented in earnest.
The Government of Sierra Leone issued its
Agenda for Change last December as a document to
guide the peacebuilding process in the country. The
relevant United Nations agencies and international
partners have also refocused their work in line with the
Agenda. We welcome the courageous choice made by
the people and Government of Sierra Leone to once
again embark upon the path of reconstruction.
However, they still face grave challenges in the areas
of economic recovery, social development and
rebuilding the judicial system. We expect that the
political factions of Sierra Leone will continue to build
consensus and strengthen cooperation in the area of
nation-building. We hope that the relevant international
assistance will be provided on the basis of full respect
for the priority development areas and focus chosen by
the people and Government of Sierra Leone, in order
that the limited relief resources available will be used
to genuinely address the pressing concerns of the
people of Sierra Leone.
In a few days, the Government of Sierra Leone
and the Canadian Chairmanship of the Sierra Leone

17

S/PV.6137

country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission will co-host a high-level meeting to
discuss peacebuilding in the country. We call upon all
parties to continue to follow with interest the
peacebuilding process in Sierra Leone, as well as to
provide financial and technical assistance for youth
employment, economic and social development and
other priority areas in the country. We support the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund continuing their positive role in helping Sierra
Leone resume its development process.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I should like to join preceding speakers in
welcoming Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone. I thank her for joining
us today and for her statement to the Security Council.
I would also like to thank Mr. Michael von der
schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General in Sierra Leone, for his briefing. I
also thank Ambassador John McNee, Chairperson of
the Sierra Leone country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing. In that
regard, allow me to emphasize how much we support
the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission in
Sierra Leone.
Sierra Leone is a post-conflict African country.
We are very keen to see that Sierra Leone is not
involved in conflict ever again. The wisdom of the
leadership of Sierra Leone, supported by the
international community, has been responsible for
many achievements along the road towards stability. It
is of the utmost importance to defend the achievements
that have been made and to build upon them towards a
State characterized by stability and well-being, where
violence among the people has no place.
The wisdom of the political leadership, with
President Koroma at the forefront and with the support
of UNIPSIL, succeeded in defusing the crisis that
broke out in March. The country has been spared a new
spiral of conflict. Regrettably, party-controlled media
outlets played a prominent role in the outbreak of the
crisis by encouraging violence, which led the
authorities to take the wise decision to temporarily
suspend their operations.
The political leadership in Sierra Leone has
overcome the crisis. The joint communiqué between
the two parties was signed on 2 April 2009; the three
main political parties have now committed to it. We

18

express the hope that they will be able to implement all
of its provisions, particularly those pertaining to
political participation, respect for State institutions and
State bodies such as the police force and the judiciary,
the creation of non-partisan media and the disbanding
of militant youth groups.
The living conditions of most people in Sierra
Leone are a source of grave concern. Prices,
particularly those of foodstuffs, are spiralling, while
unemployment is rife and the population relies to a
large extent on remittances from citizens living abroad.
In this regard, we express our appreciation for the
efforts of the African Development Bank and donor
organizations and States: despite the lack of resources,
they have supported local food production within the
context of the Government’s reform policy. We look
forward to further support being provided to the
Government, as it lacks the financial resources it needs
to implement its development programmes. We
welcome President Koroma’s Agenda for Change, and
we express the hope that it will be implemented.
We take note with satisfaction of the results of
efforts being made to support institutions such as the
National Electoral Commission, the Independent
Media Commission, the National Human Rights
Commission and the Anti-Corruption Commission. We
support the parallel plans adopted to provide job
opportunities for unemployed young people. We note
that young people played a central role in fuelling the
disturbances in the recent crisis. Like Ambassador
McNee, we also hope that the effective implementation
of the Joint Vision of the United Nations family will
change the lives of Sierra Leoneans and bolster the
peace that was achieved after strenuous efforts.
In conclusion, we express our thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the United Nations country team. We
congratulate them on reaching the political and
development benchmarks for peacebuilding. We wish full
success to the special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Sierra Leone to be held on 10 June 2009.
We call on all States to support that session.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I begin by
welcoming the participation of Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sierra Leone, in today’s Council meeting, and thanking
her for her statement. I also thank Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, head of the United Nations Integrated

09-36192

S/PV.6137

Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), and His
Excellency Ambassador John McNee of Canada in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configuration on Sierra Leone for their
briefings.
My delegation is certainly concerned about the
recent outbreak of political and security tensions in
Sierra Leone, which underscores the still-fragile
situation there, which requires continued and urgent
attention. Apart from the increasing divisions along
regional lines throughout the country, Sierra Leone
must also deal with the emerging threat of piracy, illicit
drug trafficking and the illegal trade in natural
resources, uncontrolled migration to urban centres,
high numbers of unemployed and underemployed
youths, and reductions in remittances and other adverse
effects of the global financial crisis. All of these
challenges have the potential to create an environment
conducive to further violence.
In that context, we welcome the signing of the
2 April joint communiqué, in which the parties in
Sierra Leone committed themselves to a cessation of
all acts of political intolerance and violence and agreed
upon a bipartisan consensus on important national
institutions and policies.
We take positive note of the strengthened
cooperation among Sierra Leone and the United
Nations country team, the Peacebuilding Commission
and other development parties to strengthen their areas
of focus and the principles of national ownership,
mutual accountability and sustained engagement, as
contained in the United Nations peacebuilding strategy
for Sierra Leone and the Joint Vision of the United
Nations family for Sierra Leone.
We are further encouraged by the efforts of the
Government of Sierra Leone to translate its Agenda for
Change into further concrete results, particularly in
such areas as fighting corruption, reforming the
security sector, creating jobs for and empowering
youth and combating drug trafficking and organized
crime.
While commending UNIPSIL’s efforts in carrying
out its new mandate, as stipulated in resolution 1829
(2008), we believe that well-coordinated and
interconnected cooperation among United Nations
agencies, regional organizations and international
donors remains essential to ensuring maximal use of
resources, avoiding duplication of work and helping

09-36192

serve the best interests of Sierra Leone in each phase of
its development.
Finally, I wish to reaffirm that Viet Nam will
continue to support the efforts of Sierra Leone to
sustain peace and stability, address the root causes of
the conflict, promote national reconciliation and unity
and strengthen its international integration process. We
call upon the United Nations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the international
community at large to continue to assist the Government
of Sierra Leone in these endeavours.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We, too, would like to
start by welcoming Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, to the
Council and to thank her for her briefing. We also
thank the Executive Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL),
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/267) and the
Permanent Representative of Canada, Ambassador
John McNee, in his capacity as Chair of the Sierra
Leone
country-specific
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing.
Uganda commends UNIPSIL, the United Nations
country team and the Peacebuilding Commission for
their efforts and support towards the implementation of
the mandate of the peacebuilding mission in Sierra
Leone in an integrated and coherent manner. We are
particularly pleased to note that the United Nations
peacebuilding strategy has been finalized and that all
20 projects financed by the Peacebuilding Fund to the
sum of $35 million are expected to be fully
implemented by the end of this year. The establishment
of two regional offices in Kono and Bombali districts
and the pending creation of six others will further
enhance effective coordination among United Nations
agencies, programmes, funds and development partners
operating from one location in each district.
We welcome the initiatives undertaken and
tremendous progress made by the Government of
Sierra Leone under the leadership of President Ernest
Bai Koroma in the political, economic and social
sectors during the period under review. In particular,
we note that the overall security situation in the
country has remained largely calm. We are encouraged
that, following the unfortunate incidents of political

19

S/PV.6137

violence in March this year, inter-party dialogue
between the ruling All People’s Congress and the main
opposition party, the Sierra Leone People’s Party,
culminated in the signing of a joint communiqué by
their leaders.
We call upon all political leaders to resolve any
misunderstandings through dialogue and to desist from
all acts of political intolerance and the incitement of
violence. We further call upon them to ensure widespread
publicity and the expeditious implementation of the joint
communiqué, which lays the foundation for reconciliation
and constructive bipartisan consensus on important
national policies and institutions.
We commend the Government for making
agriculture and national food production its top
priority, as well as for initiating innovative
programmes, including food- and cash-for-work
activities. This focus on the agricultural sector is
critical to the country’s economic growth and food
security and to the provision of employment for a large
number of unemployed young people. In that regard,
we appreciate the support extended by the African
Development Bank, the European Commission, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Food Programme and non-governmental
organizations towards the implementation of these key
initiatives.
We call upon the Government, UNIPSIL, the
Peacebuilding Commission and international partners
to intensify their efforts in mobilizing the national and
international funding needed for the consolidation of
Sierra Leone’s recovery, economic growth and
development.
The
implementation
of
priority
programmes, such as the Joint Vision, the peacebuilding
strategy for Sierra Leone, the President’s Agenda for
Change and the private sector development strategy,
requires substantial funding. We welcome the
Government’s ongoing plans to utilize and harness the
country’s natural resources for strategic investments that
will spur economic growth and development.
My delegation supports the proposed launching
of the United Nations multi-donor trust fund at the
forthcoming special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission, slated for 10 June, and calls for the
further commitment of support at the subsequent
Consultative Group meeting scheduled for November
in London.

20

Sierra Leone still faces a number of challenges in
consolidating peace, stability, economic growth and
development. The capacities of national institutions,
including the civil service, the judiciary and police,
require substantial enhancement. We are therefore
encouraged by the commitment of UNIPSIL and the
development partners to support Government efforts in
strengthening
their
capacity.
Massive
youth
unemployment also remains a significant problem.
We are encouraged to learn from the Foreign
Minister that consideration of the constitutional review
report is now on course. It is imperative that the
Government ensure the expeditious resumption of the
process with wider public participation, as recommended
by the Lomé Peace Agreement and the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission.
Finally, we commend the recent steps taken by
the Government in fighting drug trafficking, which
should be sustained.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): I would like to thank
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg for his briefing, as
well as Foreign Minister Bangura and Ambassador
McNee for their useful insights.
At the outset, allow me to express the deep
concern of my delegation with regard to the political
disturbances in Sierra Leone during the month of
March this year. Croatia strongly condemns any
attempt to resolve political divergences by resorting to
force and violence. At the same time, and as stated in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/267), the
recent disturbances, although having the potential to
evolve into full-blown conflict, were swiftly and
determinedly terminated. That fact undoubtedly
testifies to the political wisdom and personal courage
of the leaders and people of Sierra Leone, as well as to
their strong determination to avert potential disaster
and continue along the path of peace and stability.
In that context, we welcome the signing of the
joint communiqué on 2 April by the two main political
parties in the presence of all relevant political
stakeholders, and the role played by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone in
helping bring it together, cementing Sierra Leone’s
return to the track of democracy and peace. We also
welcome the anticipated intention of the third largest
political party to adhere to the agreements contained in
the communiqué, as well as the joint pronouncement
made by youth groups affiliated with major political

09-36192

S/PV.6137

parties of their intention to work towards political
stabilization and lasting peace.

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

Croatia finds particularly important the
agreements reached between the major political parties
regarding bipartisan consensus on important national
institutions and policies, such as the police and the
judiciary, the reintegration of ex-combatants by the
National Electoral Commission and other important
issues. We also welcome the first signs of national
reconciliation and political rapprochement as direct
consequences of the aforementioned agreements.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/267). I would also like to thank
Mr. Michael
von
der
Schulenburg,
Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General Ambassador
John McNee, Chairperson of the Sierra Leone countryspecific configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sierra Leone for their presentations.

We also commend the concrete steps taken by the
Government of Sierra Leone to combat the trafficking
of illicit drugs, in particular the formation of the Joint
Drug Interdiction Task Force. In the same vein, we
encourage the Government to continue its fight against
corruption, as announced in the national Agenda for
Change. We commend the Government for economic
and structural reforms undertaken, as attested to by the
International Monetary Fund during its most recent
visit to the country. We hope that the Government will
continue to seriously tackle the many burning
economic and social issues before it, including youth
unemployment and underemployment and corruption.
Croatia condemns the practice of genital
mutilation to which, according to the World Health
Organization, nearly 94 per cent of girls in Sierra
Leone are subjected, and expresses its concern
regarding ongoing sexual violence. We note with
satisfaction the fact that the Government has finally put
into place the machinery for implementing the
reparations programme, as recommended by the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission.
Croatia welcomes the completion of political and
development benchmarks for each of the five priority
areas within the peacebuilding efforts of the United
Nations system contained in the Joint Vision. We also
welcome the further implementation of the Joint Vision
strategy through the opening of two regional offices, as
well as the announcement of the forthcoming creation
of another six regional field offices, aimed at achieving
more substantial outreach and at enhancing the work of
development partners.
Finally, Croatia looks forward to the special
session of the Peacebuilding Commission to be held on
10 June, at which the Agenda for Change and the
peacebuilding strategy of the United Nations should be
fully endorsed and supported.

09-36192

Developments over the past months have shown
that the advances that have been made in Sierra Leone
in the consolidation of peace, reconciliation and
prosperity remain fragile. Nevertheless, the political
stakeholders in Sierra Leone have also proved that
when confronted by problems they are able to rise to
the occasion and address their outstanding problems in
a peaceful and constructive manner.
Turkey welcomes the joint communiqué issued
on 2 April in Freetown, and is pleased to see that
momentum in the right direction has been maintained
in Sierra Leone. That sets an excellent example not
only for Sierra Leone’s immediate neighbourhood, but
also for Africa in general. Turkey applauds both the
Government and the opposition for showing leadership
in the face of adversity. We also congratulate the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) for continuing to play a
crucial role in consolidating progress in what was once
a war-torn nation.
Sierra Leone still faces important challenges, and
there is much work to be done. The task of
concurrently fighting corruption, drug trafficking and
youth unemployment cannot be taken lightly. Turkey
believes that, with the support of UNIPSIL and the
international community, the Sierra Leonean
Government will be able to effectively surmount those
obstacles. In that vein, we call on the international
community to keep supporting Sierra Leone as it
successfully navigates the challenges and difficulties
that it faces.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Von der Schulenburg
to respond to questions and comments.
Mr. Von der Schulenburg: First of all, I would
like to thank all delegations for their support for our

21

S/PV.6137

team and the work we are doing there. That is great
encouragement for us.
I would like to respond to two issues that were
brought up by a number of delegations, in particular by
the delegation of the United Kingdom. One is the level
of recruitment at the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). That
issue is also of great concern to me. The number of
vacancies, if we look at the substantive staff, is much
higher than the percentage of vacancies that was
mentioned.
There are reasons for that. One reason is that the
budget was approved only in December, after three
months of operation, and that delayed any recruitment
process. The second is that we have tried to take a
different approach to peacebuilding than that used in
peacekeeping. That meant that I wanted our posts to be
more substantive. I replaced many general civil affairs
officers with actual experts who could advise on
matters such as anti-corruption, rule of law,
constitutional issues, illicit drug trafficking, et cetera.
Those people are unfortunately more difficult to find.
Also contributing is the change in remuneration in the
United Nations system and the very fact that there is no
long-term view for UNIPSIL. Potential qualified
candidates, therefore, even when we select them, are
not interested in or have rejected taking posts in Sierra
Leone. I think that is a structural issue that we have.
The second issue concerns the links of
cooperation with the United Nations system. I think the
basic idea of peacebuilding is that it is essentially what
I call development with a political agenda. So it was
very important for me, from the very beginning, to
fully integrate the mandate, which is a political
mandate, from the Council, with the mandates that the
various development agencies have. It is actually one
thing, and that is why we developed the Joint Vision.
I must say that, based on my 30 years of
experience, I think that the cooperative spirit we have
among the United Nations agencies is the best I have
seen so far in those 30 years. I hope it will continue. I
think that the challenge to our cooperation actually
comes more from the outside. One of the challenges
relates to donors. If donors go beyond the Joint Vision
and want to finance their own projects, they will
always find takers in the United Nations family. But
that, of course, would break the solidarity we have.
Therefore in my opinion, one of the most important

22

roles of the Peacebuilding Commission is to keep the
international community organized and disciplined
behind certain plans we have made, because money
speaks for itself and that is something we will not
have.
The other thing that I think is very important in
keeping the mission together and working according to
plan is that there must be more clarity on the future of
UNIPSIL itself and the role of the Under-SecretaryGeneral; these are short-term things and agencies think
in the long term. I think that if we have a clear time
frame — and I am not suggesting that the Council
should take any decisions — that could help. But
everybody knows that these are the areas we will work
on for the next year, two years, three years or four
years. Such clarity would thus help to keep us all
together.
Personally, I am very encouraged by the work in
Sierra Leone and the exceptional cooperation that we
get from the Government and the good cooperation we
get from the opposition party. I think we are very well
received there. There is a friendly and constructive
atmosphere among all of us, including the development
partners. I think that is the kind of atmosphere that we
should all maintain. In the framework of the
Peacebuilding Commission, where we all meet together
and look more at the development side of the issues, I
think it is important to maintain that atmosphere. I am
pleased with the new emphasis that the special session
will place on taking more care to support what we do
in the field, rather than having parallel tracks.
The President: I thank Mr. Von der Schulenburg
for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, to make a further statement.
Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): I would like to
express the sincere appreciation of my delegation for
the interest shown. We take all the comments and
concerns in good faith. My Government has taken full
note of the issues raised regarding the constitutional
review, sexual violence and the reparations process, as
well as regarding our commitment to implement the
joint communiqué.
On behalf of President Ernest Bai Koroma, I
would like to thank members of the Security Council,
our bilateral and multilateral donors and the broader

09-36192

S/PV.6137

international
community
for
their
engagement and support to Sierra Leone.

continued

I wish to reassure the Council of the commitment
and cooperation of Government and all Sierra
Leoneans in ensuring that Sierra Leone does not revert
to conflict. I wish to reiterate my Government’s
determination to keep up the momentum towards
rebuilding a prosperous, peaceful and free Sierra Leone
for the benefit of all Sierra Leoneans.
President Koroma believes that failure is not an
option and understands that of those to whom much is
given much is expected. He is very much aware of how
much the international community has and continues to
invest in Sierra Leone and realizes that the best form of
gratitude that Sierra Leoneans can show to the
international community is to succeed. This we are all
committed to achieve. We know with the Council’s
continued support and engagement, we will arrive at
our final destination of a prosperous, free and peaceful
Sierra Leone.

I would also like to thank the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Chairman of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their dedication and commitment to Sierra Leone’s
peacebuilding process. Once again, I would like to
thank you, Sir, and the other members of the Council
for your commitment and to call upon you all to
support the high-level event of 10 June and to
contribute to the multi-donor trust fund for the
implementation of President Koroma’s Agenda for
Change and the United Nations Joint Vision.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone for her additional clarifications
and for participating in our debate today. Madam
Minister, we have very much appreciated your
presence.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

09-36192

23
