United Nations

S/PV.6186

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6186th meeting
Wednesday, 9 September 2009, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Puente
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2009/439)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-50519 (E)

*0950519*

S/PV.6186

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.

Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of
Haiti.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first open meeting
of the Security Council for the month of September, I
should like to take the opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Sir John
Sawers, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of August 2009. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Sawers
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council’s business last month. I should also like to
extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm welcome to
our new colleague Ambassador Gérard Araud,
Permanent Representative of France to the United
Nations. We look forward to working closely with him
over the course of the coming months and years.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. PierreLouis (Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. William Jefferson Clinton, United Nations Special
Envoy for Haiti.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Clinton to take a seat at the Council
table and thank him very much for his participation.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2009/439)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Haiti, Jamaica, Norway, Peru, Spain,
Sweden, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency

2

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2009/439, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by His Excellency Mr. William J. Clinton,
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, and Mr. Hédi
Annabi, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I wish to warmly and personally thank President
Clinton for coming to the Council today in his capacity
as United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti. It was my
great honour and privilege to serve him in several

09-50519

S/PV.6186

capacities in his Administration. He is an American
treasure and a great international public servant, and
we salute him for shouldering this important duty. We
are confident that his efforts and leadership will
produce more sustained international attention and
resources for Haiti, as well as greater creativity and
innovation in our common efforts, deeper engagement
with Haiti’s leaders and more stability and prosperity
for its people.
I also wish to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Annabi for his dedication to
Haiti and his excellent leadership of MINUSTAH. In
addition, I wish to offer a very warm welcome to Her
Excellency Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, for
making a special effort to travel to New York on short
notice and join us for this important meeting.
It now gives me great pleasure to give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. William Jefferson Clinton.
Mr. Clinton: Let me begin by thanking you,
Madam President, for inviting me to this meeting,
Mr. Annabi for his work and Prime Minister PierreLouis for her truly outstanding leadership. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon — whom
I am still inclined to thank for asking me to become
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti — and UnderSecretary-General Le Roy for their support for Haiti’s
building effort.

In spite of the devastation caused by last year’s
hurricanes and storms, in spite of the absence of basic
infrastructure and the inadequacies in health, education
and other areas, and in spite of deforestation and its
consequences, which are very severe, I am convinced
that Haiti has a remarkable opportunity to escape the
chains of its past, for several reasons.
First, the President, the Prime Minister and their
Government are committed to building a modern State
with a diversified economy, and they have the
understanding and the capacity to do so. Secondly,
Haitians, including a substantial diaspora in the United
States, France and Canada and elsewhere, are hopeful
and committed to contributing to a better future.
Thirdly, both multinational and national donors have
made substantial pledges of aid, not just to alleviate
misery, but to help to build a modern, sustainable
society. Fourthly, thousands of non-governmental
organizations are already doing useful work there.
Fifthly, Haiti’s neighbours have recognized that Haiti is
part of our neighbourhood and that, perhaps for the
first time, by virtue of that recognition, all of us have a
responsibility to help the Haitian people change their
present and their future.

My wife Hillary and I first travelled to Haiti in
December 1975, before many of you in this Chamber
were born and just two months after we had married.
Ever since then, I have been completely captivated by
the promise and peril of that country; by its unique
culture and history; by the gifts and the spirit of its
people and the burdens of oppression, abuse and
neglect that they have suffered; and by the beauty and
bounty of the land and the barrenness that plunder and
poverty have brought.

This new embrace can be seen in Brazil’s
outstanding leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in the
positive initiatives of the Inter-American Development
Bank and the Organization of American States, in the
promise of the Haitian Hemispheric Opportunity
through Partnership Encouragement Act of 2008
(HOPE II), adopted last year by the United States
Congress, and in the support that Haiti has received
from two countries in our hemisphere, Venezuela and
Cuba, with which the United States is often found not
cooperating. In other words, in our neighbourhood,
there is a deep, wide sense that we can and should
support Haiti.

When I was President, I worked with many of
you in the United Nations to end the violent military
dictatorship there and to restore an elected President.
And when President Préval succeeded President
Aristide, I did what I could to support him in his first
term within the limits imposed by the United States
Congress, which was then hostile or indifferent
towards our Haitian neighbours — a condition that, I
am glad to say, no longer exists. There is an enormous
amount of support for Haiti in the new Administration
and in the United States Congress.

As Special Envoy, I have no responsibility for the
peacekeepers, although I do appreciate their
contributions to improving security. I am grateful to
every country that has contributed troops. Nor does my
job entail any involvement in domestic Haitian politics.
That is up to the Haitian people. My mandate, instead,
is to work with the Government and the people of
Haiti, the United Nations agencies involved in-country,
the
donor
community,
potential
investors,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and diaspora
groups to do the following six things.

09-50519

3

S/PV.6186

First, we seek to support the implementation of
the Haitian Government’s recovery programme,
focusing on generating new jobs, enhancing delivery of
basic services and being more sensitive to the needs of
Haiti’s middle class, including, as the Prime Minister
just emphasized to me, the shortage of decent housing
for public-sector employees. Nor can we forget that
50 per cent of all households in Haiti are headed by
women and that, while maternal mortality rates are
among the highest in the world, so far, of all the aid
pledges, only 1.5 per cent go towards women’s
empowerment issues.
The second part of our mandate is to ensure that
the recovery effort has assistance at the level of
commitment we had when I did this work for the
United Nations in the tsunami-affected areas. Our goal
is to build back better — better schools, hospitals and
housing, better public facilities and infrastructure, and
much more effective disaster prevention and
mitigation. Those here who were involved in the
post-tsunami rebuilding know that that part of our
endeavour was extremely successful, and I hope it will
be here.
Thirdly, we seek to encourage more private sector
investment in Haiti, with a focus on opportunities
available now and on the need to make Haiti even more
competitive to maximize its investment potential. We
need to be promoting, at first, the opportunities that
exist and that have been made possible by the more
secure environment to which MINUSTAH has
contributed so much.
In a few weeks, I will lead a trade mission to
Haiti to explore investment opportunities. In August,
the Government shortened the length of time it takes
between filing an investment proposal and its approval.
That is a very good beginning, but we need to do more
to rebuild the roads, the infrastructure and the power
supply necessary to advance agriculture, manufacturing
and tourism. Given the untapped economically viable
opportunities for clean energy and greater energy
efficiency, there is also no reason why Haiti cannot
become much more energy independent in a way that
will create substantial numbers of new jobs and cut
long-term costs to business, Government and
individual citizens.
I see that Costa Rica is currently a member of the
Security Council. Participants might want to ask that
country’s representative what the economic benefits of

4

being the most clean energy country in the world are.
Every Caribbean country can achieve such energy
efficiency due to the benefits of size, temperature and
sunlight, but my focus is on what it can mean for the
poorest country in our neighbourhood, Haiti.
Fourthly, I will seek to urge philanthropists,
NGOs and civil society groups to invest more financial
and human resources and to work more closely
together. My team is currently working on a NGO
database to map out who is doing what to help us better
coordinate the literally thousands of NGOs working in
Haiti today. That is something that we did in the
aftermath of the tsunami with quite exceptional
success. Coordinating the work of NGOs with that of
the host Government, the United Nations agencies and
others can have a very tangible and real impact on the
population, especially in a country like Haiti which,
with the single exception of India, has more NGOs per
capita working there than any other nation in the
world.
Fifthly, I hope be able to project a more positive
image of Haiti to the international community so as to
push it into the spotlight, not as some sort of lost cause,
but as a country genuinely primed to claim a bright
future.
Sixthly, I hope to involve the Haitian diaspora to
an extent never before seen. It is a very impressive
group, not just in the United States, but also in Canada
and Europe. Recently, I attended the second annual
meeting of the Haitian diaspora in the United States in
Miami and hosted leaders from the Haitian community
in the north-eastern United States in my office in
Harlem in New York. I will continue this engagement.
Finally, Haiti can succeed, but not without the
help of the Security Council and the United Nations. I
urge all who made commitments during last April’s
donor conference and in the immediate aftermath to
begin actually funding them as soon as possible. An
estimated $760 million have been pledged to the
Government of Haiti since then, but so far only
$21 million have been disbursed. The contributions
that participants generously pledged are urgently
needed now — now to create jobs, now to restore
services, now to fund the public budget, now to help
patient parents who cannot afford to send their children
to private schools, now to build back better and finish
prevention and mitigation projects that will minimize

09-50519

S/PV.6186

any storm damage that comes this year and create lots
of new jobs.
I ask participants to help me to ensure that the
commitments made by all Member States are honoured
in a way that is consistent with the priorities of the
Haitian Government’s plan. Every now and then, the
Prime Minister, the President and I get criticized by
someone in the press in Haiti claiming that this
mandate is some vast colonial conspiracy by me to take
over Haiti. I assure the Council that that is not true. My
sole goal is to help them to do what they have decided
they want to do, and their knowledge and judgment on
that score are far, far superior to mine.
Anything that we can do expedite the actual
distribution of aid is going to have a positive impact on
the lives of ordinary Haitians. There will be
transparency, accountability and effectiveness in this
process. I believe that the United States Government
will fulfil its commitments in this way, and I am
grateful for the personal interest of the Secretary of
State and her Chief of Staff, Cheryl Mills. They have
made a real personal commitment, and Cheryl has
already been to Haiti twice to support the Government
in its priorities.
Beyond the commitments of the Government and
multilateral donors, some significant new individual
commitments have already been made, even in advance
of the trade mission. The Soros Economic
Development Fund has launched its Haiti Invest
Project, an equity investment programme with an
initial commitment of $25 million and a potential of
$150 million. That can do a lot of good in Haiti.
Michael Carey, an Irish businessman, and a group of
his colleagues recently established the Soul of Haiti
Foundation after a number of visits, and have offered
to host a delegation of Haitian business people in
Ireland in October. The former director of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency when I was President,
James Lee Witt, has committed $250,000 for disasterpreparedness training for women in Haiti and has
already begun identifying training sites in coordination
with both the Government and the United Nations. One
of my partners in the Global Initiative, an Indian
businessman, Desh Deshpande, who feeds a million
children a day in India, has committed to work in Haiti
to help expand some very impressive school feeding
programmes already under way there. A citizen of both
the Dominican Republic and the United States,
Rolando Gonzalez Bunster, who is an energy

09-50519

executive, has offered to install, initially, five Vestas
windmills made in Denmark, which can provide
economical, renewable energy at competitive prices
within just a few months. We know that there is
enormous untapped potential both for wind and solar
energy in Haiti.
The United Nations is also exploring ways to
replicate a community-led recycling project I recently
visited in Port-au-Prince, which has the best potential
of anything I have seen anywhere to reduce
deforestation in a way that creates 10 times as many
jobs as the production of charcoal does and cuts the
cost.
Essentially, in a neighbourhood I visited, a young
man and his nine fellow board members have
employed people for the first time in picking up and
sorting the garbage, and the organic waste is being
turned into compost and organic fertilizer. The paper is
being recycled with sawdust, and they are turning it
into little briquettes about this size. I meant to bring
one for every member of the Security Council, but I
forgot to bring them down here today. With four of
them one can cook dinner; they cost one penny apiece,
which is one fifth the cost of cooking dinner with
charcoal in Haiti. But the employment necessary to
collect the garbage, sort it, produce these briquettes in
a hand-held press and then sell them door to door is 10
to 20 times the employment that is generated by cutting
down trees that should be left standing and turning
them into charcoal.
It is a simple thing to think of a product that costs
a penny apiece — it literally could employ hundreds
and maybe thousands of people just in Haiti and help
us to turn back the tide of deforestation even as we
seek to increase agricultural capacity with mangoes,
coffee and lots of other products. These are things that
are important. In addition to the trade mission, many
here will know that the Inter-American Development
Bank is going to hold a trade conference on Haiti soon
to showcase that country to businesspeople and
investors from Latin America and the Caribbean,
Canada, the United States and Europe. We are working
at this.
Finally, let me say what I have no intention of
doing. I will not give the Council one more written
analysis of the problems of Haiti. If I file a report, it
will be only on what we have actually done or what we
have failed to do. I am very grateful for the team that

5

S/PV.6186

the United Nations has provided, including some fine
people who are permanent employees and worked with
me on the tsunami.
I am also grateful for the Secretary-General’s
appointment of Mr. Paul Farmer as my Deputy. We are
both working with the United Nations for $1 a year,
and we appreciate the compensation. I have known
Paul Farmer for over 15 years. We have worked
together in Africa, in Rwanda and Malawi, since 2005.
He actually translated for me in 2004 in Haiti when I
went there and was working with the Government of
that time to help the country with its AIDS problem.
His work in the mountains of Haiti to provide
affordable and quality health care to some of the
poorest people in our neighbourhood has been
recognized all around the world. He has been involved
with Haiti since he was a student in 1983. When I
asked my daughter some 12 years ago what she knew
about Paul Farmer, she said that he was her
generation’s Albert Schweitzer.
We are indeed fortunate that he has agreed to be
the Deputy Special Envoy to Haiti. He has a lot of
personal contact and credibility with the Haitian
Government. He has already met with representatives
of the United Nations and the non-profit world,
including George Soros and Jeffrey Sachs. He has met
with Paul Collier’s team, which provided the United
Nations with an analysis and set of recommendations
on Haiti’s economy. We are all working on this, and we
are 100 per cent committed to delivering tangible
results to the United Nations and, most important, to
the people of Haiti.
In closing, let me just ask each member of the
Security Council to recognize the actual and potentially
critical role that they can play. I am grateful for their
support of MINUSTAH and for the security it has
provided, which has made possible the progress that
has occurred so far. I am hopeful that investments in
the socio-economic sphere will match or exceed the
contributions that have been committed or those that
will be discussed here today with the people who will
speak after me.
I have been going to Haiti for nearly 35 years.
Two hundred and ten years ago, Haiti was the
wealthiest island in the Caribbean. It is now the poorest
country in our hemisphere, but when we look at the
Haitians here in New York, in Canada and in France,
and even at many of the Haitians in Haiti, we see that

6

they are intelligent, creative, innovative and successful.
They have suffered from misgovernment, abuse and
neglect from within and from their neighbours and
partners in the international community. We have a
great set of leaders down there now. We can turn this
around, and because we can, we must.
The President: I thank President Bill Clinton for
his statement. We are very grateful for his briefing, his
presence and his extraordinary leadership on this issue.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Annabi: I thank you, Madam, for organizing
this important open debate on Haiti. This meeting
offers a clear indication of the continued strong
commitment of the Security Council and the wider
international community to Haiti’s stabilization
process. I am honoured to speak alongside of Prime
Minister Pierre-Louis and President Clinton, the United
Nations Special Envoy.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) enjoys constant close collaboration with
the Haitian authorities. I wish to recognize the
leadership of Prime Minister Pierre-Louis and her
strong support for this partnership. We are deeply
grateful to President Clinton for his willingness to lend
his unique prestige and abilities to Haiti’s quest for a
better future. His involvement will be invaluable in
promoting the country’s socio-economic development.
The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council (S/2009/439) provides an update on the
stabilization process with regard to the five key
benchmarks endorsed last year by the Security Council.
These benchmarks concern political dialogue and
elections, the extension of State authority, ensuring
security and stability, strengthening the rule of law and
human rights, and socio-economic development.
As an introduction to today’s debate, I would like
to summarize key developments in each area, while
highlighting where further efforts are required.
Political dialogue lies at the heart of the
stabilization process. A peacekeeping operation can
succeed only if there is a genuine will for change
within the host country. We are encouraged in this
regard by the continuing efforts of President Préval,
Prime Minister Pierre-Louis and the Haitian
Government to foster constructive dialogue within the
country. President Préval’s establishment of a series of

09-50519

S/PV.6186

broad-based commissions on issues of national interest
has contributed to inclusive discussions on the
country’s future.
We also saw, at the end of last year, a muchneeded improvement in collaboration between the
executive and legislative branches of Government. This
paved the way for the adoption of key legislation,
including financial laws that enabled the cancellation
of the bulk of Haiti’s international debt to the tune of
$1.2 billion. The Senate last week seated 11 new
members who were elected in June. We hope that the
replenishment of the upper house may pave the way for
more effective action by the Parliament, which
frequently lacked a quorum in the past.
At a time when Haiti faces difficult choices, but
also enjoys a valuable opportunity to advance, these
positive trends must be strengthened. The country
cannot afford renewed political and institutional
paralysis of the kind that afflicted it in 2008. It is
critical that all branches of Government enhance
collaboration, avoid inflammatory language, and
jointly assume responsibility for hard decisions. Such
cooperation is indispensable to identifying and
implementing solutions to urgent problems, to pursuing
the fight against impunity and corruption, and to
ensuring the stable governance that is required for
development.
The international community can contribute by
showing strong support for those who place national
interest above narrow personal ambitions. Civil
society, too, has a responsibility to engage to ensure
the sustainability and legitimacy of decisions that
affect the entire Haitian people.
Secondly, in the area of extension of State
authority, some progress has been made in enhancing
Haiti’s institutional capacity. The Mission is
contributing, within its limited means, by providing
expertise to key ministries, as well as in the areas of
local governance and border management. Working
with Haitian authorities, MINUSTAH has supported
reforms that have increased customs revenues and
enhanced the local management of resources. Bilateral
partners and international organizations are supporting
a number of other capacity-building initiatives, for
which we would like to express our appreciation.
However, all of those initiatives combined
represent a fraction of what is required to enable the
State to deliver basic services to the population, which

09-50519

is critical for lasting stability. Real progress in that area
will depend upon the continued political will of the
Haitian leadership and on strong and coordinated
support from bilateral and multilateral partners.
Thirdly, in the area of security, the past year has
seen continued progress in addressing threats in rural
and urban areas and the further development of Haiti’s
own security capabilities. MINUSTAH has worked
with national authorities to undertake a variety of
tasks, including anti-gang operations in Cité Soleil and
in Martissant, promoting security along the land and
maritime borders, anti-kidnapping actions, responding
to civil unrest and ad hoc threats, and regular patrolling
throughout the country, including in remote areas.
Meanwhile, the Mission has also supported the
strengthening of the Haitian National Police, which
constitutes a critical element of MINUSTAH’s exit
strategy. The Haitian National Police now comprises
nearly 10,000 officers, including 468 new officers who
graduated last month. Mid-level and senior police
officers are receiving advanced training, in part
through bilateral scholarships. MINUSTAH is working
with Haiti’s partners to support national programmes to
enhance the police’s institutional capacity and
infrastructure.
That progress is encouraging and should
contribute to investor confidence. However, at the
same time, we must not lower our guard prematurely
before these advances have been consolidated. Haiti
continues to face threats, including the potential for
resumed activity by gangs, criminals and other armed
groups, corruption and violence associated with illegal
trafficking, and the risk of civil unrest. All of those
threats may be manipulated to achieve personal or
political objectives, including in the context of
forthcoming electoral processes. Potential spoilers are
likely to exploit any indication of weakness or
disengagement.
While the Haitian National Police is becoming
stronger, it does not yet have the capacity to address
those threats without assistance. The continued
presence of international troops and police therefore
remains indispensable to protecting the gains that we
have achieved and to ensuring continued progress.
Accordingly, the Secretary-General recommends in his
report the retention of our security component at a
broadly similar level, but with some adjustments to its
configuration. Those include the repatriation of a

7

S/PV.6186

number of armoured personnel carriers and an
associated reduction of 120 troops in our military
component. At the same time, he has suggested an
increase of 120 officers in our police component to
bring all formed police units up to standard strength.
Those measures would lower the Mission’s profile
while increasing its flexibility and maintaining its
capacity to respond effectively to possible threats over
the coming 12 months.

The fifth area of the stabilization process —
socio-economic development — is not, as the Council
knows, the core business of peacekeeping operations.
There is, however, a strong linkage between security,
stability and development. Peacekeeping operations
can help create the conditions for development, but
stabilization cannot succeed unless there is some
prospect of tangible improvement in the daily lives of
the Haitian people.

At the same time, further efforts must be made to
address significant shortfalls in the Haitian Police’s
equipment, especially outside of Port-au-Prince, and to
increase its financial resources and managerial
capacity. In order to achieve the timelines established
in national reform plans, it is essential that the Haitian
authorities continue to prioritize the necessary political
decisions while continuing to benefit from strong and
sustained support from MINUSTAH and bilateral
donors.

The Mission has worked closely with the United
Nations country team and donors to highlight the need
for a peace dividend. The creation of several thousand
temporary jobs through labour-intensive projects has
helped to respond to immediate needs, but continued
generous assistance from the international community
will remain essential for the foreseeable future.

Fourthly, we have seen further progress towards
the strengthening of other rule-of-law institutions and
the protection of human rights, following national
blueprints and drawing on the commitment of Haiti’s
leadership.
In the area of justice, the training school for
magistrates is now up and running, after having been
closed for a number of years. It is important that the
recruitment of the first class of magistrates be
expedited, taking full advantage of that new resource.
Likewise, we hope that the supervisory body for the
judiciary — the Superior Council of the Judiciary —
will soon be put in place.
In the area of corrections, the construction of a
new prison near Port-au-Prince and the rehabilitation
of other facilities are under way. That is an important
initial step towards responding to the urgent problem
of extreme prison overcrowding. More also needs to be
done to strengthen the Office de Protection du Citoyen,
which will play a key role in promoting respect for
human rights.
We must bear in mind that the creation of all of
these institutions is a long-term process. Continued
Haitian leadership and sustained international support
are indispensable to creating a solid institutional
framework to protect the legal and human rights of the
Haitian people.

8

We have also sought to reflect that sensitivity
within the work of MINUSTAH, drawing, inter alia, on
our engineering capacity. The priorities of our
engineering component are necessarily dictated by the
operational needs of the Mission. But as they help us to
achieve our mandated tasks, their work to repair basic
infrastructure or to respond to urgent needs can also
make a difference in people’s lives and strengthen
relations between MINUSTAH and the community
where we serve.
At the same time, it is vital that further efforts be
made to lay the foundations for long-term progress,
based around the revival of private-sector activity.
Today, we see a window of opportunity. Haiti’s
inherent advantages as an area for investment have
been highlighted repeatedly over the past year. The
engagement of President Clinton as United Nations
Special Envoy can help create the dynamism and
coordination that is required for success. At the same
time, it is critical that the Haitian leadership reach out
to the private sector and take the additional regulatory
measures needed to create an environment that is
genuinely conducive to business.
In conclusion, let me say that over the past two
years events on the ground have highlighted the fact
that stability is built slowly and that setbacks are to be
expected. But they have also shown that if we
persevere and if we stay the course, we can advance.
We remain convinced that today Haiti enjoys a
remarkable opportunity for change, as President
Clinton just underscored. We cannot lose confidence
when we meet challenges and we cannot take progress

09-50519

S/PV.6186

for granted, but must work to nurture and consolidate
it. With the continuing engagement of the Haitian
leadership and people, and with the assistance of the
Security Council and the wider international
community, I am confident that the stabilization
process will succeed and that the Haitian people can
look forward to the better future to which they have
aspired for so long.
The President: I thank Mr. Annabi for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of
Haiti.
Mrs. Pierre-Louis (Haiti) (spoke in French): In
this forum, where I have been invited to take the floor
today, may I on behalf of my country, Haiti, convey to
the Council friendly greetings and expressions of
solidarity from President Préval, from the Government
of the Republic and from the people of Haiti.
I would like first of all on behalf of the
Government to thank Ambassador Susan Rice,
President of the Security Council; Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon; his Special Representative for Haiti,
Ambassador Hédi Annabi; his Special Envoy, President
Clinton; the Deputy Special Envoy, Mr. Paul Farmer;
the members of the Security Council; and all States
Members of the United Nations. All of them have made
a significant contribution to the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I
should also like to take advantage of this occasion to
pay tribute to the memory of all of those who have laid
down their lives in working to bring about and ensure
lasting stability in my country.
The people of Haiti are the first to know the
progress that has been accomplished thanks to the
combined efforts of MINUSTAH, the international
community and the Haitian National Police towards
restoring peace, stability and security to the country —
conditions essential for bringing the investment that
the country needs so badly today. And here we must
emphasize
the
undeniable
contribution
that
MINUSTAH has made to the stabilization process.
MINUSTAH arrived in a Member State in the
grip of a profound and multidimensional crisis, and
today we must acknowledge what has been achieved in
implementing the mission’s mandate. I refer to
supporting our institutions and strengthening the State;

09-50519

helping with capacity-building and enhancing the
competencies of local administrations in serving
citizens; assisting with reforms; guaranteeing the
emergence of the rule of law by improving the Haitian
National Police and its services, the legal and prison
systems; disseminating practices and attitudes that
respect human rights; and improving the short-term
socio-economic situation of people living in areas
considered to be most difficult.
Today our country is going through a sea-change,
and, as members are all aware, any change gives rise to
entrenched conservative resistance to any move away
from the status quo. This threatens efforts to set the
country on the course of modernization and
development. But despite the tremors to which it is
sometimes still subject, which still render it fragile, the
Government is resolutely committed to creating
conditions that can inspire confidence in local
investors and attract foreign investment. This is
because today priority must go to the creation of good,
lasting jobs that also respect the environment.
Despite the successive upheavals of 2008, the
Government continues to invest in rebuilding urban
and rural infrastructure, supplying electricity and
drinking water, increasing food production capacity
and creating other goods and services. The national
road network is under construction, and the availability
of energy and drinking water is improving. Laws and
administrative provisions confirm this in both these
sectors. Reforms central to economic development are
under way, and the participation of citizens in political
life is being encouraged. The process of identification
of all the citizens of Haiti, men and women alike, has
also begun.
It is for us, then, the men and women of Haiti of
all political complexions and ideologies, with the
support of our international partners and of the
members of the Security Council, to help us hold fast
to a course that takes Haiti unwaveringly to economic
growth and sustainable, equitable development that
truly takes into account the needs of our people.
However, given the level of widespread
underinvestment, both public and private, unsatisfied
legitimate demands and the lack of structure still
affecting the country, this progress, while it is
perceptible and not negligible, is far from removing us
significantly from risk, enormous fragility and extreme
environmental and human vulnerability. It is true that

9

S/PV.6186

the resolution of all serious and complex problems
often requires time and considerable investment, and
the Council is no stranger to Haiti’s situation. President
Clinton and Mr. Annabi have just spoken of this.
I stated repeatedly during the donors conference
held in Washington, D.C., on 14 April that Haiti is
today at a critical juncture in its history, and that we
must grasp the opportunities provided for the benefit of
the people. Indeed, we are working unstintingly to
prevent any relapse into instability and unrest, and we
wish to continue to be able to rely on the Council’s
cooperation as a partner in bolstering the progress that
is being achieved so that we may continue to harvest
the fruit of social peace and political stability, the seeds
of which we have sown together.
For this, we must collectively and progressively
confront the huge challenges still threatening the
country’s stability. The first is the forthcoming
elections, where much is at stake in the struggle for
local, legislative and presidential power, and where
there is a risk of going astray in many ways, a risk we
must avoid at all costs. And the second is the draft
constitutional amendment, which must pass through the
participatory process of the various political forces and
interest groups, and where political compromise is vital
for our future.
Faced with these challenges, which require
commitment and firmness from all of us, we cannot
wait to respond. First, we must commit to investments
that can increase national production, reduce
environmental vulnerability, develop our vast tourist
potential and improve basic social infrastructure, thus
ensuring broader access to the population. It is
important here that the international community keep
the promises it entered into in April at the Washington
donors conference. I thank President Clinton once
again for having referred to this during his briefing.
We need to build or extend productive
infrastructure to foster the development of private
enterprise and intensive job creation. Employment is
the country’s number one priority today. We have to
break the vicious circle of corruption and impunity and
rebuild State institutional capacity so that governance
and the rule of law may be recovered and extended
throughout the land. We must arouse the interest of
local actors all over the country in creating
decentralized job opportunities in the various regions,
redress the imbalance in population distribution and

10

improve living conditions. We have to inspire young
people with renewed confidence. They are the majority
of the population, and they have been neglected. We
should be channelling and appreciating their potential
and creativity in the national reconstruction effort. We
must positively welcome the contributions of the
Haitian diaspora — and I thank President Clinton again
for having mentioned this — in its areas of
competence, which it has gained after sore trials in
foreign lands. Lastly, we must involve the State and
civil society in the fight for social, economic and
cultural rights essential to the vast majority of Haitians,
women, artists and initiators.
Those are the challenges that we must face. That
is the agenda to which we are committed together with
the members of the Security Council and the
international community, because the Government of
Haiti cannot play a waiting game. We have taken
initiatives that seek to enable the Government to
improve its overall functioning and that of the business
sector.
As all Council members know, the Government
has met the requirements for debt relief to the tune of
$1.2 billion. It submitted the 2009-2010 budget by
respecting the constitutional deadline for the first time
since the adoption of the Constitution in 1987. It has
completed the process that should lead to Haiti being
certified to benefit from the opportunities offered by
the Hemispheric Opportunity through Partnership
Encouragement (HOPE) Act.
It has democratically negotiated with the
Parliament and stakeholders the setting of a minimum
wage at a level that ensures Haiti’s attractiveness and
competitiveness. It has provided direct support to
strengthen production and the building of investment
capacity in sectors that can protect the environment
and encourage reforestation, including Haiti’s premium
grade coffee programme.
To improve the business registration process, the
Government encourages businesses to establish
themselves in the country and to continue to boost the
HOPE II Act activities — farm products, cattle
farming, tourism and the construction of housing and
industrial buildings, which offer huge opportunities for
investors, who now must look at Haiti in a different
light. We are all aware that development will come
from private and public investment, which is the
creator of jobs and wealth, not from humanitarian aid,

09-50519

S/PV.6186

even if today such aid is necessary to relieve the
suffering of the most vulnerable sectors of the
population.
The Republic of Haiti, President Préval and I
echo the recommendations of the Secretary-General’s
report, dated 1 September 2009. And I am pleased to
quote it here:
“While the road of stabilization and peace
processes is rarely smooth, I remain confident
that Haiti today enjoys a historic opportunity for
progress. I urge the Haitian leadership and
people, and their partners in the stabilization
process, to remain engaged and to persevere in
their efforts to create a brighter future for this
remarkable country.” (S/2009/439, para. 87)
I can only echo the Secretary-General’s words.
And to the younger generations of my country, so
thirsty for knowledge; to the women engaged in the
struggle for equality and for recognition of their rights;
to the farmers who have been too long neglected and to
whom a significant share of the positive results of
growth and development must fall, as is only fair; and
to all the men and women in the private sector, in
non-governmental organizations and in civil society
who have invested and still invest in the country, in
one way or another, taking daily risks, expressing their
creativity and devoting time and energy to
undertakings that are still vulnerable to reversibility, I
say loud and clear, in this gathering where all the
concerns and hopes of the world are voiced, that Haiti
will survive. Haiti must press forward. Haiti can once
again, as it has already done in the past, reach a
moment of epiphany that will set it firmly on the
course of progress and modernity to the benefit of the
entire Haitian population.
The President: I thank Her Excellency
Mme Pierre-Louis for her dynamic statement and her
outstanding leadership in Haiti. I want to thank again
President Clinton. He must leave to go to another
commitment, but I want to reiterate our gratitude to
him before he goes and thank him for his presence here
today.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to

09-50519

deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on the assumption of the important
role of President of the Security Council. I would also
like to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
their effective work in presiding over the Council last
month.
We welcome the participation in today’s debate of
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Bill Clinton. We expect the results of the active work
by Mr. Clinton as Special Envoy to be a significant
breakthrough in mobilizing international assistance and
investment for social and economic recovery in Haiti.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for his substantive
briefing on the recent developments in Haiti, and for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/439) on the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We agree
with the main observations and recommendations of
the report. We are grateful to the Prime Minister of
Haiti, Mme Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, for her
informative statement, and we wish her success in
addressing the problems that face Haiti.
Positive results have been achieved in the
stabilization process in Haiti. The political process has
been revitalized, the State authority has been
established and senatorial elections have been held.
Thanks to the joint efforts of the Haitian police and
United Nations peacekeepers, it has been possible to
stabilize the security situation.
However, the situation in the country remains
fragile. A constant threat to stability comes from the
grave social and economic situation. MINUSTAH is
playing an important role in maintaining law and order
in the country. United Nations peacekeepers helped to
restore State control during the civil unrest, provided
the necessary support to the Haitian people in dealing
with the aftermath of the hurricanes and ensured the
safe holding of senatorial elections.
The United Nations is making great efforts to
revitalize the political process in Haiti and to establish
a national dialogue and reconciliation. We should note

11

S/PV.6186

the good cooperation established between the Mission
and Haiti’s law enforcement agencies. United Nations
peacekeepers and the Haitian police are working
together effectively on securing sea and land borders
and on fighting crime.
Providing assistance to Haiti in re-establishing
and reforming the bodies responsible for security is a
principal area of the activities of the United Nations
Mission. Russian citizens have been deployed in the
Mission. We expect that that progressive plan to
increase the personnel of the Haitian National Police
will make it possible to begin the process of gradually
transferring responsibility to the Haitian police.
We note the significant contribution by regional
organizations of Latin America and the Caribbean in
providing comprehensive assistance to the Haitian
people. We support the 2009-2011 consolidation plan
for Haiti drawn up by the Secretary-General. We are
convinced that the consistent implementation of the
provisions of that plan will contribute to incremental
advances in the priority areas for Haiti.
The main responsibility for establishing peace
and security in Haiti lies with the Government and
people of the country. However, it is clear to us that, at
this time, they still need international assistance.
Therefore, we support the extension of MINUSTAH’s
mandate for one year until October 2010, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. The Russian
Federation will continue to support the people and
Government of Haiti in building a stable and
democratic State.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to welcome Her
Excellency Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime
Minister of Haiti, and former President Clinton, who
has just left the Council Chamber. We wish him every
success as United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti and
thank him for his briefing. Allow me to also thank
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and his efforts to
stabilize Haiti.
The situation in Haiti has been on the agenda of
the Security Council for a long time, but has recently
attracted increasing international attention, as shown
by the convening of the donors conference in
Washington, D.C., last April, as well as the two visits
there by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his
Special Envoy for Haiti, former President Bill Clinton.

12

These are certainly positive indications of the attention
being given by the international community to the
stabilization of Haiti.
My delegation believes that Haiti has a historic
opportunity as it traverses a delicate phase in the
strengthening of the peace process and works towards
achieving sustainable development. All parties
involved must reaffirm their commitment to a better
future for Haiti.
In that context, we welcome the ongoing political
cooperation between all parties. We pay tribute to the
progress made in many fields, in particular the holding
of senatorial elections, the adoption of fundamental
legislation and continuing dialogue. My delegation
hopes that efforts towards a more peaceful and stable
environment will continue and register concrete
progress in the political process and strengthened
security in general.
My country notes with satisfaction the
incremental progress in the reform of the rule of law
sector, in particular the extension of State authority and
the strengthening of the police, justice and corrections
systems in accordance with national reform plans. We
hope that these reforms will spur efforts to improve
human rights through the fight against corruption,
organized crime, illicit trafficking and impunity.
Despite these achievements, my country remains
concerned
vis-à-vis
the
Secretary-General’s
observation in his report (S/2009/439) that
collaboration between a number of Haitian institutions
remains fragile
“and subject to reversal, with a potential for
renewed tensions and conflict among and within
the governing institutions of Haiti, and a
continued readiness on the part of influential
forces within the country to inflame public
tensions to further their own interests”
(S/2009/439, para. 2).
In addition, the report notes increased civil unrest
due to the deteriorating economic situation. There is no
doubt that the recurring destructive hurricanes and the
recent food insecurity crisis that have afflicted Haiti
have also worsened living conditions for most Haitians
and increased the socio-economic burden on the State.
Since, security and stability are directly related to
improved economic, social and development
conditions, the efforts of all Haitian authorities,

09-50519

S/PV.6186

cooperation between various State institutions and
international assistance are necessary to help Haiti to
continue to address all the security, social and
economic threats it faces.
My country agrees with the Secretary-General’s
observations in paragraphs 26 and 27 of the report
concerning the need to adjust the force configuration of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti to
keep pace with developments on the ground in Haiti. In
that context, we welcome the measures recommended
by the Mission as a result of its assessment and hope
that they will lead to a finalized strategy to reconfigure
the Mission.
Finally, we support and welcome the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report, in particular those on extending the mandate,
and agree with him that the primary responsibility for
progress falls on the shoulders of the Haitian people.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is the first open debate of the Council under your
presidency, Madam, allow me to reaffirm my
delegation’s conviction that the work of the Council
will be fruitful throughout this month.
I also congratulate Sir John Sawers, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, on the
excellent work of the Council presidency during the
month of August.
I wish to begin by thanking Mrs. Michèle
Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of Haiti, for her
presence in the Council. We listened to her statement
with great attention. My delegation also appreciates the
participation of former President Bill Clinton and
thanks him for his commendable work to mobilize
international efforts on behalf of Haiti, which have
wrought tangible changes in the lives of the Haitian
people. We also thank Mr. Hédi Annabi for his briefing
and reiterate our support for the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
which he heads.
Today’s debate is of special importance to
Mexico in that it reflects the clear commitment of the
Security Council to political stability, reconstruction
and development in Haiti. Mexico welcomes the fact
that this year the international community has
expressed its will to promote substantive action to help
Haiti, as demonstrated by the high-level visits there by
the Security Council (see S/2009/175) and the Ad Hoc

09-50519

Advisory Group of the Economic and Social Council in
May (see E/2009/105), the open debate on the situation
chaired by my country in April (see S/PV.6101) and the
donor conference on Haiti convened by the
Inter-American Development Bank.
Haiti represents a shining example of the
comprehensive attention required by many crisis
situations on the Security Council agenda that
transcend the narrow requirements of the maintenance
of peace and stability. As the Council agreed in its
presidential
statement
of
22
July
2009
(S/PRST/2009/23), post-conflict peacebuilding is of
critical importance as the foundation for building
sustainable peace and development in the aftermath of
conflict.
Mexico welcomes the progress made in Haiti
with the support of MINUSTAH in such areas electoral
politics, institution-building, security, rule of law and
human rights. However, as noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, progress remains fragile and its
sustainability will depend largely on progress in the
socio-economic situation of the Haitian people. It is
therefore important to support the efforts now being
led by former President Clinton to promote democracy
and development in Haiti.
Mexico wants to see MINUSTAH continue to
work with the United Nations country team in support
of Haiti to strengthen development, humanitarian
assistance, the rule of law and security, and its capacity
to respond to natural disasters.
Mexico agrees with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that MINUSTAH’s mandate be
renewed until 15 October 2010. We must bear in mind
that its work is critical at a time when the Haitian
police capacity is not yet fully developed and the State
continues to face serious threats to its stability.
Furthermore, given the ongoing evolution of the
national and regional environment, we support the
Secretary-General’s proposal to adjust the force
configuration of the Mission by increasing the police
component and reducing the military component.
Mexico acknowledges MINUSTAH’s political,
logistical and security support to the Haitian
Government in the holding of elections in April and
June. We reaffirm how important it is that the mission
continue to lend its support to the Haitian Government
in the presidential and local elections planned for late
2010. The success of those elections undoubtedly

13

S/PV.6186

requires the political will of all actors and greater civil
society participation in order to guarantee that they are
transparent and inclusive and that there is wide
participation.
In the security sphere, we encourage MINUSTAH
to continue to build the capacity and professionalism of
the Haitian National Police as it confronts the
proliferation of gangs and other armed groups,
violence associated with the trafficking of arms,
persons and drugs, and large-scale civil unrest.
Mexico supports the promotion of a regional
approach to illegal drug and arms trafficking in Haiti,
and we appeal to the countries of the region to continue
to support MINUSTAH and the National Police in
responding to these problems, given their implications
for cross-border and regional security. We think it is
vital to strengthen MINUSTAH’s mandate and its role
in supporting the police and building its capacity in the
areas of land and maritime border security.
The human rights situation in Haiti is also a
matter of concern to us. We urge the Haitian authorities
and the Governments of the region to work together to
combat internal and cross-border child trafficking. We
support MINUSTAH’s endeavours, with UNICEF
support, to continue to protect children’s rights in
Haiti.
Turning to the question of international
cooperation, it is vital to work with the Government of
Haiti to identify ways to build a comprehensive
international strategy to meet the country’s concrete
economic needs. As a community cooperating with
Haiti, we can work in two dimensions: first, in
emergencies we must meet the urgent needs of the
population in the areas of health care and food; and
secondly, in terms of medium- and long-term
cooperation, we must build the country’s institutional
and administrative capacity, which is crucial for
restoring economic development.
The Government of Mexico has decided to give
the highest priority to Haiti in its cooperation policy,
and to make a contribution in keeping with our
capacity. My country has established the Mexican Fund
for Cooperation with Haiti to address requests from the
Haitian authorities in six fundamental areas:
agriculture, education, energy, health care, security and
tourism.

14

The Mexican Government has called a
hemispheric conference for coordinating cooperation
with Haiti, to take place on 4 and 5 November in
Mexico City. Its purpose is to effect an in-depth
analysis of cooperation with Haiti and to encourage the
coordination of efforts to ensure that international
cooperation works hand in hand with national efforts to
create better conditions for sustainable development
and to ensure a real impact on the Haitian people. This
event will be co-sponsored by the Governments of
Mexico and Haiti and the Organization of American
States.
Let me conclude by expressing my delegation’s
support for the statement to be made later by the
representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): In aligning ourselves with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union, we would like to thank you, Madam,
for organizing this open debate under your presidency.
Croatia deeply appreciates the personal presence today
of the Secretary-General’s two key representatives for
Haiti, as well as the Prime Minister of Haiti, Her
Excellency Ms. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, and is
grateful for their valuable insights for the Council’s
consideration.
Croatia would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Secretary-General’s new Special
Envoy for Haiti, former President Clinton, on his
appointment. We welcome his vision and look to his
leadership to mobilize much needed international
investment to help create a better future for millions of
Haitians.
Furthermore, Croatia commends and reiterates its
support for the tremendous work carried out by Special
Representative Annabi, the civil and military
components of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the United Nations
country team. Alongside the Secretary-General, their
steadfast dedication and efforts are a strong
reaffirmation of the commitment of the international
community to help Haiti lay strong foundations for its
future political and economic stability.
While we are encouraged that some progress has
been made on a number of fronts, the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/439) once again indicates that
meaningful progress remains elusive for many in Haiti,
especially in the socio-economic field. The interlinked

09-50519

S/PV.6186

challenges Haiti still faces today require sustained and
integrated assistance from the broad-based membership
of the international community, in line with Haitian
priorities.
Indeed, we have watched closely as improved
stability has paved the way for increased international
assistance and investment, which are vital for
significant changes in Haiti. To this end, Croatia
welcomes the outcome of the international donors
conference in April, along with Haiti’s subsequent debt
exoneration and loans earmarked for poverty reduction
and pro-growth expenditures, as important signals of
growing confidence by the international community
that Haiti is on the right track. To this end, we hope
that the envisaged trade mission to be led by the
Special Envoy, Мr. Clinton, in October this year will
further contribute to this growing momentum of
international political commitment towards helping the
Haitian people create a sustainable environment in
which to foster better livelihoods. Despite all the
challenges, at this moment of historic opportunity for
progress in Haiti, it is imperative that the international
donor community honour pledges made earlier.
Simultaneously, the Haitian Government must
match this international goodwill and support by
consolidating its hard-won gains with continued
political momentum to translate commitments into real
action on the ground. This will entail further
strengthening of the improved, yet tenuous, internal
political cooperation and political dialogue achieved
over the past few months. Only a fully inclusive
political process will ensure timely elections and
necessary constitutional reforms. In this respect, the
Senatorial elections in April served as an important
litmus test for Haiti, from which important lessons
should be learned. A strong and effective response is
required to address the incidents of voting
inconsistencies and subsequent incidents of violence, if
public confidence in the electoral system is to be
restored.
Croatia is encouraged to learn that during the
reporting period key legislation was enacted, including
the approval of the national budget and the
establishment of a minimum wage. We note also that
advancements have been made by some of the
presidential commissions in tackling issues of national
priority. These are important steps which we hope will
have a positive impact on the daily lives of many in
Haiti. However, we remain concerned over continued

09-50519

procrastination on the implementation of the joint
legislative agenda from 2008.
Croatia welcomes the continued progress made in
the security environment despite increasing tensions
over the prevailing socio-economic challenges.
Maintaining stability in Haiti requires the constant
engagement of the Haitian authorities to strengthen key
State institutions and to complete constitutional
reforms. Strong foundations for a politically and
economically secure Haiti cannot be created without
bolstering the rule of law. An improved legislative
framework and the creation of a fully functioning,
independent, credible justice apparatus and penal
system, in adherence to international standards, is a
critical prerequisite for curbing the current
environment of impunity for both violence and
corruption and in winning greater domestic confidence
in State institutions. This in turn calls for continued
international
funding
to
allow
for
further
professionalization and capacity-building, especially
with regard to the national police force and the justice
sector.
Cognizant of the fact that long-term sustainable
economic development is underpinned by security and
stability, Croatia too recognizes the vital role the
United Nations Stabilization Mission has to play in
assisting the Haitian authorities in addressing the
remaining cross-cutting challenges in the country.
Notwithstanding this, the future of Haiti lies with the
Haitian people, who have primary responsibility for
ensuring progress.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
for a further 12-month extension of the mission’s
mandate, accompanied by some readjustment of the
force capacity, as outlined in the report, as clear
recognition of the positive evolution of circumstances
under the stabilization process. In Croatia’s view, a
strong United Nations presence on the ground via
МINUSТAH and the United Nations country team is
needed for the foreseeable future to help lock in
progress to date and to reduce the susceptibility to
reversal, through further consolidation of political and
economic reforms.
We hope too that any future reconfiguration of
МINUSТAH will include greater participation by
female officers in any proposed increase of its police
capabilities. Croatia is of the view that female officers
would not only be integral to assisting victims of

15

S/PV.6186

gender-based and sexual violence, but would also serve
as important role models for their counterparts in the
emerging national police force.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized this
debate on the situation in Haiti and the activities of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). This debate helps to keep international
attention focused on the situation in that country. The
exceptional number of delegations that will take part in
today’s debate — in particular States of the region,
whose role is essential — shows the broad interest
aroused by this item.
Of course, I also wish to thank Mrs. Pierre-Louis,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Haiti, for her
briefing and to assure her that we listened to it with
great attention and, of course, sympathy on the part of
France.
France fully associates itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. I should just like to add several
comments in my national capacity.
As others have already stressed, Haiti has made
significant progress in recent years thanks to numerous
efforts made not only by the international community,
but also by the Government and the people of Haiti.
That progress is the result of the ongoing mobilization
of the international community, illustrated by the
Security Council’s unanimous support for the activities
of MINUSTAH — support that we shall soon renew. I
wish to commend the continued and unwavering
commitment of the Secretary-General and the excellent
work of his Special Representative, Mr. Annabi.
We all know how difficult it is to keep the
international community’s attention on a particular
country as crises are, unfortunately, increasing
throughout the world. As the situation in Haiti is
gradually improving, some might be tempted to let
down their guard. To the contrary, it is during this
virtuous phase that we must step up our efforts.
Mr. Clinton’s resolute action on behalf of Haiti
and his generous commitment have already produced
results. They should be supported. The improvement in
security conditions should make it possible to increase
international mobilization, to encourage investors — as
stressed by the Prime Minister of Haiti — and also to
encourage non-governmental organizations to commit

16

themselves to helping Haitian society take full
responsibility for its future. Today, it is to the
reconstruction of the Haitian State and to economic and
social development that we must devote our efforts.
France thus welcomes the resolute economic and
financial mobilization of the international community.
The Washington conference showed the support of
international donors and made it possible to mobilize
funds as well as budgetary assistance. Haiti’s progress
towards the completion point of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Debt Initiative in June allowed for
substantial debt cancellation. Last July, the Paris Club
announced a very significant debt cancellation by
bilateral creditors, including France.
In this endeavour, the role of the United Nations
is obviously crucial. MINUSTAH plays a role in the
area of stabilization. United Nations agencies present
on the ground, under the supervision of the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
are
contributing to social and economic development. But
the ultimate responsibility for success rests on the
shoulders of the Haitian Government and people. Thus,
it is to the Haitian Government and people that we
must lend our full assistance and support in their
difficult and courageous fight. They can count on us.
Of course, they can count on France, which has
historical, cultural and human ties with Haiti that we
shall not forget. France is participating in MINUSTAH.
We are on the ground and recently increased our
assistance, particularly after last year’s devastating
hurricanes.
It is our collective responsibility to continue to
support the efforts of the Haitian authorities with a
view to stabilizing the country, strengthening
democratic institutions and promoting sustainable
development. The United Nations and the Haitian
authorities must continue the work that has begun.
France will continue to lend its support to the United
Nations and to the Haitian Government.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to join others in thanking Prime Minister Pierre-Louis
and former President Clinton — in his new role as
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti — for their
presence here today. Their contributions are inspiring
great efforts to achieve our agreed goals in Haiti. We
welcome their vision and energy, and we are grateful to
you, Madam President, for giving the Council the
chance to hear from them in person today. I would also

09-50519

S/PV.6186

like to welcome back to this Chamber Special
Representative Annabi and to thank him and the entire
team of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their ongoing efforts in Haiti.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on Haiti
(S/2009/439) paints a picture that we recognized:
important progress and positive trends in certain areas,
yet continued challenges in others. In the area of
security, the relative stability and calm of the past six
months is encouraging, particularly given that this was
a period that saw two sets of closely fought senatorial
elections. One consequence of the improved security
environment is that MINUSTAH is much less likely to
have to conduct large-scale security operations of the
sort seen in Cité Soleil in 2007. That has allowed for a
modest reduction in troop levels, accompanied by an
uplift in police numbers.
We welcome regular reviews of this sort, which
are in line with the approach and the principles
captured in the presidential statement adopted by the
Council at last month’s debate on peacekeeping
(S/PRST/2009/24). We encourage the Special
Representative and the Force Commander to continue
to keep MINUSTAH’s force levels and posture under
close review in order to ensure the most efficient and
effective use of scarce peacekeeping resources.
Our goal is to create the conditions in which Haiti
can take responsibility for its own security, thus
enabling the United Nations peacekeeping mission to
complete its task. No one is saying that we are there
yet. We agree with the Secretary-General that
MINUSTAH’s presence remains essential for the time
being. Equally, however, the United Nations
consolidation plan conveys a sense of progress towards
the objective of a Haiti able to guarantee its own
stability and security.
Perhaps the most crucial aspect of MINUSTAH’s
work in the coming period is to build local capacity.
The efforts to train and mentor the Haitian National
Police, in line with the police reform plan, are vital in
order to extend and consolidate the authority of the
State. MINUSTAH and the wider international
community have to maintain and increase their focus
on building indigenous capacity in terms of the police,
justice and the rule of law generally.
Equally,
we
agree
with
others
that
socio-economic development is essential for long-term
stability in Haiti. All of our efforts to nurture and

09-50519

strengthen the institutions of the Haitian State will
come to nothing if we cannot give the people of Haiti a
stake in their future and the prospect of a better life for
them and for their children. For that reason, we warmly
welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to appoint
former President Clinton as his Special Envoy for
Haiti. We have already seen, including in the
announcement of a major trade mission by private
investors last month, some of the results of the energy
and ideas that the Special Envoy brings with him.
As Prime Minister Pierre-Louis has remarked,
there is an opportunity to change perceptions about
Haiti and to encourage the sort of investment that will
change the socio-economic dynamic of the country.
There is scope to move Haiti onto a virtuous circle of
security, investment and development. Let us keep
focused on that goal so that, in the years ahead, we
shall be able to add Haiti to the list of countries that the
United Nations has helped transport from conflict to
self-sustaining stability.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At this first
open meeting of the Council during the month of
September, I would like to extend to you, Madam, and
to the rest of the United States delegation our warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month.
I would like also to convey to Ambassador John
Sawers and the United Kingdom delegation our great
appreciation for their leadership in conducting the
work of the Council in August. I congratulate President
William Clinton on his appointment as United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti and thank him for his
statement. I thank Mr. Hédi Annabi, head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
for his comprehensive briefing. I welcome and thank
Prime Minister Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis of Haiti
for her participation in the Council’s debate today.
My delegation is pleased to note the progress
achieved during the reporting period in the five
benchmark areas of Haiti’s consolidation plan, as
manifested in the holding of senatorial elections, the
passage of key legislation and the pursuit of an
inclusive dialogue on a number of key issues that the
country faces. We also take positive note of the
vigorous efforts undertaken by President Préval to
establish the four commissions to consider issues of
national interest which, we believe, will facilitate the

17

S/PV.6186

achievement of the benchmarks and bring about
tangible changes in the country.

Government to address its current political, economic
and security challenges.

In spite of those positive developments, we
remain deeply concerned about the fragility of the
security environment and the lack of progress in the
realization of economic, social and cultural rights in
Haiti. We are troubled by reports that children continue
to suffer as a result of criminal acts, with minors
reported to be victims in numerous rape cases, while
child trafficking for the purpose of sexual or economic
exploitation continues unabated. The political and
economic shocks, coupled with the severe natural
disasters that hit the country in 2008, have not only
worsened the already dire economic conditions, but
have also hindered the full implementation of the
Government’s strategy.

While noting the primary responsibility of the
Government and the people of Haiti for their country’s
stabilization process, we commend МINUSTAН’s
admirable work in helping maintain stability and
re-establish security in Haiti. The continued presence
of MINUSTAH remains indispensable with a view to
avoiding possible setbacks or reversals in the
implementation of the consolidation plan.

At this critical juncture, we hold that the full
engagement of the Haitian leadership and people, and
the execution of a sound and comprehensive
socio-economic strategy that seeks to mobilize
domestic
resources,
generate
growth,
create
employment, reduce poverty and improve the living
conditions of the people are of paramount importance
to Haiti. My delegation supports the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that there is an urgent need to
support the Haitian authorities in the implementation of
targeted social and economic agendas aimed at
addressing the extreme vulnerability of the country and
its people, especially food insecurity, which is
affecting nearly 2 million Haitians.
To ensure security and stability in Haiti, the
international community’s strategy for the country
should focus on enhancing the Haitian National Police,
strengthening national and local governance and the
rule of law, and placing the country on the path to
recovery and sustainable development. In this
connection, we urge donors to fulfil the pledges made
at the high-level donor conference hosted in April by
the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington,
D.С.
We wish to take this opportunity to stress our
great appreciation for President Clinton’s continuing
efforts to attract foreign investment and gather
international support for Haiti. We are convinced that,
with his vast experience and his proactive engagement
in the country, President Clinton, in his capacity as
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, will make
worthy contributions to enabling the Haitian

18

We
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the mandate of the mission
for an additional year, until 15 October 2010. However,
in view of the progress made in strengthening the
Haitian security forces and developing a handover
strategy for МINUSТAН’s operational responsibilities,
we share the view that it is necessary for the mission to
reconfigure its components and adjust to changing
circumstances on the ground.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As I
take the floor for the first time this month, I should like
to congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency and once again express to you the support
of my delegation, which I will prove by brutally
shortening the statement I had prepared. I wish you the
greatest success. I would also like to welcome the
presence among us of the Prime Minister of Haiti,
Mrs. Pierre-Louis, and to thank President Clinton for
his statement. My delegation is delighted to see Special
Representative Annabi here once again. We
congratulate him on his work and thank him for his
briefing.
If for many years to come we do not want to find
ourselves in this same Chamber repeating the same
questions and tirelessly formulating the same pious
intentions on Haiti, we have to ask and answer in all
honesty the question of what we have done wrong for
15 years that as yet we cannot see the progress and
welfare we are seeking for the people of Haiti. Even
more important, we have to analyse what we are doing
now and ask ourselves whether we really are moving in
the right direction and if we are sure that within a
reasonable time frame, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) will be able to leave
Haiti, leaving behind a strong State, a peaceful country
and a prosperous people.
On four occasions, the international community
believed that it had achieved its goal, and on five

09-50519

S/PV.6186

occasions it has had to return. Although it is true that
Haiti is gradually moving away from its past of
conflict, it must also be stated that it seems that the
progress is still very fragile. In this situation, Costa
Rica agrees that it is not yet advisable to begin to think
about an exit strategy for MINUSTAH. But we support
the recommendation that it be reconfigured.
My country believes that the Stabilization
Mission and the international community have not
achieved a relationship with the people of Haiti that
combines actions in a way that can ensure that the
progress made remains sustainable. Although it is
undeniable that the five interventions in Haiti have
been justified on grounds of security, we cannot ignore
the fact that a large part of the failure is due to
obstinately ignoring that, in any human community,
sustained peace and stability depends on social,
economic and political development.
We agree with Professor Jeffrey Sachs that
stability provides the basis for the economy to take off.
Hence, it is vital to ensure that there are complements
to peacekeeping tasks, with actions to bring about
sustainable development that can ensure stability in the
future and preserve the benefits of security that have
been achieved over the past few years.
We believe that some of the difficulties in
building sustainable peace in Haiti are linked to goals
that have been promoted. Costa Rica firmly defends
the principle of national ownership in the processes of
reconstruction and peacebuilding. However, we do not
believe that in the name of this principle of national
ownership the international community should endorse
and support opinions that are clearly inappropriate,
such as the rebuilding of the Haitian army, which was
dismantled years ago and which had evidently been
made suitable only for typically civil functions, such as
environmental protection, or worse, in some cases, in
assisting the police to quell civil unrest.
Haiti’s priorities do not include the creation of a
new army or the squandering of its scarce resources on
military expenditure, given that the Haitian people
faces no external threat. The Government and people of
Haiti, in cooperation with the international community,
must define their priorities more clearly. My delegation
welcomed Prime Minister Pierre-Louis’ statement this
afternoon because it demonstrated greater clarity of
vision on the part of the Government and people of
Haiti with regard to their future.

09-50519

Costa Rica believes that the lack of
socio-economic
development
deserves
priority
attention and that certain chronic problems, such as
food insecurity and very low agricultural production,
must be addressed more energetically. In that respect,
we believe that it is perfectly apposite to establish
development parameters, as informally suggested by
the representative of Japan during Council members’
visit to Haiti. It is not sustainable for Haiti to produce
only half the food it requires, which clearly accounts
for the high levels of anaemia among the population,
with a particular impact on women and children.
Another urgent priority is the drafting and
implementation of a national strategy to develop
human capital. Nearly half of Haiti’s population is now
under the age of 18. This young and abundant labour
force needs training and jobs before it loses hope,
which in turn would foment instability in the country
and beyond. The task of training human capital must
go hand in hand with the necessary special focus on
developing a national strategy on competitiveness.
Haiti has an unshirkable responsibility to establish a
regulatory framework for a modern economy. It must
update production factors, such as the land tenure
system, that are widely recognized as obstacles to
growth.
The participation of the Haitian diaspora is also
required in the development of its country. Foreign
investment must also play a more dynamic role, while
priority must be accorded to the provision of basic
services, in particular health care and education. Haiti
will achieve only two Millennium Development
Goals — those on gender equality and the reduction of
HIV/AIDS. The vast gulf separating Haiti from the
attainment of the other Goals can be largely explained
by the alarming lack of basic services of which all are
aware.
Haitian society must continue to strive for
political and institutional capacity-building to foster
modernization and development. The Haitian political
system must reject factors that limit and undermine the
country’s development in order to become an
instrument that legitimizes democracy and lays the
foundations for development. We believe that Haiti
would be helped by adopting a simple, more
predictable and less costly political system. The many
continual electoral processes and the uncertainty they
promote disrupt the stability that is so necessary to the
public and private sectors. The costs of numerous and

19

S/PV.6186

frequent elections could be rationalized to release
resources necessary to other ends. The simplification
of the complex institutional framework should be
considered to promote improved governance.
Maintaining the stability of Haiti will also depend to a
large extent on how the authorities are able sustainably
to strengthen the pillars of the rule of law. In that
respect, we welcome the progress described by Special
Representative Annabi.
I conclude by expressing my delegation’s concern
over the situation of children in Haiti, who are afflicted
by malnutrition and its consequences, including
abandonment, abuse and human trafficking. We urge
the Haitian authorities and the international community
to advocate intensively to protect children and to
design and implement a strategy to extend their
opportunities, leading to genuine hope for future
generations.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Madam, for
organizing this important debate. I welcome the
participation of President Clinton, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy, and thank him above all for
his commitment and efforts since he assumed his post
towards the return of peace and stability in Haiti.
I also welcome the presence of the Prime
Minister of Haiti, Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis,
and thank her for her important statement. I further
thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing.
With respect to the situation in Haiti, we note
first of all that significant progress has been made
since we considered the Secretary-General’s previous
report in April (S/2009/129), although the country
continues to face some difficulties with regard in
particular to the functioning of institutions. The
country’s achievements include the holding of
complementary senatorial elections on 19 April and
21 June, despite the regrettable incidents that marked
them. The low voter turnout at these elections, the first
since 2006, should prompt the Haitian political class to
work harder to win the trust of the population and,
through tolerance and dialogue, to establish the optimal
conditions for the organization of more credible
elections in the future. For the time being, we call on
them to accept the results published on 24 July so as to
allow for the unimpeded functioning of the legislature.

stability. We are therefore concerned about the delays
in the implementation of the joint legislative agenda
agreed upon by the Government and Parliament in
2008. The report notes the slow pace and low rate of
adoption and ratification by Parliament of the laws and
conventions of that agenda. The budget law, for
example, was adopted only on 2 June, while the
2009-2010 budget has yet to be adopted. We therefore
hope that the process will be accelerated so as to
strengthen the country’s legal and institutional
framework.
We congratulate the commissions responsible for
constitutional reform and security on their reports and,
above all, on the proposed reforms concerning the
electoral cycle, dual citizenship, the security
architecture and local authorities. We also encourage
the other commissions responsible for justice reform,
competitiveness and information technology to
continue their work so as to be able to submit their
respective reports as soon as possible.
We remain concerned by the threats to the
security situation in Haiti arising from the ongoing
unemployment, corruption, illicit trafficking in drugs
and small arms, and civil unrest. In light of the various
weaknesses afflicting the Haitian National Police, and
while thanking bilateral partners for their assistance in
strengthening police capacity, we urge the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to
continue to support the Government’s initiative. As to
the judiciary, we welcome the efforts of the Haitian
authority, in cooperation with MINUSTAH and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to combat
corruption, crime and illicit trafficking.
The slow pace of progress in the field of human
rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights,
is another source of concern to my delegation. The
majority of the Haitian people live under very
precarious conditions. We are therefore very grateful to
President Clinton for having embraced this issue and
for having devoted himself since then to mobilizing
funds and public and private investment with a view to
improve the living conditions of the population. In that
regard, while we welcome the outcome of the
conference of bilateral partners held in Washington last
April, during which significant contributions were
announced, we nevertheless regret the delays that have
occurred in the disbursement of those funds.

The regular and effective functioning of
institutions is necessary to consolidating peace and

20

09-50519

S/PV.6186

It is clear that the Haitian State still faces many
difficulties in ensuring security and in taking strong
measures for the recovery of its economy. The
Stabilization Mission therefore continues to serve as an
important lifesaver for the country. It should be
commended for its efforts on the ground and
encouraged to continue to provide assistance to the
Government in the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and in the
preparations for the upcoming elections.
We commend the Special Envoy and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as all
of the MINUSTAH staff, for their efforts to contribute
to the consolidation of political stability and peace in
Haiti, which so desperately needs to focus on its
development. We would also like to take this
opportunity to thank troop-contributing countries for
their commitment to Haiti.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s meeting. We would also like to
warmly welcome to the Security Council His
Excellency Mr. William Jefferson Clinton, United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, and Her Excellency
Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of
Haiti. We also welcome the report (S/2009/439) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), as well as the briefing
just given by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Hédi Annabi.
Over the past five years, thanks to the support of
the international community and, in particular, the
outstanding contributions of MINUSTAH, the security
situation in Haiti has improved a great deal. As
indicated in the discussion in the Secretary-General’s
report of the consolidation plan annexed to the report,
Haiti has made encouraging progress on all five
benchmarks of the consolidation process. We have also
noted that the situation in Haiti continues to be fragile,
in particular with regard to the economic, social and
development situation. Great challenges also remain in
terms of the political process, institution building and
the security sector, and especially with regard to
police, legislative, judicial, penal and institutional
reform, as well as in combating corruption.
As the international community continues to
provide support, we call upon the Haitian Government
to muster greater determination, make increased efforts

09-50519

and strengthen in a practical manner its own capacitybuilding efforts in order to effectively assume
responsibility for achieving sustainable peace and
stability in the country. The Government of Haiti is
expected to strengthen its coordination with
MINUSTAH and to take effective steps in the political,
security, economic and social spheres. It should also
step up its legislative and judicial reforms, strengthen
the recruitment and training of police and bolster its
coordination with its neighbours in the areas of border
control and the fight against drug trafficking and crime.
At the same time, it is essential to strengthen dialogue
between the Haitian Government, the Parliament, the
political parties, the private sector and civil society,
with a view to achieving consensus, in a joint effort to
maintain stability in the country.
Extreme poverty and economic and social
underdevelopment pose the major obstacles to
sustainable peace and stability in the country. In order
to achieve sustainable stability, Haiti must make
greater progress on the economic and social fronts. The
Haitian Government and people bear the greatest
responsibility in that regard. The international
community should provide assistance appropriate to
the conditions in the country. Through MINUSTAH, it
can also provide support and the necessary resources in
connection with political, security and rule of law
efforts.
However, we should also realize that ensuring
Haiti’s economic and social development is not
MINUSTAH’s mandate. The Security Council cannot
just turn to the Mission for the country’s development;
other United Nations and international and regional
organizations, Haiti’s neighbours and countries of the
region can all play a greater role.
MINUSTAH has now been deployed for five
years. It has made a great contribution to the
maintenance of Haiti’s peace and stability. We
appreciate its work and pay tribute to its staff for its
dedication. At a time when the situation in Haiti is still
fragile, we support the continued presence of
MINUSTAH. However, as progress continues to be
made in Haiti’s consolidation and stabilization process,
MINUSTAH
should
eventually
hand
over
responsibilities to the Haitian Government and people.
We hope that MINUSTAH will focus on carrying out
its mandate to maintain peace and stability in Haiti and
remain from taking on tasks that do not fall within its
responsibilities.

21

S/PV.6186

At a time when the countries of the world face all
sorts of security challenges, there is an ever-growing
demand for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
However, there is only a limited supply of available
peacekeeping resources. The Security Council is
currently engaged in discussions on the reform of
peacekeeping operations. It is necessary for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to
carry
out
a
comprehensive
assessment
of
MINUSTAH’s mandate, including its military and
police components, and the deployment and efficient
use of resources, so as to ensure that the Mission’s
assets and resources are configured as appropriately as
possible in order to further improve the efficiency of
peacekeeping operations and propose drawdown plans
where appropriate.
Strengthening the capabilities of Haiti’s security
sector is an important task. The Haitian President’s
Commission on Public Security has developed some
recommendations for the establishment of a force with
military status. Those recommendations merit further
study. We hope that the Organization of American
States, DPKO and countries of the region will accord
due attention to recommendations on Haiti, so that they
can together arrive at a solution.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Let me also begin, Madam
President, by welcoming the holding of this open
debate under your presidency. I should also like to
express my deep gratitude to President Clinton, United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti. I am also grateful for
the briefing by Special Representative Annabi. I also
welcome
Prime
Minister
Michèle
Duvivier
Pierre-Louis and thank her for her presence here today,
and in particular for the hospitality extended to our
mission a few months ago, which was extremely
productive and useful for all of us.
In the past six months, several important events
have served to heighten interest in supporting of Haiti.
In particular, the donors conference held in
Washington, D.C., was very important. Many
countries, including Japan, expressed strong support
for Haiti’s development. Part of the challenge now
before us is twofold. First, the international community
needs to attach much more importance to, and focus
on, development in Haiti. The second objective is to
mobilize support and broaden the basis of that support
to deal with current issues confronting Haiti, such as
recovering from a series of hurricanes, food insecurity
and youth unemployment. We very much believe that

22

today’s timely debate in the Council will contribute to
those two objectives.
The three important statements we heard this
afternoon contain priority concerns and prescriptions
we should jointly focus on. I would like to discuss only
three essential points regarding the stabilization of
Haiti. The first point is the political process.
After the Security Council mission to Haiti, the
senatorial elections took place, representing an
important political process. We welcome the fact that
elections were successfully organized without major
disruption. However, to increase public engagement in
the political process, it is critical for the Government to
initiate legal action against the crimes alleged to have
taken place in this process. Depending on progress in
future political processes, including in the forthcoming
elections to the Chamber of Deputies and the
presidential election, there is a possibility that
domestic tensions may rise. The international
community must continue to carefully monitor the
political situation in the country.
The second point relates to the security situation,
which has been relatively calm thanks largely to the
efforts of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). We welcome the good progress
that has been made, particularly in building the Haitian
National Police. At the same time, we must be mindful
that the situation remains fragile and that social unrest
may occur again if poverty is not alleviated and basic
livelihoods for the population are not secured.
It is important to note that the Haitian National
Police has not reached the necessary capacity to
conduct policing successfully without the support of
MINUSTAH. Continued technical support from
MINUSTAH will be indispensable until at least 2011,
when the Haitian National Police will achieve its target
of building a strong professional force of 14,000. We
believe, therefore, that the presence of MINUSTAH
troops and police will continue to be critical, and we
are thus in favour of the extension of the Mission’s
mandate, but we also expect that MINUSTAH will
implement its mandate effectively and efficiently to
meet the benchmarks in its consolidation plan.
The third point concerns economic and social
development. The biggest challenges in Haiti are
underdevelopment and poverty. In order to stabilize the
country, food security and job creation in particular are
two of the issues that must be tackled urgently and

09-50519

S/PV.6186

forcefully. Those countries that made pledges at the
donors conference should give concrete shape to their
support, and efforts must be made to broaden the
political and financial support base and to improve
coordination.
In that connection, Japan pledged $50 million at
the conference to support the implementation of the
Poverty Reduction Strategy. Since then, we have sent a
mission to discuss the details of this implementation,
consulted with the Haitian Government and decided to
offer support in the fields of food security, health care,
education, human resource development, the
environment and disaster protection. It is also good
news that the Paris Club countries have cancelled the
country’s entire bilateral debt.
In order to create jobs and promote vibrant
economic activity, however, we believe that not only
the support of the public sector but also the active
engagement of the private sector, including the
diaspora, are essential. We should make much greater
effort to bring about tangible change in people’s daily
economic life by facilitating trade and investment
involving the private sector. In this regard, I commend
the initiative of President Clinton to lead an
international trade mission of private investors to Haiti
in October. We hope that the mission will have a
positive influence on the stabilization of the country
and promote investment in various sectors in the near
future. The Haitian Government, for its part, needs to
ensure that the legislative and regulatory environment
and facilities in the country are not only attractive to
investment, but also conducive to transparency in the
market.
I would like to conclude by thanking those
countries that have contributed valuable troops, police
and logistical support, as they have helped to bring
about significant improvement in stabilization under
difficult circumstances.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency in a challenging month. This is clearly a
very important event as part of an impressive
programme of work. I should also like to thank the
United Kingdom for its work during the month of
August.
I join others in welcoming Prime Minister PierreLouis to the Council meeting today and thanking her
for what she has been able to tell us. We are also

09-50519

grateful for the chance to listen to the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy, President Clinton, and to
express our appreciation of his continued engagement.
We also appreciate the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi
Annabi, and want to thank him for his work and his
commitment.
Austria aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered later on by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union. I want to make a
number of specific points that are based on my own
experience during the mission of the Security Council
to Haiti.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/439), which highlights the continued
assistance of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to national efforts for peace and
stability in Haiti. We have the feeling that
MINUSTAH, under very difficult circumstances, is a
success story. This is a case in which United Nations
peacekeeping has been able to make a difference,
assure the peace and security of the Haitian people and
protect them against violence and organized crime.
One of the reasons this has been successful, from our
point of view, is the strong Latin American and
Caribbean participation in and co-ownership of this
Mission. At the same time, it is important that ensuring
the protection of citizens in Haiti has been recognized
as a challenge by the entire international community,
with contributions from all over the world, such as the
Chinese police contingent that we were able to visit
during our mission.
Important improvements have been made with
regard to the rule of law. With MINUSTAH’s valuable
support, the Haitian National Police has been gradually
strengthened, contributing substantially to security and
stability along land and maritime borders and
throughout the country. Austria believes that the
ongoing training and vetting of the Haitian National
Police constitutes an essential element in the
re-establishment of reliable and trustworthy security
institutions. We also welcome the envisaged
adjustment of MINUSTAH’s force configuration to
Haiti’s country-specific needs. The additional number
of police officers for the formed police units will
enhance the Mission’s capacity to support the Haitian
security forces.

23

S/PV.6186

At the same time, we agree with the Haitian
authorities that substantial progress remains to be made
in the judicial as well as the correction systems in
order to fight impunity and secure greater stability in
Haiti. Efforts to strengthen the capacity of the judiciary
to address issues such as prolonged pretrial detention
are important, and we are concerned about the
continued problematic situation in Haiti’s prisons due
to increased overcrowding. The launching of the
construction of a new prison in Croix-des-Bouquets is
a first concrete and important step which must be
followed up with further efforts.

Subsequent to the Security Council’s mission to
MINUSTAH in March, elections to the Senate in Haiti
were held in April. We are glad to see that these
elections were conducted in a generally peaceful
climate. We believe that it is vital for the Government
to continue its efforts in the field of political dialogue,
in the extension of State authority as well as
decentralization, and to engage all relevant actors in
these processes. In light of the challenges ahead, we
fully support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH for an additional
year.

We are encouraged by, and encourage, the
strengthening of the judicial inspection unit, as well as
the reorganization of the Ministry of Justice. We are
also very interested in the forthcoming review of
existing criminal legislation, including on juvenile
delinquency. This is an area on which my country has
been able to cooperate with Haiti in the past, and we
are prepared and happy to continue that cooperation.
We also welcome the collaboration of MINUSTAH, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and the Haitian Government in strengthening measures
against corruption, organized crime and illicit
trafficking, and we encourage the ongoing involvement
of UNODC’s expertise.

Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Clinton, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi Annabi, for their
briefings. Let me also extend a warm welcome to
Prime Minister Pierre-Louis and thank her for her
insightful presentation. We also thank her for the
excellent hospitality accorded to the Security Council
mission in March this year.

The benchmarks and revised indicators of
progress contained in the Secretary-General’s report
are an important tool for measuring the achievements
of MINUSTAH, in cooperation with the Haitian
Government.
These
benchmarks
provide
a
comprehensive framework for the activities undertaken
by the host authorities, the Mission itself, the United
Nations country team and the international community,
and therefore contribute to enhanced coherence and
coordination among all actors.
The socio-economic situation in Haiti remains
precarious and thus continues to pose a threat to
stability. We therefore welcome warmly the dedication
of Special Envoy President Clinton in mobilizing
public and private investment, while at the same time
fostering the commitment of all relevant actors to
improving living conditions in Haiti. The decision of
30 June on debt cancellation by the international
financial institutions and the Paris Club was an
important step towards sustainable economic
development in the country.

24

I would further like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation to President Clinton for
his involvement in the advancement of peace and
development in Haiti. His special role in helping to
generate a broader awareness of the challenges facing
Haiti, as well as in further motivating the international
community to address the needs and expectations of
the Haitian people, is most commendable.
Today’s debate, the second within the past five
months, and the wide interest that it has drawn from
the Member States stand as testimony to the
importance that we all attach to nurturing the promise
of that country. In fact, much has already been
accomplished to that end, and this year in particular
has been an extremely encouraging period regarding
Haiti’s prospects. As such, today’s meeting gives us a
good opportunity to take stock of the progress made so
far and to reiterate our resolve for continued
engagement.
In that regard, the appointment of and visits by
President Clinton, as well as the Security Council
mission to Haiti, have helped us streamline our
endeavours towards that country with renewed focus
and dedication. The donors conference in Washington,
D.C., in April also provided a much-needed political
and financial boost to our collective efforts.

09-50519

S/PV.6186

We observe with great pleasure that the Haitian
people and Government have also been most
responsive to those efforts, vindicating the investment
of the United Nations and the international community
in Haiti. In that context, we are particularly glad to see
increased political cooperation among the parties, as
evidenced by the partial senatorial elections having
being held without major incident and by the security
environment preserving its calm.
All those developments point in the same
direction — the security situation in Haiti is clearly
evolving from the risk of a major social outburst to a
less massive, but still relatively precarious condition,
requiring first and foremost policing tasks. As such, it
is noteworthy that the Secretary-General has
recommended downsizing the military component of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) by 120 troops, while adding the same
number of police officers to the formed police units.
It also explains why the Haitian authorities are
also considering the re-establishment of a special
gendarmerie-type force with domestic security
responsibilities. As a country that has long-standing
experience and expertise in such forces, Turkey stands
ready to cooperate with the Haiti Government if and
when it is ready to take further steps in that direction.
That said, the positive developments in the field
of security should not make us forget that the
underlying causes of instability in Haiti — extreme
poverty and the unstable socio-economic environment —
are still there. Although there has been a clear
improvement in the macroeconomic indicators, the
relative recovery of the economy has not yet fully
translated into tangible progress in the everyday lives
of Haitians, and thus there is still a long way to ensure
a sustainable development track.
That is why we think that the socio-economic
assistance efforts of President Clinton must be
advanced in tandem with MINUSTAH’s stabilization
endeavours in order to create the conditions conducive
to the maintenance of peace, security and prosperity in
Haiti. That is also why Turkey, in addition to its
continued police contribution to MINUSTAH, will
explore new avenues of assistance to and cooperation
with Haiti in a way that will address the most pressing
needs of the Haitian people.
In conclusion, we are pleased to see that some
progress has been achieved in Haiti and we are

09-50519

confident that a brighter future awaits the Haitians. To
that end, a functioning judiciary system, improved
collaboration between the State branches, the
continued development of the Haitian National Police
both in numbers and capabilities, and, above all, a
substantial improvement in the living standard of the
Haitians are key benchmarks for a complete
normalization in Haiti.
Accordingly, we believe that there is still a need
for MINUSTAH to remain in Haiti and thus fully
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to extend its mandate until 15 October 2010.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We welcome the
participation in today’s debate of the United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, President Bill Clinton. We
also welcome and thank the Prime Minister of Haiti,
Mrs. Pierre-Louis, for her briefing. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mr. Hédi Annabi, for his briefing
on the situation in that country.
We are encouraged by the progress that has been
made in Haiti and commend the Government and
people of Haiti for that progress. We congratulate the
people of Haiti and the new Provisional Electoral
Council on having held peaceful and well-run Senate
elections on 21 June this year. Despite the
organizational challenges during the elections, we are
convinced that they were an important milestone in
efforts to restore democracy to Haiti and to achieve
lasting stability and progress in that country.
The Secretary-General rightly observes in his
report (S/2009/439) that the Haitian people have the
primary responsibility for ensuring progress in that
country. It is incumbent upon the leadership of that
country to continue its remarkable efforts in
establishing the institutions of Government, restoring
the rule of law and revitalizing the economy.
We commend the role that MINUSTAH has
continued to play in coordinating international action
and assistance in support of the Government to
strengthen its institutional capacity. We have noted the
progress achieved in border management, expanded
border facilities and the upgraded customs data system.
Although the security situation in the country
remains generally calm, it is still fragile and continues
to face such potential threats as resumed activity of

25

S/PV.6186

gangs, criminals and other armed groups. There is a
need to counter these threats, including cross-border
child trafficking. The Government of Haiti requires
increased support in institutional capacity-building,
and certainly in the security sector, as soon as it can
take effective control over its entire territory. We
commend the progress achieved in bringing stability to
Cité Soleil and Martissant, and call for the
consolidation of stability in the rest of the country.
We welcome the commitment of the Government
of Haiti, with the support of the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank, to
developing a post-disaster national preparedness
strategy during the hurricane season. However, given
the extreme vulnerability of Haiti to natural disasters
that endanger much of the country’s population and
agricultural potential, we call on the friends and
development partners of Haiti to offer more substantive
assistance to the Haitian authorities to improve their
capacity to manage disasters and place Haiti on the
path to recovery and sustainable development.
The success of national development efforts in
Haiti will critically depend on the availability of
adequate and predictable resources. There is a need to
continue consolidating peace and stability in Haiti
through peacebuilding.
There is also a need to intensify efforts to
mobilize additional resources for the country,
especially by broadening the donor base and
strengthening partnerships with the private sector.
Uganda therefore welcomes the cancellation of Haiti’s
$1.2 billion multilateral debt with international
financial institutions and the subsequent cancellation of
the country’s entire bilateral debt owed to the Paris
Club.
We believe that this debt relief will drastically
lessen Haiti’s international financial obligations and
hence facilitate the channeling of funds to various
internal investment and development projects critical
to the country’s economic recovery. In this regard,
Uganda would like to commend the work of the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, former United States
President Bill Clinton, towards mobilizing public and
private investment and improving the lives of the
Haitian people.
Finally, Uganda
commends the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff
of MINUSTAH for their work and commitment to the

26

stabilization of Haiti, and we support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
extension of the mandate of MINUSTAH until
15 October 2010.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.
I want to begin especially by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annabi for his
dedication to Haiti and his very capable leadership of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). I am also very delighted that Prime
Minister Pierre-Louis of Haiti is here with us today. We
look forward to deepening our partnership with her and
our work together.
I want to warmly again thank President Clinton
for coming to the Council today. The United States is
deeply honoured by his appointment as United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, and we are proud that he is
taking up this important mission to extend and expand
our common efforts to help the people of Haiti.
Last year’s hurricanes and food crisis have meant
major challenges and serious setbacks, but real
progress is still being made in Haiti. The United States
is pleased to see increased political cooperation, which
allowed for senatorial elections and the passage of
several key pieces of legislation. We continue to urge
the Government of Haiti to deepen its efforts to foster
an all-inclusive political dialogue, and we thank
MINUSTAH for its ongoing support of the electoral
process in Haiti.
The United States also congratulates the
Inter-American Development Bank and Prime Minister
Pierre-Louis on the successful conclusion of the
14 April donors conference in Washington, D.C., which
the Bank reports has resulted in $353 million in new
pledges for Haiti. The United States pledged
$57 million in new funding, including $20 million in
indirect budget support.
Let me again stress the need for the Government
of Haiti and its partners to continue their good efforts
to advance economic growth and development in the
country, including by supporting the country’s plan for
reconstruction and economic recovery. At the
conference in Washington, D.C., the United States
welcomed donor commitments to help the Government
of Haiti address the difficult and demanding conditions
that dominate the daily lives of far too many Haitians.

09-50519

S/PV.6186

We thank our partners for their commitment to tackling
these problems, even as we call upon them to keep up
the momentum to alleviate ongoing suffering.
For our part, my Government again underscores
its own commitment to partnering more closely with
the Government of Haiti and other donors to better
respond to the urgent needs of the Haitian people. Real
gains have been made in improving security in Haiti,
but we are acutely aware of the potential threats to
Haiti’s stability, including transnational crime, gang
violence, drugs and civil unrest. In Haiti, as elsewhere,
as we have heard more than once today, there can be no
security without development and there can be no
sustained development without security.
The United States remains optimistic about the
gradual improvements in the capabilities of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) to meet these security
challenges, but the HNP still lacks the capacity,
training and equipment to respond independently to the
full range of threats that Haiti now confronts. So we
again commend MINUSTAH, as well as bilateral
donors, for their ongoing role in maintaining stability
and providing technical support and contributions to
build up the HNP. We have also renewed our efforts to
respond to the security priorities of the Government of
Haiti to help foster the security and stability that the
people of Haiti need and deserve.
To complement these efforts on the security front,
we are also looking closely at our investments on the
development front. Guided by development priorities
set out by the Government of Haiti at the donors
conference, we are looking at ways to make the United
States a more effective donor, investor and bilateral
partner with Haiti. We continue to work with the
Haitian people to strengthen the rule of law and the
security sector, expand human security, extend
economic development, deepen good governance and
reinforce the stability required for the eventual
drawdown of peacekeeping forces.
The United States therefore firmly backs the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation
that
MINUSTAH’s mandate be extended for another year,
including the adjustments he proposes to its force
configuration. We remain optimistic about the
advances that have been made to the consolidation plan
over the past year and we remain committed both to the
Mission and to Haiti itself. We urge our partners again

09-50519

to maintain their own commitments and to deepen our
common efforts to stabilize the country.
As the Secretary-General rightly notes, the
Haitian people have the primary responsibility for their
own country’s future and fortunes. But the continued
engagement of the wider international community is
essential if we are to seize this historic opportunity for
progress and bring a brighter future to Haiti.
Finally, on behalf of the United States, let me
again convey my appreciation to the Special
Representative and let me again salute the men and
women of MINUSTAH for their bravery and
dedication under the admirable leadership of Brazil and
with the steady support of all of the troop- and policecontributing countries. Haiti is our neighbour and
friend. We look forward to working together as a team
with Haiti at the helm to produce results that will better
the lives of the people of Haiti and to spur on progress
that will endure.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give
Guatemala.

the

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam,
on your initiative to hold an open debate to discuss the
question of Haiti, in anticipation of the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the presentation of his report (S/2009/439)
on recent developments in the field and for his valuable
recommendations to Member States. I am also grateful
for the statements of Prime Minister Pierre-Louis,
Special Envoy William Clinton and Special
Representative Hédi Annabi.
It is my pleasure to inform the Council that, this
past July, Guatemala sent its eighth contingent of
military police to MINUSTAH, thereby renewing its
commitment to contributing to the Mission and to
supporting the Haitian Government. The deployment of
the contingent was accompanied by Mr. Rafael Espada,
Vice President of Guatemala, who had the honour of
meeting with President René Préval to convey our
message of solidarity and best wishes.
We welcome the holding of the senatorial
elections in Haiti in April and June, which provided an
opportunity to improve stability in Haiti in the future.

27

S/PV.6186

At the same time, we pay tribute to the international
community for continuing to support the strenuous,
coordinated and generous efforts towards long-term
cooperation, which involve far more than ending the
violence.
I would like to make the following observations
on the renewal of MINUSTAH’s mandate. First, I
reiterate my country’s support for the renewal of the
mandate for another year, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. Identifying the right moment to
draw down a peacekeeping operation is always
difficult. In the case of Haiti, on the basis of our own
observations and the contents of the report of the
Secretary-General, that time has clearly not yet arrived.
We wish to highlight the observation in the report
confirming that, if we are to avoid setbacks, the
maintenance of a substantial international military and
police presence on the ground, at a level similar to that
currently deployed, remains essential. We consider that
the military presence remains indispensable, as
demonstrated by the type of support that the Mission
provides in matters of security, emergencies and
disasters, civil unrest, elections, infrastructure and
border protection. Over the past year, the military
presence has proved to be best equipped and most able
to meet such needs.
Secondly, the political stabilization of Haiti
cannot be achieved through a military and police
presence alone. Coordination among donors, regional
organizations, agencies, programmes and civil society
to support the Government in establishing a secure and
stable environment is a crucial element if we are to
derive the maximum benefit from all work being
carried out in the field. In all those respects, we believe
that the Economic and Social Council’s Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti is an important body that has
helped to strengthen the link between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. It also
provides a practical forum through which the United
Nations and the international financial institutions have
broadened their cooperation on behalf of Haiti.
That brings me to my third point. Guatemala has
experienced first hand the socio-economic challenges
that violence and a lack of security pose to
development. Consolidating State institutions makes it
possible to promote sustainable development
processes. We encourage the prioritization of thorough
socio-economic reform and the strengthening of

28

institutions responsible for the administration of
justice.
Never before have we had so many tools and
opportunities to address the security and development
of Haiti jointly and in a complementary manner. We are
confident that significant progress will be made that
will speed up the transfer of functions and
responsibilities to Haitians themselves.
Finally, we note with some concern paragraph 82
of the report, which indicates the amounts owed to
countries contributing troops and police to
MINUSTAH. Guatemala recognizes that MINUSTAH
is working tirelessly to carry out its mandate of
consolidating stability in the country. However, that
will be possible only if the resources necessary to do so
are available. That requires up-to-date and timely
reimbursements for expenses and contingent-owned
equipment.
In short, the United Nations presence in Haiti has
made a crucial difference to the country. We are
confident that the day is approaching when that
presence will no longer be necessary and Haitians will
assume responsibility for their own future. For now,
however, we need to persist in our endeavour for the
good of the country and of the United Nations itself.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Uruguay wishes at the outset to sincerely
congratulate you, Madam President, and your team on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. On behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, my delegation also wishes to
congratulate the delegation of the United States on
having taken the initiative to organize this timely
public debate on the situation in Haiti and the work
being done by the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). In particular, I wish to thank
Mr. William Clinton, United Nations Special Envoy for
Haiti; Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; and Mrs. Pierre-Louis, Prime
Minister of Haiti, for their participation in this debate.
I also thank the delegation of Brazil for having kindly
allowed me to make this statement on its behalf.
Before sharing with the Security Council a
number of opinions and observations of the Group of
Friends of Haiti regarding the issue before us, I should

09-50519

S/PV.6186

like to reaffirm once again our Group’s full
commitment to and support for the Haitian
Government and people in rebuilding the country,
consolidating peace and stability and promoting
recovery and sustainable development. As coordinator
of the Group of Friends of Haiti, I should like to
express our firm support for MINUSTAH and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
their efforts to improve the stability and governance of
Haiti.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on this subject, dated 1 September 2009 (S/2009/439),
emphasizes the progress made in the implementation of
the Mission’s mandate in conformity with Security
Council resolution 1840 (2008) and previous Council
resolutions. The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes
with satisfaction the progress made in four of the five
areas considered fundamental to consolidating the
stability of Haiti: political dialogue; the extension of
State authority, including border management; and the
strengthening of security, the rule of law and human
rights. We also recognize the strong commitment of a
group of Latin American countries that are pooling
their resources to assist in the training of the Haitian
National Police.
The Group of Friends of Haiti stresses the
growing political cooperation that is facilitating
progress in a number of areas, such as the recent
senatorial elections, the adoption of key legislation and
the establishment of an inclusive dialogue on various
fundamental issues facing the country, based on the
work carried out by a number of presidential
commissions.
The Group of Friends of Haiti expresses its
concern over the grave socio-economic situation,
which remains a direct threat to the country’s stability.
As the Secretary-General’s most recent report shows,
the daily living conditions of the majority of the
Haitian population are still characterized by hardship
and privation. Haiti has also continued to grapple with
food insecurity, extreme poverty and a fragile
humanitarian situation.
With regard to the development challenges that
Haiti continues to face, the Group of Friends of Haiti
wishes to emphasize the great importance of the
appointment of former United States President
Mr. William Clinton as Special Envoy for Haiti. Our
Group is convinced that the new Special Envoy will

09-50519

help to advance the country’s social and economic
recovery efforts by focusing attention on the
importance of new partnerships and efforts with the
private sector, civil society and donors, as well as on
the strengthening of local capacity.
The Group noted that the last visit undertaken by
former President Clinton and Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to Haiti helped to identify better ways for
developing the country’s economy, energy supply, food
security, private sector, ecology and health care.
The Group of Friends of Haiti shares the view of
the Secretary-General that there is a link between
development and stable security, since the current
levels of poverty, deprivation and suffering in the
country are clearly incompatible with its long-term
stability. It is therefore urgent that the Haitian
authorities and the international community work
closely together to facilitate the distribution of
humanitarian aid and recovery tasks and lay the
foundations of renewed private sector activity in the
interests of achieving the country’s long-term
reconstruction and development.
The Group of Friends of Haiti has taken note of
the report of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the
Economic and Social Council (E/2009/105), in which it
recommends ways to explore the enhanced use of
MINUSTAH engineers for greater synergy between the
mandate of the Mission and the country’s development
needs. The Group welcomes this idea and encourages
the Council to consider it.
Lastly, the Group of Friends of Haiti, highlights
and agrees with the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report on the need
to extend MINUSTAH’s mandate for an additional year
and to adjust its military and police components to
enable the Mission to operate effectively in the current
environment. In the next few days, the Group will
submit a new draft resolution for consideration by the
Security Council.
The President: I
representative of Sweden.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). In addition,
Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine and Armenia
align themselves with this statement.

29

S/PV.6186

Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the
Western hemisphere. While security and stability have
improved significantly since the deployment of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in 2004, we remain concerned that the
people of Haiti continue to face serious challenges in
the area of socio-economic development. High levels
of unemployment, increasing costs of living, and the
lack of access to basic services are serious risk factors
for stability and could undermine the progress achieved
over the past years. Therefore, with great satisfaction
we welcome Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
appointment of President Bill Clinton as the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti in an effort to refocus
international attention on the country’s deep economic
problems and environmental decay.
The priorities laid out by the Haitian Government
at the donors conference in Washington, D.C., last
April represent a challenging road map. We remain
committed to our pledges made at that conference and
welcome the Secretary-General’s engagement. The
Special Envoy, in addition to his work in the follow-up
to the donors conference, plays a crucial role in
attracting private investments to Haiti. The improved
security situation has turned Haiti into a more
attractive destination for such investments, and the
creation of urgently needed long-term job opportunities
would further consolidate the achievements reached in
the past years.
Let me also thank Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his strong
leadership of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti.
The focus of European Union’s efforts is shifting
from support of democratic reform and rehabilitation to
economic recovery and basic services. The EU indeed
believes that strong socio-economic development is
required to sustain and consolidate the newfound
stability. Furthermore, the capacity of the State to
deliver basic services needs to be enhanced. The EU
cooperation strategy with Haiti for 2008 to 2013 is
based on these elements. The strategy, funded with
€291 million, will primarily focus on infrastructure,
mainly the building of roads, as well as on governance.
Efforts in the socio-economic area must go hand
in hand with efforts to enhance Haiti’s institutions. To
that end, the international community must ensure that
its efforts to assist Haiti are based on a coherent

30

strategy with clearly defined benchmarks. As recently
pointed out by the independent United Nations expert
on human rights in Haiti, the reform of the Haitian
police is proceeding at a fast pace. Ongoing training
and vetting constitute essential elements for the
re-establishment of reliable and trustworthy security
institutions.
On the other hand, the justice system is still
hampered by deprivation and limited resources.
Ensuring access to justice for the rural poor remains a
high priority. The European Union strongly welcomes
the commitment of the Haitian Government to a
gradual takeover of the current nationwide legal aid
system set up jointly by MINUSTAH and the
International
Legal
Assistance
Consortium.
Overcrowded prisons constitute cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment. The financial difficulties are
enormous and the Haitian Government is encountering
huge problems. Nevertheless, we urge the Haitian
Government to invest more in the corrections system in
order to improve the sometimes life-threatening
conditions of the prisoners.
The European Union shares the view expressed in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/439) that
intensified efforts must be made to review pretrial
detention. National legislation that allows for the
separate detention of juveniles has to be adopted. We
also encourage the Security Council to consider a
separate budget for corrections officers.
When the Security Council reviews the mandate
of MINUSTAH in October, the issue of border
management control remains an area that has to be
carefully monitored. Operational assistance from the
international community will be critical to safeguard
and build upon the gains that have been made.
Another key area in building Haiti’s institutions
is the follow-up to the partial elections held in April
and June. The European Commission contributed to
these efforts in the amount of €3.3 million. A number
of electoral exercises lie ahead and the continued
support provided by the international community in
this area will be crucial. However, the Haitian people
will have to take the primary responsibility for
ensuring progress.
Haiti benefits from a generous donor base. It is
essential to improve coordination among donors to
avoid duplication. Also, more could be done within the
United Nations system to increase coordination.

09-50519

S/PV.6186

In recent years, there has been growing
recognition of the need to develop political strategies
for managing the transition from peacekeeping to
post-conflict peacebuilding. The Secretary-General’s
report outlines the challenges presented and identifies
ways of addressing them. We are committed to
supporting the Secretary-General in meeting these
challenges. The European Union will continue to
engage with Haiti and its people in the crucial period
ahead.

MINUSTAH has been a decisive factor in the
re-establishment of stability and security in the
country, assisting the Haitian people in its commitment
to democracy. When MINUSTAH was first established
by the Council in 2004, its main objective was to create
a secure and stable environment that would allow the
normal development of the political and constitutional
process in Haiti. The holding of senatorial elections in
April was thus a concrete example of the significant
progress in the realization of the Mission’s mandate.

The President: I give
representative of Argentina.

In April, I made a statement before this Council
to stress my country’s concern over the lack of
progress in the social and economic development of
Haiti, taking into account that without tangible
improvement in the living conditions of the Haitian
population, progress in the field of security and
stability could be undermined. I take this opportunity
to note the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/439) and the recommendations contained
therein, while regretting once again the grave economic
and social situation in which the country finds itself.
When we consider how things were in Haiti when
MINUSTAH was established, we must acknowledge
that the progress in the security situation and in the
political process is promising and reminds us that we
have a historic opportunity to advance in other fields.
Nevertheless, in order to move forward and launch a
new phase in Haiti, seizing upon the opportunity we
have today, the work of this Organization and the
international community must be more effective and
determined.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I wish to note that my delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti. I would also like to congratulate you,
Madam, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for September and to thank the United States
delegation for the timely organization of this open
debate on the situation in Haiti. Allow me, through
you, to thank the Prime Minister of Haiti, Mrs. PierreLouis; the Special Envoy for Haiti, former United
States President William Clinton; and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi
Annabi, for his very comprehensive briefing.
In addition, I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
importance of frequent open meetings of the Security
Council to allow all Member States to express their
opinions and to interact with the members of this body.
The question of Haiti is of fundamental
importance to Latin America in general, and to my
country in particular. The fact that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) is the first
peacekeeping operation with a majority of Latin
American participants, among its military contingents
and in its military command, reflects that importance.
The many technical cooperation programmes that Latin
American countries carry out in Haiti, mainly oriented
to strengthening Haitian institutions, are also a
reflection of the importance of the question for the
region. In this regard, allow me to recall that my
country is cooperating with Haiti to strengthen the
Ministry of Investment and Planning and the Ministry
of Economy and Finance, and in the field of food
security through the PRO-HUERTA programme, which
is aimed at developing community gardens.

09-50519

At this stage, it is important to recall that the
purpose of our presence in Haiti is to work to ensure
that
the
Haitian
Government
assumes
its
responsibilities, thereby making the presence of the
United Nations no longer necessary. We understand the
importance of learning the lessons of the past and of
avoiding a hasty withdrawal from Haiti, as
demonstrated by our continued support for
MINUSTAH through the provision of military and
police officers. Nevertheless, we believe that the action
of the international community in Haiti cannot and
must not consist merely in the presence of MINUSTAH
in its current configuration. We understand that it is
necessary to adapt the composition of MINUSTAH to
the situation on the ground. There is an urgent need to
move ahead in strengthening the institutional capacities
of the country and in improving the coordination of
international cooperation in order to align it with the

31

S/PV.6186

priorities set by the Haitian Government and enhance
its efficacy and visibility. The United Nations has a
fundamental role to play in that regard.
I cannot conclude without stressing one of the
main conclusions of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on Haiti, which highlights that,
“[f]ive years into the stabilization process, there is
substantial reason to believe that Haiti is moving away
from a past of conflict, towards a brighter future of
peaceful development” (S/2009/439, para. 83). Given
this unprecedented opportunity, it is essential to ensure
the continued commitment of the international
community in support of the security and State
institutions of Haiti, as well as of its economic and
social development. To that end, Argentina supports the
extension of the mandate of MINUSTAH for an
additional year and will work actively within the
Group of Friends of Haiti in the elaboration of the draft
resolution in that respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway commends the
United Nations and the Office of the Secretary-General
for their comprehensive involvement in Haiti. Norway
welcomes the appointment of President Bill Clinton as
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti. We believe
that President Clinton can play a key role in mobilizing
and coordinating the international community’s support
to the Haitian Government in consolidating peace.
Norway was the first country to give financial support
to the Office of the Special Envoy, and we look
forward to receiving updates in the weeks and months
to come.
Norway has also supported capacity-building
efforts in Haiti, both within public entities and in civil
society, with particular attention paid to gender issues
and the political participation of women. We have
cooperated closely with United Nations agencies and
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), and will continue this dialogue. In
addition, we have supported direct initiatives in Haiti
focusing on areas that can foster stability, such as
initiatives promoting dialogue between political
parties, non-governmental organizations and church
communities.
MINUSTAH has played a significant role in
creating conditions conducive to building peace, and
we commend the work of Special Representative of the

32

Secretary-General Annabi and the women and men of
MINUSTAH. However, much work remains to be done
to establish incentives and a framework for economic
and social development. We welcome President
Clinton’s ambition to work with the private sector to
increase foreign investment and thereby create more
jobs and opportunities for the people of Haiti.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/439), a substantial international military and
police presence will be necessary for another year. The
support of the international community must continue.
Member States’ engagement in the larger ongoing
United Nations reforms will also be crucial, as reforms
are vital to ensuring effectiveness and flexibility in the
field. Norway supports the Secretary-General in his
planning beyond 2010 to ensure a smooth and gradual
handover of the responsibilities and activities of
MINUSTAH to the Haitian State apparatus. The
success of a handover will depend on the quality of its
planning and must be done in close coordination with
the Government of Haiti, the United Nations system as
a whole and other national and international partners.
The President: I
representative of Canada.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Madam, and your delegation for
organizing this important meeting. Our also express
our special appreciation to Prime Minister Pierre-Louis
for joining this debate and for her outstanding
leadership. I would also like to thank President
Clinton, Special Envoy for Haiti, for his cogent
remarks and for his dedication to Haiti. I also thank
Mr. Annabi for his insightful presentation and for his
excellent work in Haiti.
As members of the Council know, Haiti is a top
priority for Canada. During the Council’s public debate
on Haiti last April (see S/PV.6101), the international
community had every reason to be proud of progress
achieved in Haiti since 2006, particularly in terms of
security, while remaining aware of the continuing
challenges. In the past few months, a series of events
has provided more opportunities to build on progress
achieved in Haiti. The Washington conference was a
success because it generated high-level commitment
and elicited a number of financial commitments.
President Clinton’s appointment as Special Envoy was
another turning point. Canada appreciates the way in
which the Secretary-General has focused international

09-50519

S/PV.6186

attention on Haiti, and we applaud his decision to
appoint President Clinton. But the biggest obstacle to
addressing the complex problems facing Haiti and the
magnitude of the work to be done is apathy, which
must be overcome in order to achieve success.
(spoke in French)
In a context such as the one in Haiti, where
everything must be done immediately, it is worthwhile
to set certain priorities. First, progress has been noted
in Haiti over the past few years because there was a
political consensus among Haitian authorities. Given
the multiple challenges the country is facing, it is
essential to maintain that consensus among Haiti’s
decision makers in order to work for the common good
of the people. Of course, the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard
is crucial.
We know that the great majority of Haitians want
reform in order to develop their country and find
reasons to hope. Only those who profit from instability
and insecurity have an interest in maintaining the status
quo. We must all remain vigilant and not be misled by
individuals who seek to continue to profit from a
situation that is unacceptable to the Haitian people.
Maintaining the status quo will only set the stage for
another crisis. Eight United Nations interventions over
the past two decades should be sufficient proof of that.

that those indicators need further fine-tuning.
Nevertheless, we commend the Secretary-General for
having launched that process.
Thirdly, the recent senatorial elections reminded
us of the importance of the success of such events to
the strengthening of democracy. The elections equally
reminded us of the importance of strengthening
parliamentary institutions. The recently established
political consensus must prevail in parliament. Canada
also expects that the strengthening of the parliamentary
system will take place with greater emphasis on
responsibility for development in Haiti and on the
public interest, as the Prime Minister underscored
during this debate.
Canada has the honour of chairing the Economic
and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti.
Last June, the Group released its fifth report
(E/2009/105), which included some of the
recommendations I have just mentioned. The Group
also emphasized the need to reconcile economic
growth objectives with huge gaps in basic services. We
also highlighted connections between issues as varied
as food
security, energy, the environment,
landholdings, access to credit and civil registration.
Lastly, the Group wished to see better use of
MINUSTAH engineers to improve the synergy between
the mission’s mandate and development needs in Haiti.

Secondly, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) must remain in Haiti
for as long as it takes to strengthen the capacity of the
country’s institutions and ensure a stable and secure
environment for its citizens. Premature withdrawal
would have devastating consequences and could undo
everything that has been accomplished so far.
MINUSTAH should be able to rely upon the
appropriate resources and mandate to continue to play
its role as successfully as it has to date.

The international community has provided
considerable assistance to Haiti, which is must increase
further. While seeking to increase the number of
partners countries that lend their support to Haiti, it is
our responsibility to improve the effectiveness of that
aid through better coordination between donors and the
Government, and through an emphasis on tangible
results that improve the quality of life for Haitians. A
primary objective must be to strengthen the capacities
and abilities of the State and, by extension, its
legitimacy in the eyes of the Haitian people.

MINUSTAH’s work must clearly be paired with
the successful reform of the Haitian National Police
and reform of the judicial and correctional systems.
Canada would also like to highlight how useful the
indicators of progress put forth by the SecretaryGeneral last year were when the future of MINUSTAH
was being considered. With regard to the police, it will
soon be time to make plans for 2011 and beyond, in
collaboration with the Haitian National Police. The
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/439) has
updated the indicators somewhat, but Canada believes

Canada will continue to cooperate with Haiti,
fully respecting its Constitution, culture, history and
diversity. We stress the need to work with a united
Haitian people and with national authorities that are
politically inclusive and convinced of the need to move
forward together democratically towards true political,
economic and social development. The progress
achieved in certain areas is encouraging for the future.
Setbacks due to hurricanes and political instability in
2008 may make the scope of the work to be done seem

09-50519

33

S/PV.6186

daunting. However, the international community has no
alternative but to move forward on the question of
Haiti. In conclusion, that is why, despite the extent of
the challenges, Canada remains clearheaded and
confident and determined to continue to contribute to
Haiti’s development.

institutional areas and would also reinforce the plan for
peacebuilding that has been established. All of this
requires a strategic alliance between both sectors,
which will help strengthen the capacity of the Haitian
State, a fundamental goal that will eventually bring
stability and security to this beloved Caribbean nation.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.

Secondly, I would like to reiterate, because it is
so relevant, the need for us to bear in mind the
recommendation made by the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
for Haiti of the Economic and Social Council, just
referred to by the distinguished Ambassador of Canada,
namely, that we should look into how we can make
better use of the engineers of MINUSTAH in order to
create greater synergy between the mandate of the
Mission and the development needs of Haiti.

Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
would like to associate itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti. We also welcome the
President’s decision to hold this open debate on the
situation in Haiti, as this issue will soon be the focus of
attention when a discussion is held on the desirability
of renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I should
also like to welcome Mrs. Michèle Duvivier PierreLouis, Prime Minister of Haiti, and to thank her for her
briefing on the situation in her country. I welcome the
positive briefing of President William Clinton, Special
Envoy for Haiti. I would also like to thank Mr. Hédi
Annabi, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his detailed briefing on the progress made
in Haiti.
Also under your presidency, Madam, there was an
opportunity, last Friday, 4 September, for an exchange
of views with police- and troop-contributing countries
on the item before the Council today. What is clear is
that, although the situation in Haiti has obviously
improved, its stability and level of security is still
weak. That is why, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2009/439), it is essential that
the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) be renewed. Peru is
firmly committed to making its contribution to this
goal.
The representative of Uruguay has already
detailed the plans and proposals that we wish to
contribute to this matter. I would like, however, to
stress two points that are of crucial importance to
making a decisive contribution to the consolidation of
stability and development in Haiti. First, in order to
deal with the grave social and economic situation, as
discussed in the Secretary-General’s report, we must
see greater interaction between the public and private
sectors in Haiti. This would strengthen the
implementation of the necessary reforms in the various

34

We are convinced that with the very important
contribution of the Special Envoy for Haiti, President
William Clinton, and with the active and sustained
participation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi Annabi, and the
contribution of MINUSTAH and in particular the
countries of the region, we can continue the work that
has been done to date. This will help the people and
Government of Haiti face with decisiveness, energy
and a healthy optimism the challenges they must deal
with in achieving sustainable development in their
country. Here I would like to reiterate the unwavering
commitment of Peru to contributing towards the
stabilization and development of Haiti.
The President: I
representative of Cuba.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Benítez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): For
Cuba, Haiti is more than just our closest neighbour,
barely 45 miles from our shores. The Haitian
revolution, which sheltered and encouraged several
revolutionary groups from our continent during crucial
times of the Latin American struggle against colonial
domination, has also had a special influence on the fate
and formation of the Cuban nation. This is why Cuba
particularly welcomes the presence among us today of
the distinguished Prime Minister of Haiti, Her
Excellency Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis.
Unfortunately, Haiti, cradle of the liberation
struggles against colonialism in the American continent
and the first independent republic in Latin America and
the Caribbean, has been for many years, and continues
to be, a country neglected by the international
community. Haiti is one of the clearest examples of the

09-50519

S/PV.6186

disastrous
consequences
of
colonialism
and
neocolonialism, of the unjust and exclusionary
international
order,
and
of
the
continued
interventionism characterizing its turbulent history.
When the situation in Haiti in addressed in the
framework of the United Nations, the focus is almost
always on the so-called security issues, while, despite
all the rhetoric, the necessary urgent attention to the
serious structural, economic and social problems that
the country suffers from is minimized for all practical
purposes. Lasting peace, security and stability in this
nation demand, first of all, that we eliminate poverty
and underdevelopment. There can be no peace and
stability without development. There can be no peace
and lasting stability when over 70 per cent of the
population lives in poverty. Half of the labour force is
unemployed. Life expectancy is under 52 years old.
Illiteracy affects 48 of every 100 inhabitants, and
almost half the population is malnourished and has no
access to drinking water.
Last year, Haiti suffered a new, devastating
setback caused by four successive hurricanes and
tropical storms that lashed the country. The death toll
was immense, and the damage to the infrastructure and
economy is the most serious that Haiti has faced since
the beginning of the twenty-first century. To all this,
we must add the negative impact of the current global,
economic and financial crisis.
Haiti can only move forward towards a future of
prosperity if it has the sustained and firm support of
the international community. There can be no doubt
that since the establishment of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in 2004,
security on the ground has improved. However, the
actions of the international community cannot be
limited to the presence of MINUSTAH. There has not
been, and there cannot be, a military solution to the
situation in Haiti.
Being a small country under blockade with very
limited resources, Cuba maintains and increases its
cooperation with its Caribbean sister nation mainly in the
health sector, but in other areas as well, such as energy,
education and sports. Cuban cooperation teams are
working throughout Haiti in the most remote places. Of
the 400 such workers, 336 of them in the area of health,
working in 134 different communities around the
country. Since Cuban cooperation with Haiti began, in
1998, Cuban doctors have provided almost 14.5 million

09-50519

consultations; they have saved the lives of 232,000
patients and have performed more than 110,400
deliveries and 250,000 surgical operations.
Cuba has trained 544 Haitian doctors, and 670
Haitian scholarship holders are studying health
specialties in Cuba today, totally free of charge. More
than 800 Haitian youths have graduated from Cuban
schools as professionals. In the framework of
Operation Miracle, the cooperative programme
developed by Cuba and Venezuela to provide free care
to patients in various countries suffering from eye
problems, more than 42,000 Haitian patients have
undergone surgery, many of them in two
ophthalmology centres and three surgery clinics
donated by Cuba. The implementation of the Cuban
literacy programme “Yes, I Can”, has to date provided
4,500 illiterate Haitians with the opportunity to learn to
read and write.
What Cuba is doing today for Haiti is only a
modest example of how much more could be achieved
through international cooperation and assistance,
especially by those States with greater economic and
financial resources than ours. The resources that Haiti
can marshal to face these multiple challenges are very
limited. The massive contribution of the international
community, as well as an increase in its assistance and
fulfilment of its financial and human commitments to
Haiti, is an unavoidable duty.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that Haiti
can always count on the assistance of and on bonds of
solidarity with the people and Government of Cuba. In
this, we are simply fulfilling our duty and honouring
our debt of gratitude to a sister nation that has always
proved its firm and unvarying friendship and solidarity
with Cuba.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on the initiatives that the delegation
of the United States has proposed for the programme of
work for this period. In particular, the holding of this
open debate on the question concerning Haiti gives us
the opportunity to discuss points of view with regard to
the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

35

S/PV.6186

I would also like to thank former President Bill
Clinton, the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
for his informative briefing. His indisputable
leadership contributes to revitalizing international
commitment and support so that Haiti can successfully
tackle the challenges that it faces. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the Prime Minister of Haiti,
Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Mr. Hédi Annabi.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/439)
on
MINUSTAH
recounts
the
achievements of the past five years. However, it also
reminds us of the fragility of the progress if the
commitment and joint action of the leaders and the
people of Haiti, the United Nations and the
international community are not sustained.
My country wishes to underscore the importance
of those efforts being guided by a comprehensive
vision that seeks to improve the economic and social
conditions in Haiti and fosters development and
institution-building. In that endeavour, we believe that
it is vital to restore an environment of security that
guarantees lasting stability.
That is why Colombia focuses its cooperation
initiatives with Haiti within the broader context of its
assistance for the development of the wider Caribbean
region. At the same time, it supplements those efforts
with timely bilateral and regional initiatives.
Within the technical cooperation initiatives with
the wider Caribbean, we have had the opportunity to
support Haiti in three areas essential to its economic
development: food security, work-oriented education
and disaster prevention. In addition, through
inter-institutional initiatives and with other donors, we
have given support in the environmental field through
initiatives of solid residue treatment and hydrographic
basin management.
In MINUSTAH, we have contributed to
institutional capacity-building initiatives by increasing
the number of police experts in the fight against
kidnapping and the global drug problem, and in
training for the police and the judicial police. We have
gone from contributing two officers in 2006 to
27 officers in the current year.
I would like also to highlight the information
provided by the Assistant Secretary-General for

36

Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, at a
recent meeting with the troop-contributing countries in
Haiti, in which he underscored the success of
MINUSTAH’s anti-kidnapping efforts. The decrease
from some 30 kidnappings a month in the first six
months of 2008 to less than eight per month in the
same period of 2009 is a promising development.
My country knows the value of those outcomes.
Consequently, we will continue to expand our
contribution to MINUSTAH and to work jointly with
the other countries of the region that support the
mission’s work.
In the spirit of finding comprehensive and
effective solutions, my country is participating in two
cases of coordination with Latin American countries:
the Coordination Group for Latin American
Cooperation with the Haitian National Police and the
2x9 mechanism, comprising the Deputy Ministers for
Defence and for Foreign Affairs of countries in the
region. We find the contribution of those mechanisms
to be of great value and will continue to support their
work.
Also in the area of security, the Ministry of
National Defence of Colombia and the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security of Haiti have signed a
memorandum of understanding in order to strengthen
bilateral cooperation in tackling the challenges of
transnational organized crime, the illicit trade in drugs
and psychotropic substances, kidnapping and extortion,
through training activities, equipment donation and
institutional capacity-building.
Under that agreement, a high-level Colombian
National Police mission was deployed in Haiti from
June 2009 for a period of 60 days to advise Haitian
police personnel on strategic planning and institutionbuilding, as well as on the capabilities needed to
address the security challenges. In addition, police
support equipment will be delivered, and training
programmes on human rights and the handling of
equipment provided by Colombia will take place.
Colombia acknowledges the importance attached,
in considering the renewal of MINUSTAH’s mandate,
to efforts to strengthen the fight against illicit drug
trafficking, in particular with regard to resources for
land and maritime interdiction. That is essential in the
context of a comprehensive strategy aimed at
institution-building. My country will continue to
provide support to MINUSTAH in the field of security

09-50519

S/PV.6186

and reaffirms its readiness to offer its experience and
the expertise of its officials in training the specialized
anti-narcotics teams of the Haitian National Police.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the importance of
the efforts to preserve the progress made in developing
the capacities of the Haitian National Police. The
principal security challenges that Haiti faces are of a
civilian nature and need a police approach. In
particular, it is very important, with regard to
initiatives such as the one described by the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 37 of his report, that alternatives
be explored to avoid reducing material and human
resources in the ongoing reform of the Haitian National
Police.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Madam, I should like to congratulate your
country on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September, and also
to thank you for having convened this open debate on
the situation in Haiti. Chile associates itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti and
reiterates its commitment to the process of stabilization
and peacebuilding in that country.
From the start of the crisis in February 2004,
Chile joined the efforts of the international community
to continue supporting that sister Caribbean nation, as
part of the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti in an
early stage, and later with an active presence in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Likewise, it has contributed to Haiti’s
development through bilateral cooperation, supporting
the generation of national capacities in those less
developed areas where Chile is strong.
This year marks five years of MINUSTAH’s
presence in that Caribbean nation. In that regard, we
would like in particular to underscore Latin America’s
ongoing commitment to the future of Haiti. The
countries of the region have sought to harmonize
consistent and sustainable strategies to optimize our
support both in the peacekeeping mission and in
training and cooperation programmes with the Haitian
National Police.
We are pleased to see that the security situation in
Haiti is stable, and we welcome MINUSTAH’s efforts

09-50519

in that regard. However, the fragility of the
achievements in that field concerns us, principally
owing to how little progress has been made on social
and economic development. We believe that the link
between security and development is fundamental to
any effort to achieve sustainable peace.
Chile supports and welcomes the appointment of
former President William Clinton as United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti. He will help the Government
and the people of Haiti in their endeavours to create
jobs, improve infrastructure, provide basic services,
enhance disaster readiness and recovery, ensure private
sector investment and attain increased international
support.
We would like to thank former President Clinton
for his briefing at this debate. We are optimistic about
his mission’s prospects for success. Given that
peacebuilding efforts require high levels of
coordination between all stakeholders, we believe it
would be worthwhile to consider the participation of
experts from Latin America and the Caribbean,
alongside those from Haiti itself, as part of the Special
Envoy’s technical teams.
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative Hédi Annabi on behalf of
Haiti. We also appreciate the presence and statement of
Her Excellency Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis,
Prime Minister of Haiti.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate Chile’s
readiness to continue to cooperate with Haitian
authorities and the international community in the
search for lasting peace in Haiti, while fully observing
and promoting human rights, strengthening the rule of
law and democracy and making real progress in raising
the level of development of its people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): Although I have received a five-page
statement from my capital, in the interests of time I
shall read out a condensed version.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and
your entire delegation for having organized this
important meeting. On behalf of the Government and
people of my country, I should also like to thank
President Bill Clinton, Special Envoy of the Secretary-

37

S/PV.6186

General for Haiti, as well as Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
their informative briefings today and for their
continuing work on behalf of the Republic of Haiti.
The Dominican Republic commends the efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to address and resolve
the numerous needs of the Haitian people. We also
acknowledge the presence of Mrs. Michèle Duvivier
Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of Haiti, from whose wise
comments this afternoon all of us have benefited.
We welcome the holding of an important donors
conference last April in Washington, during which
commitments in the amount of an additional
$350 million in assistance were pledged to Haiti. More
recently, international financial institutions cancelled
$1.2 billion of Haiti’s multilateral debt. Similarly, the
countries of the Paris Club cancelled $214.7 million of
the country’s bilateral debt. The Dominican Republic,
through both President Leonel Fernández Reyna and
Foreign Minister Carlos Morales Troncoso, has
strongly called for both of those steps to be taken. It is
now urgent that the pledges of financial assistance be
given effect and that they have a direct impact upon the
resumption of growth, the creation of jobs, the
establishment of infrastructure, the provision of social
services and, given Haiti’s precarious natural
environment, its capacity to feed itself and develop
peacefully.
The Dominican Republic is also a poor country.
As Haiti’s neighbour on the Island of Hispaniola, we
too must confront the devastating natural events that
periodically beset us, in addition to the challenges
posed to social cohesion by an international economic
and financial crisis that has triggered a decrease in our
exports and a slowdown in tourism. The Dominican
Republic is therefore prepared to join our colleagues in
the Haitian Government in the framework of the HaitiDominican
Republic
Joint
Commission. The
Dominican Republic’s teams were formed long ago.
Their agendas include numerous initiatives that must
now be finalized with our Haitian brothers.
In that connection, I should like to add that we
are more than willing to jointly implement and make
the best use of the economic association agreement that
we negotiated with the European Union, which Haiti
has yet to sign. In that connection, we would like to
thank the Secretary-General for emphasizing the
importance of the Joint Commission in his report
(S/2009/439), as well as for his objectivity in

38

addressing
recently.

the

regrettable

events

that

occurred

Haiti alone is the master of its future.
Nevertheless, no member of the international
community can be indifferent to its enormous urgent
needs. The Dominican Republic believes that the
international community’s generosity towards Haiti is,
and will always be, absolutely essential. In recent
statements, Haitian Senator Rudolph Henry Boulos
expressed important views as to my country’s role,
which I would very briefly like to refer to here.
In Senator Henry Boulos’s opinion, about
350,000 Haitian labourers work in the construction
industry in the Dominican Republic, with another
300,000 working in agriculture and 3,000 others in
specialized tourism activities. Moreover, according to
his own estimates, a large part of Haiti’s middle class
resides in the Dominican Republic, providing a flow of
remittances to a significant part of the Haitian
population. If we combine that with the thousands of
Haitians who are currently studying in Dominican
universities and who receive official tuition and
transportation assistance and if we also take into
consideration the huge numbers of Haitians in our
schools and hospitals, we would then have a more
accurate picture of the Dominican Republic’s
contribution to Haiti.
We share the Secretary-General’s vision for Haiti.
In that connection, the Dominican Republic supports
the idea that the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti should, in addition to the functions established
in Security Council resolutions, continue to patrol on
the Haitian side of the border area, so as to strengthen
security and effectively combat the trafficking in
weapons and drugs, as well as other associated crimes.
Haiti continues to face significant and
unavoidable challenges. Although our geographic
reality requires mutual cooperation and solidarity, none
of our joint efforts will be enough unless we have the
generous and effective support of the international
community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Cordeiro Dunlop (Brazil): I first wish to
congratulate the United States on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I also commend your delegation, Madam

09-50519

S/PV.6186

President, for holding this open debate well in advance
of the scheduled renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
This meeting provides an opportunity for the wider
membership to express its views to the Council in a
timely manner.
I warmly welcome Prime Minister Michèle
Duvivier Pierre-Louis to the Council today. Her
outstanding leadership has certainly contributed to the
recent success in Haiti. I thank her for her statement. I
am also pleased to welcome President Clinton among
us today. His appointment as the United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti attests to the importance that
the Secretary-General attaches to that country.
Mr. Clinton’s generous decision to put his remarkable
prestige, leadership and experience in the service of the
Haitian people is truly commendable.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for his
informative briefing.
Brazil would like to associate itself with the
comments made by the representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
Brazil
welcomes
the
recent
positive
developments in Haiti, as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report (S/2009/439). The holding
of elections for the Senate, the achievements in the
consideration of the legislative agenda, the enhanced
dialogue on the main national questions through
presidential commissions and the gradual strengthening
of domestic institutions are all encouraging indicators.
Also noteworthy are the domestic macroeconomic
stability and the positive forecast for economic growth
in 2009. The cancellation of Haiti’s bilateral and
multilateral debt is yet another positive indication of
progress.
Last but not least, the personal involvement of
former President Clinton will certainly contribute to
keeping Haiti high on the international agenda.
All of this allows for the cautious optimism that
many, including the Secretary-General, have expressed
with regard to Haiti. There is a feeling that a priceless
window of opportunity has been opened and conditions
seem ripe for the country to consolidate the gains
achieved in recent years and lay the foundation for
long-term development.

09-50519

For this positive scenario to become reality, the
Haitian authorities and the international community
must renew and improve their partnership. The
political and economic leadership of Haiti must show
practical commitment to the well-being of the people.
This implies delivering a modicum of public services
to all Haitians and, just as important, putting aside
differences in order to agree on and implement the
constitutional and other reforms that will ensure
adequate governance in the years to come.
For its part, the international community must
improve the quality and quantity of its assistance to
Haiti. Increased coordination among donors and full
alignment of their aid with Haiti's national priorities
are indispensable. It is also vital that the prompt and
full disbursement of pledges made in April at the
Washington donors conference be guaranteed.
Such partnership is particularly relevant in
addressing what the Secretary-General describes in his
report as the most acute problem in Haiti's human
rights landscape: the lack of progress in the realization
of economic, social and cultural rights of the people.
We all know that the progress achieved in the area of
security is not enough to ensure the country's stability.
The key to the sustainability of our common
peacekeeping and stabilization efforts is employment
generation. Peace will thrive only once poverty and
deprivation are substantially reduced. It is imperative
to address the current infrastructure bottlenecks, attract
private investment and generate new jobs. We are
confident that President Clinton will contribute to
disseminating this vision and encourage the fulfilment
of the pledges that will make available the resources
needed by the country.
Brazil very much praises the excellent work of
MINUSTAH, in particular its role in maintaining
stability throughout the country and supporting the
Government's efforts to build institutional capacity.
The latter task is of crucial importance. Without
capacity-building, our collective and individual
political and financial investment in Haiti will be lost
and United Nations success short-lived. This is
especially true in the case of the Haitian National
Police. Every effort must continue to be made to ensure
that Haiti can soon rely on security forces capable of
operating in a professional and autonomous manner.
The
quick-impact
projects
executed
by
MINUSTAH have proven increasingly important for

39

S/PV.6186

the lives of many Haitians. As recommended in the
most recent report of the Economic and Social
Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti
(E/2009/105), it would be important to envision
possibilities for greater synergy between the mandate
of the mission and the development needs of Haiti.
In the light of the foregoing, Brazil welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend the
mandate of MINUSTAH for one year. We have
consistently indicated that Brazilian forces are ready to
stay in Haiti for as long as the Haitian Government and
the Security Council deem necessary.
We also support the proposed reconfiguration of
the security forces of the mission. The changes actually
mirror positive developments on the ground, while
maintaining the same overall size of the contingent,
which is the correct approach to take given the stillfragile security situation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for the opportunity given to my
delegation to participate in this open debate, which
enables me to reaffirm Spain’s commitment to the
people and the Government of Haiti in their ongoing
efforts to build stability — a necessary condition for
development. I take this opportunity to congratulate
former President Clinton on his recent nomination as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mr. Hédi Annabi, and to express
to them the full support of the Spanish Government. I
also welcome the presence among us for this debate of
Mrs. Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of
Haiti.
My delegation endorses the statement made
earlier by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.
We share the view that it is necessary to continue
to help Haiti to become a viable State able to stand on
its own and Spain is working hard towards that goal
bilaterally and multilaterally. For example, Spain has
become the fifth largest bilateral donor, with an annual
contribution of some €20 million, as well as the third
largest donor at last April’s Washington donors
conference, with a contribution of $37 million. I should

40

recall that Spain also actively participates by providing
44 police officers to MINUSTAH’s police component.
As a member of the European Union, together with
France, Spain is providing the largest number of police
officers to that component. Spain is also a member of
the Economic and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti.
Although we know that the international
community must continue to support Haiti, we feel that
its support should not be limited exclusively to official
development assistance, as important as that may be.
For that reason, we are convinced that we need to
complement official development assistance by
promoting employment generation through investment,
in particular through private initiatives, as highlighted
in the report of Professor Paul Collier. In that respect,
the international trade mission of private investors,
which will visit Haiti in October led by the Special
Envoy, is particularly important.
Spain very much agrees with the decision of the
Secretary-General to appoint former President Clinton
as Special Envoy for Haiti. He is a person with a
comprehensive vision of the country’s needs, and he
has shown his ability to act on both political and
socio-economic issues. Also, his work within the
United Nations will enable him to promote consensus
within the international community.
The process of institutionalization in Haiti is
essential for progress and for strengthening the
country. Pursuit of that goal must continue through
democratization of State bodies and by rationalizing its
institutions and making them more effective. Here, we
believe that the ongoing constitutional reform should
be supported by the holding of elections at the end of
the year. Once again, Spain is ready to provide its
support for these.
As part of the institutionalization process in
Haiti, Spain thinks that necessary efforts must continue
towards establishing a State based on the rule of law
worthy of the name. In that respect, it is essential to
prioritize the reinforcement and improvement of the
judicial and penal systems through close cooperation
between the Haitian authorities and the United Nations.
We express our support for the gradual
reconfiguration of MINUSTAH’s dual military and
police component, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2009/439) dated 1 September
2009. I am referring to a reduction of 120 troops within

09-50519

S/PV.6186

the military component, given the unlikelihood of new
large-scale security operations and the need to
strengthen rapid-deployment and monitoring capacities
in remote areas, including land and maritime borders.
Such a step would allow for an increase of 120 officers
in the police component, given the need to continue to
support the Haitian National Police in its efforts to
ensure public safety.
I reiterate the importance that my country
attaches to the reform of the Haitian National Police
with a view to ensuring the country’s sustainable
stability. In that regard, Spain welcomes the
recommendation in the report of the Presidential
Commission on Public Security, issued on 6 August
2009, to establish an additional security force with a
paramilitary status that would be comprised of between
4,000 and 5,000 members to ensure border and rural
security, provide protection from natural disasters and
environmental degradation, and combat illicit
trafficking.
In conclusion, along with the European Union,
Spain supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that the Security Council extend MINUSTAH’s
mandate for an additional 12 months, until 15 October
2010.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela appreciates the initiative of the
Security Council to consider the situation in Haiti for
the second time this year. This is a very important issue
for our country, given the historic and geographic ties
that have bound us to the Haitian people since our
establishment as a sovereign republic. We have shared
in fraternal solidarity the experience of emancipation.
The rise to independence and sovereignty is a process
both relevant and key to understanding current
developments on our continent today, which reaffirm
the emancipation of our peoples and our political,
economic and cultural liberation against a backdrop of
social equality and justice.
Secretary-General
Ban
Ki-moon’s
report
(S/2009/439) sets out the need to fully overcome
Haiti’s problems. By and large, Haiti’s circumstances
are a reflection of poverty, social inequality and the
interference of foreign Powers that destabilizes
countries.

09-50519

The Secretary-General has proclaimed the need to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and has asserted that
the country’s institutions remain fragile. Venezuela
believes that cooperative efforts and multilateral
actions should contribute to strengthening democracy
and political, economic and social progress in Haiti. It
is crucial to take account of the opinions of the people
and Government of Haiti, who should exercise their
sovereignty in establishing the nature of cooperation
with their country.
We welcome General Assembly resolution 63/294
of 30 June 2009, which emphasizes the need to hire
Haitian staff wherever possible, with a view to
replacing foreign officials and staff.
At this meeting, we have heard a statement from
former United States President William Jefferson
Clinton, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Haiti. In his briefing, he set out the initiatives and
programmes he intends to carry out. We acknowledge
his concern about the difficult conditions in that
brotherly Caribbean country. We appreciate former
President
Clinton’s
acknowledgement
of
the
contribution to Haiti’s development being made by
Venezuela and the sisterly Republic of Cuba.
Indeed, the Bolivarian Government has, in a spirit
of solidarity, undertaken assistance efforts on behalf of
the Government and people of Haiti. Haiti’s
participation in our PetroCaribe energy cooperation
initiative has contributed to reducing that country’s
economic difficulties. In addition, our country has set
up electrical power stations that provide service to up
to 30 per cent of Haiti’s population. That cooperation
contributes to the provision of such public services as
schools and hospitals. Together with the sisterly
Republic of Cuba, we are also carrying out Operation
Miracle. That cooperation programme provides patients
from various countries with free care for eye
conditions. As of February 2009, surgical procedures
had been performed on more than 40,000 Haitian
patients. Venezuela has also generously welcomed the
Haitian diaspora. Our university classrooms host
hundreds of young Haitians who will lend their
knowledge to the comprehensive development of their
country.
Haitian President René Préval has emphasized the
need for MINUSTAH to reinvent itself. That is truly a
challenge. Cooperation should seek to address the

41

S/PV.6186

urgent problems of that sisterly country without
undermining its sovereignty or imposing conditions
that could perpetuate the political and social
catastrophes of its past. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates its commitment to the Haitian
people and its support for the Government led by René
Préval.
I should like to conclude my statement by quoting
the very beautiful words spoken today by Prime
Minister Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis, which we
fully support:
“Haiti can once again, as it has already done in
the past, reach a moment of epiphany that will set
it firmly on the course of progress and
modernity”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): It is my distinct honour to
speak on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), which means that
I am speaking for Haiti twice. We welcome this
opportunity to again assess recent developments in our
sister Caribbean member State.
At the outset, may I convey, on behalf of
CARICOM member States, our sincere congratulations
to you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I ask that you
convey our appreciation to Permanent Representative
Ambassador Susan Rice. May I also say how pleased
we were earlier this afternoon to listen to the
statements made by the Prime Minister of Haiti, whose
words were very touching and emotional, and President
Bill Clinton, Special Envoy for Haiti. CARICOM
naturally and easily aligns itself with the statements
made by those two leaders.
Like any closely-knit family, we in CARICOM
continue to be concerned about any situation that
negatively affects any one of us. The natural affinity
we have in common goes far beyond being neighbours
who share the same hemispheric space or common
bodies of water. Undoubtedly, we face similar
challenges, although perhaps at different magnitudes,
and so our participation in this debate here today
comes not just as a matter of duty but out of a common
desire to see Haiti return to the path of sustainable
stability and security, thereby enhancing the prospects
for the economic growth and prosperity of its citizens,

42

as I believe all of us around this table have already
emphasized.
CARICOM naturally welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report, as contained in document S/2009/439.
This latest report provides an overall assessment of the
current situation and, from our vantage point, there are
encouraging developments despite the serious setbacks
that we described in our presentation to this body in
April (see S/PV.6101) and those described in the
Secretary-General’s report.
While the situation remains tremendously
complex, we note that, during the reporting period,
there was indeed increased political cooperation in a
number of very important areas, including the holding
of senatorial elections, the adoption of key legislation
and the pursuit of inclusive dialogue on a number of
major issues facing our sister CARICOM country.
These achievements were made against the backdrop of
a “generally calm” security environment and hinged
largely on efforts aimed at institutional support and the
strengthening of the State, including capacity-building
and technical assistance in crucial areas of governance,
and to some extent on improving the capacity of the
National Police and on the results of an overall
reduction in community violence.
CARICOM member States readily acknowledge
that the gains identified over the reporting period,
which to some may appear incremental, were not
achieved overnight but are the results of the fortitude,
resilience and determination of the Haitian people to
rise above and, surely, beyond their circumstances. As
an extension of their fortitude, resilience and
determination, the international community must surely
continue to extend the necessary support and assistance
in providing the platform upon which the fundamental
changes so crucial to Haiti’s reconstruction and
socio-economic
development
can
finally
be
irreversibly constructed.
CARICOM member States once again wish to
draw attention to the very pivotal role being played by
the courageous men and women of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) on the
ground in that country. That role extends practically to
all spheres, including the strengthening of national and
local institutional capacity and the area of human rights
where, during the period under review, MINUSTAH
sought to enhance its efforts to protect and promote
economic, social and cultural rights and to support

09-50519

S/PV.6186

women’s participation in the political process, the
enhancement of child protection capabilities, and the
promotion of HIV/AIDS health education. CARICOM
member States further welcome MINUSTAH’s ongoing
collaboration with the Government of Haiti in the area
of border management — an area that continues to be
of significant concern to the region — through
maritime, air and land patrols.
It is to be candidly acknowledged that, despite
the favourable assessment, the Secretary-General’s
report quite rightly also expresses a note caution,
acknowledging that the accomplishments remain
“extremely fragile, and [are] susceptible to setbacks or
reversal” (S/2009/439, para. 83).
In these circumstances, CARICOM fully supports
the initiatives undertaken during the period under
review to consolidate the progress achieved thus far.
Earlier today, we heard the statement made by former
United States President Bill Clinton. We regard the
recent appointment of Mr. Clinton as the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti is a signal
development in the stabilization process and one which
we anticipate will galvanize additional support from
the international community and raise the profile of its
efforts, thereby keeping the focus on our sister
Caribbean State until such time as the long-term
stability and security of Haiti are achieved. As a
demonstration of its commitment to the process, in July
2009 Haiti appointed Ambassador Leslie Voltaire as
special envoy to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Indeed, the continued support of the international
community will be crucial to the ongoing consolidation
of stability. In this connection, CARICOM member
States welcome and are indeed greatly encouraged by
the high level of commitment shown by the country’s
partners at the Washington, D.C., conference held in
April and by the subsequent cancellation of the
country’s debt, as has been mentioned around this table
this afternoon. These are undoubtedly strong
expressions of the profound confidence of the
international community first and foremost in the
Haitian people, the improvement of whose livelihood
and development remains vital to the success of the
stabilization process and beyond.
Of equal importance will be the continued
support of MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team in Haiti. Certainly, it will be necessary for the
fledgling security apparatus to continue to benefit from

09-50519

their expertise. Indeed, the technical assistance offered
by MINUSTAH is a vital tool in capacity-building,
particularly in the key areas of governance, the
development of structures for border management, the
rule of law, human rights and other areas. It is within
this context that CARICOM member States strongly
urge the Security Council, at the appropriate time, to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti for the benefit of the entire Haitian
population as it continues on its quest to forge
sustainable peace and economic development and
recovery.
Finally, CARICOM member States remain very
optimistic that the Haitian leadership — as exemplified
by the presence of the Prime Minister here this
evening — and people will undoubtedly capitalize on
the
opportunity
presented
by
the
ongoing
improvements in stability, and therefore call on all
Haiti’s partners to remain engaged within the country
and to persist in their efforts to bring about tangible
changes in the daily lives of the Haitian people.
The President: I
representative of Ecuador.

give

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I am
very pleased to see the United States assume the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I thank
your country, Madam, for its excellent initiative to
convene this open meeting to address the situation in
Haiti, which is undoubtedly of great interest to our
region.
My delegation is pleased to welcome the
presence of the Prime Minister of Haiti, Mrs. PierreLouis, and takes this opportunity to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his wise appointment of former
United States President Bill Clinton as United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti. With his experience and
through his good offices, he will thus be able to assist
the Government and the people of Haiti in their
stabilization efforts, with a view to helping build a
better future in that sister nation.
Ecuador also thanks Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
head of MINUSTAH.
Ecuador’s commitment to the stabilization
process in Haiti is known worldwide. Since the
beginning of the humanitarian crisis in February 2004,
we have been active participants in MINUSTAH,

43

S/PV.6186

consistent with our foreign policy of providing full
support during humanitarian crises and in the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. It is worth noting that we
contribute to peacekeeping operations not only by
deploying troops: we have an integrated policy
including, for example, the establishment in Ecuador of
the Peace Missions School, which prepares soldiers to
address problems in the areas of internally displaced
persons, refugees and humanitarian disasters, as well as
to resolving conflicts involving civilian. Ecuador is
participating in MINUSTAH with 66 individuals, only
four of them members of the military; the other 62 are
volunteers, team members and civilian engineers who
are contributing to road reconstruction in Haiti and
helping the population in endeavours to promote
socio-economic
development.
The
latter
is
acknowledged to be the weakest of the five areas
defined by the Secretary-General in his report of
1 September 2009 (S/2009/439).
Ecuador is pleased to see the improved conditions
in Haiti, in particular regarding political dialogue:
Prime Minister Pierre-Louis has taken office, there
have been senatorial elections, and President Préval
has established presidential commissions on issues of
national interest. This has bolstered the rule of law and
respect for human rights in that sister country. Ecuador
also appreciates the progress in extending State
authority, including in the areas of border control and
enhancing security.
At the same time, my country is concerned at the
stagnation in the levels of socio-economic development
and food security in Haiti. We therefore call for due
coordination
among
all actors
involved
in
peacebuilding in Haiti, in line with resolution 1840
(2008).
Ecuador trusts that the new United Nations
Special Envoy, former United States President Bill
Clinton, will help in meeting Haiti’s development
challenges and in mobilizing and increasing the
international support that the country so sorely needs.
Ecuador takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social
Council (E/2009/105) and believes that it merits
serious consideration by the Security Council.
Finally, Ecuador supports the recommendation
made by the Secretary-General in his most recent
report, that the mandate of MINUSTAH be extended
for a further year. There is no doubt that Haiti

44

continues to be threatened by food insecurity, growing
poverty and a fragile humanitarian situation. My
Government hopes that the joint efforts of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, donor countries and the Government
of Haiti will be optimally coordinated in order to
achieve the social, political and economic stability that
Haiti needs, wishes and deserves.
The President: Her Excellency Prime Minister
Pierre-Louis has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I am pleased to give her the floor now.
Mrs. Pierre-Louis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Madam President, for giving me
the floor once again so that I can thank Council
members and the other representatives who have made
statements during this open debate. I was deeply
moved by all that I heard in support of Haiti. When I
return to my country I shall convey to the President,
the Government, the parliament and the people of Haiti
the unreserved support voiced by the Security Council
and all the friends of Haiti who took the floor this
evening.
All those who participated in this important open
debate spoke of the following points. First, the country
has made significant progress thanks to the presence of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the efforts of the international
community — but also thanks to the efforts of the
Haitian people. However, grave problems continue to
threaten the stability and security that was restored two
years ago. These include poverty, unemployment, the
lack of opportunities for young people, the situation
faced by children, human and environmental
vulnerability, institutional weakness, international
crime, lack of investment and low productivity. Great
investment is therefore needed in all those areas. In
that sphere, the international community must keep its
promises and enable Haiti to implement its
socio-economic programme.
Without question, the Government must build its
capacities. It must continue the fight against
corruption; it must entrench the process of good
governance and provide leadership in seeking political
and social commitments that will determine Haiti’s
future on the path to progress and modernity for the
benefit of the entire population.
Haiti welcomes the appointment of President
Clinton as the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
Special Envoy for Haiti. We welcome the role and

09-50519

S/PV.6186

solidarity of the Group of Friends of Haiti, of all
fraternal countries in the Latin American and
Caribbean area and of the countries of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), which have stated their
solidarity with us.
In particular, we thank Mr. Annabi for his
leadership as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti. When MINUSTAH first deployed in
Haiti, there were fewer than 500 police officers in the
country. Today, the national police numbers more than
10,000. Everyone who visits the country acknowledges
that visible and tangible security progress has been
made. We are working to build a State based on the
rule of law and to strengthen security and stability, in
the hope that in the not-too-distant future the
Government will regain full sovereignty and carry out
its key function of ensuring the safety and security of
people and goods, linked with equitable and
sustainable development that respects life, the public
interest and the common good — which are at the heart
of development.
We are counting on you here in this Chamber, and
you can count on us.
The President: I thank Her Excellency Prime
Minister Pierre-Louis for her presence here today.

debate. We very much appreciate the strong support
publicly expressed this afternoon by members of the
Security Council and many other Member States for
the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), for the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and for the initiatives of President
Clinton in his capacity as Special Envoy. It will
encourage me and my colleagues in the field to
redouble our efforts to implement our mandate and to
work with our Haitian colleagues, friends and partners
to consolidate stability in the country and to assist in
putting Haiti on a durable development track.
I believe that what we have heard today from
Prime Minister Michèle Pierre-Louis underscores the
determination of the Haitian leadership to move
resolutely in that direction. I want to thank her for her
presence here today, despite her many other
obligations, and I want to assure her that we will
continue to do our best to support her efforts.
Finally, I would like to place on record our
appreciation for the excellent support provided by our
troop and police contributors. I would like in particular
to thank the Latin American countries for their major
contribution to our military component and for their
growing contribution to our police component.

I now give the floor to Special Representative
Annabi to respond to comments made by Member
States.

The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

Mr. Annabi: I thank you again, Madam
President, for having organized this very useful open

The meeting rose at 8.45 p.m.

09-50519

45
