S/PRST/2006/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 May 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5445th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 May 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Timor-Leste”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council received briefings from the Secretariat on the
situation in Timor-Leste on 24 and 25 May 2006.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at developments in
Timor-Leste, recognizes the urgency of the deteriorating security situation and
condemns acts of violence against people as well as destruction of property.
“The Security Council urges the Government of Timor-Leste to take all
necessary steps to end the violence with due respect for human rights and to
restore a secure and stable environment.
“The Security Council urges all parties in Timor-Leste to refrain from
violence and to participate in the democratic process.
“The Security Council acknowledges the request made by the
Government of Timor-Leste to the Governments of Portugal, Australia, New
Zealand and Malaysia to dispatch defence and security forces under bilateral
arrangements.
“The Security Council welcomes the positive responses made by the
governments concerned and fully supports their deployment of defence and
security forces to urgently assist Timor-Leste in restoring and maintaining
security.
“The Security Council looks forward to close cooperation between the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) and the forces of the
governments concerned.
“The Security Council welcomes the initiatives of the Secretary-General,
including his intention to send a special envoy to Timor-Leste in order to
facilitate the political dialogue.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the situation in Timor-Leste and to report on developments, as necessary.
“The Security Council will continue to monitor closely the situation in
Timor-Leste and confirms that it will act, as appropriate.”

06-36391 (E) 250506

*0636391*
