S/PRST/2007/16

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 May 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5686th meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 May 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the recent political developments in
Burundi whereby the Government has taken a number of corrective steps
aimed at promoting dialogue national reconciliation and social harmony. It
also takes note with appreciation of the measures taken to improve economic
governance and the transparency and accountability of public institutions. It
encourages the authorities to remain committed to pursuing these measures
and to completing the reforms agreed upon in the agreements reached in
Arusha in 2000, in Pretoria in 2003 and in Dar-es-Salaam in 2006, and calls on
all Burundian political stakeholders to maintain the spirit of dialogue,
consensus-building and inclusiveness, including in addressing the issue of
power sharing in an equitable manner, that enabled them to achieve a
successful transition in their country.
“The Security Council welcomes the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) and the support it provides to the peace
consolidation process.
“The Security Council commends the efforts undertaken by the African
Union Special Task Force and the South African Facilitation, in support of the
Dar-es-Salaam Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement of 7 September 2006. The
Security Council calls on both parties to pursue their efforts to resolve
outstanding issues in a spirit of cooperation. It welcomes the resumption of the
work of the Joint Verification Monitoring Mechanism (JMMV) on 28 May
2007 in order to address and remove the obstacles in the implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement. It encourages in particular the Government of Burundi
to remain committed to finding a political solution to the current deadlock, and
urges the Forces Nationales de Libération (Palipehutu-FNL) to fulfil
expeditiously their obligations under the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement.
It also invites BINUB and the African Union to continue to support these
efforts.
“The Security Council urges the Government to intensify its efforts on all
aspects of reform of the security sector and to address the issue of human
rights abuses committed by members of the security services, including by
07-36351 (E) 300507

*0736351*

S/PRST/2007/16

bringing perpetrators to justice and encourages international partners,
including BINUB in accordance with its mandate, to increase their support for
this endeavour.
“The Security Council urges the Government to step up its efforts to
combat impunity and to promote and protect human rights, paying in this
context particular attention to reducing the high level of gender-based violence
and of violence against children. It encourages the Secretary-General and the
Burundian authorities to pursue their dialogue with a view to agreeing on the
establishment of a transitional justice mechanism based on the highest
standards of justice and international human rights.
“The Security Council recalls the conclusions of its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict pertaining to parties in the situation of armed
conflict in Burundi (S/2007/92), and calls upon the Government of Burundi
and all parties, as well as United Nations agencies and donor governments to
cooperate with the Working Group with a view to following up on those
conclusions.
“The Security Council welcomes the briefing by the Chair of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission on its activities
relating to Burundi and, in this context, encourages the Government of
Burundi and BINUB to work closely with all stakeholders in order to devise a
sound strategic framework to foster the commitment of the Government of
Burundi and all its partners to the priorities for consolidating peace in Burundi.
The Security Council stresses the need to ensure broad national ownership of
the Strategic Framework, and looks forward to receiving further advice on
Burundi from the Peacebuilding Commission, particularly on those issues
covered by the Strategic Framework. It welcomes the outcome of the round
table convened by the Government with the support of the United Nations on
24 and 25 May in Bujumbura and urges donors to disburse the funds pledged
at this occasion.
“The Security Council welcomes the revival of the Economic
Community of the Countries of the Great Lakes Region (CEPGL), the Great
Lakes Conference process and the upcoming formal accession of Burundi to
the East African Community. It also welcomes the Government’s commitment
to the ratification of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region at the next parliamentary session. It encourages Burundi
and all countries in the region to sustain their efforts to foster peace, stability
and mutually beneficial development.”

2

07-36351
