A /69/PV.61

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

61st plenary meeting

Tuesday, 25 November 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Emiliou
(Cyprus), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/69/L.21, A/69/L.22,
A/69/L.23 and A/69/L.24)
The Acting President: Before the Assembly takes
action on the draft resolutions one by one, I should like
to remind members that they will have an opportunity
to explain their votes on all four draft resolutions before
and after action is taken on all of those resolutions.
Before giving the floor to the speakers in
explanation of vote before the voting, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Sanfilippo (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The EU wishes to thank the Palestinian delegation for
the successful outcome of our negotiations on a number
of draft resolutions on which the General Assembly will
be taking action. Based on those negotiations, the EU
would like to confirm its consolidated voting pattern on
these draft resolutions. At this time, we would like to put
it on record that with regard to all resolutions adopted
during the Assembly’s sixty-ninth session, the EU and
its member States consider that whenever the term

“Palestinian Government” is mentioned, this refers to
the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, the use of the
term “Palestine” in any of those resolutions cannot be
construed as recognition of a State of Palestine, and is
used without prejudice to the individual positions of the
member States on the issue and thus to the question
of the validity of an accession to the conventions and
treaties mentioned therein.
Finally, the European Union as a whole has not
expressed a legal qualification with regard to the
term “forced displacement” used in a number of draft
resolutions submitted under items 36 and 51.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): In a few minutes, the Assembly
will vote on a series of draft resolutions that exist only
to defame and delegitimize Israel. As it does every year,
Israel will vote against the draft resolutions because
they are as outdated as they are outrageous. Countless
countries face dire economic conditions at home, but
manage to find the resources for United Nations bodies
that fund anti-Israeli incitement and the defamation and
delegitimization of Israel. The international community
has found the funding to create a United Nations website
called United Nations Platform for Palestine (unpfp.
un.org). The site calls for the boycotting of Israel and
Israeli products. Every year, the United Nations spends
over $6 million on the Division for Palestinian Rights,
the United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the
Department of Public Information’s special information
programme on the question of Palestine. Every year,
my delegation asks what each of these institutions do,
and we have yet to receive a response.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-65053 (E)

*1465053*

A/69/PV.61

The Assembly declared 2014 to be the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. As the
year draws to a close, I have to ask what was achieved.
Did the Year of Solidarity motivate the Palestinian
Authority to finally hold elections? Not at all. Did the
Year of Solidarity inspire the Palestinian Authority to
prepare their people for peace? Not in the least. Did the
Year of Solidarity bring us closer to peace? Far from
it. All those who claim to stand for peace should ask
what they are voting for — solidarity with perpetuating
conflicts, solidarity with the culture of hatred and
incitement, solidarity with unilateral actions instead of
direct negotiations?
I will conclude by saying the following — there
is no moral clarity in this vote for solidarity. To my
colleagues, I say the following — when they vote today,
they should vote for reason and responsibility. They
should consider the draft texts before them and then ask
themselves: will they continue the tradition of rubberstamping resolutions, or will they take a stand and seek
lasting solutions? I call on the Assembly to vote against
these resolutions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions A/69/L.21, A/69/L.22, A/69/L.23 and
A/69/L.24.

25/11/2014

Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, Guyana,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/69/L.21: the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Guyana, the Niger and Viet Nam.

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Colombia, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Vanuatu

The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.

Draft resolution A/69/L.21 was adopted by 94 votes
to 7, with 56 abstentions (resolution 69/20).

We turn first to draft resolution A/69/L.21, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,

2/11

[Subsequently, the delegations of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia and the Sudan informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]

14-65053

25/11/2014

The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/69/L.22, entitled “Division for Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat”.

A/69/PV.61

Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
on the draft document, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/69/L.22: the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Guyana and the Niger.

Central African Republic, Colombia, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu

The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.

Draft resolution A/69/L.22 was adopted by 91 votes
to 7, with 59 abstentions (resolution 69/21).

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile, China, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,

[Subsequently, the delegations of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia and the Sudan informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/69/L.23, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
A/69/L.23: Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Guyana and the Niger.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,

14-650533/11

A/69/PV.61

France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Honduras,
Madagascar, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Togo,
Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/69/L.23 was adopted by 147
votes to 7, with 9 abstentions (resolution 69/22).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.24, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the draft
document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/69/L.24: Belarus, the Plurinational State

4/11

25/11/2014

of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Guyana, Kyrgyzstan
and the Niger.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America

14-65053

25/11/2014

Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Honduras, Madagascar,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/69/L.24 was adopted by 148
votes to 6, with 8 abstentions (resolution 69/23).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Like
everyone in the Assembly Hall, we are deeply concerned
about the volatile situation in the Middle East. The
United States has made an enormous effort, especially
over the past year and a half, to work with the parties in
trying to pave the road towards achieving a negotiated
final-status agreement allowing two States to live side
by side in peace and security.
In that context, the United States remains profoundly
troubled by the repetitive and disproportionate
number of one-sided General Assembly resolutions
condemning Israel — a total of 18 this year. That
grossly one-sided approach damages the prospects
for peace by undermining trust between parties and
undermining the kind of international support critical to
achieving peace. All parties to the conflict have direct
responsibilities for ending it, and we are disappointed
that Members of the United Nations continually single
out Israel without acknowledging the responsibilities
and difficult steps that must be taken on all sides.
Those unbalanced, one-sided resolutions set back our
collective efforts to advance a peaceful resolution to
the conflict in the Middle East, and they damage the
institutional credibility of the United Nations.
Of these annual resolutions which unfairly single
out one country and consistently lack balance, three
are particularly troubling to the United States: those
concerning the Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat, the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, and the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories. Those
resolutions renew mandates for United Nations bodies
established decades ago, wasting valuable resources
and reinforcing the perception of systematic United
Nations bias against Israel. All Member States should

A/69/PV.61

evaluate the effectiveness of supporting and funding
those bodies.
I do want to add that our continued opposition to the
text on Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem and the occupied Golan,
which will come up for a vote in the Assembly next
month, should not be understood to mean that we
support settlement activity. On the contrary, we reject
in the strongest terms Israeli settlements in territories
occupied in 1967. Settlements are illegitimate; they
damage Israel’s security and the hopes for peace.
Continued settlement activity is contrary to Israel’s
stated goal of negotiating a permanent-status agreement
with the Palestinians and is inconsistent with Israel’s
international commitments. During the past year, we
have been deeply concerned by Israel’s advancement
of plans for thousands of additional housing units in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We have made clear
that such action only draws condemnation from the
international community, poisons the atmosphere — not
only with the Palestinians, but also with the very Arab
Governments with which the Israeli Government
says it wants to build relations — and undermines
the prospect for a peaceful negotiated agreement
with the Palestinians. Both sides took unhelpful steps
that undercut the most recent round of final-status
negotiations. The scale and timing of Israel’s settlement
activities contributed significantly to the erosion of
trust between the parities.
The United States is in full agreement about the
urgent need to resolve the conflict between Israel and
the Palestinians based on the two-State solution and
an agreement that establishes a viable, independent
and contiguous State of Palestine once for all. We have
invested a tremendous amount of effort and resources
in pursuit of that shared goal, and we firmly believe
that the parties need to resolve the conflict through
direct negotiations. If the parties are willing and ready
to take that step, we are prepared to support them and
to continue our efforts to advance the cause of peace.
In closing, while the United States, unequivocally
rejects Israeli settlements in territories occupied in 1967,
that does not justify the repetitive, disproportionate and
one-sided General Assembly resolutions condemning
Israel, which do not advance our collective efforts to
promote a peaceful resolution to the conflict.

14-650535/11

A/69/PV.61

Mr. Neo Ek Beng Mark (Singapore): I speak in
explanation of vote after the adoption of resolutions
69/20, 69/21, 69/22 and 69/23.
Singapore voted in favour of resolution 69/20 on
the understanding that the reference in paragraph 2
to “the achievement... of the two-State solution on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders” should be interpreted in
the same manner as set out in paragraph 1 of resolution
69/23, namely,
“the two-State solution of Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security within
recognized borders, based on the pre-1967 borders”.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote. The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 36.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/69/L.25 and A/69/L.26)
The Acting President: Before the Assembly takes
action on the draft resolutions one by one, members are
reminded that they will have an opportunity to explain
their vote on the two draft resolutions before and after
action is taken on both.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/69/L.25, entitled “Jerusalem”, and
A/69/L.26, entitled “The Syrian Golan”. We turn first
to draft resolution A/69/L.25.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the draft document, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/69/L.25: the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam and the Niger.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
6/11

25/11/2014

Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Madagascar, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/69/L.25 was adopted by 144 votes
to 6, with 10 abstentions (resolution 69/24).
[Subsequently, the delegation of China informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/69/L.26.

14-65053

25/11/2014

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations already listed in the
draft document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/69/L.26: the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam and the Niger.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,

A/69/PV.61

France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/69/L.26 was adopted by 99 votes
to 6, with 57 abstentions (resolution 69/25).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to the speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Lopes (Brazil): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the delegations of Argentina and Brazil to
explain our votes, as we have done in previous years,
on the resolution on the Syrian Golan (resolution
69/25), just adopted by the General Assembly. Brazil
and Argentina voted in favour of the resolution because
we believe that its essential character is linked to
the illegality of the acquisition of territory by force.
Paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations prohibits the use or threat of use of force
against the territory or integrity of a State.
At the same time, I want to clarify the position
of our delegations with respect to paragraph 6 of the
resolution. Our vote does not prejudge the content of
that paragraph, particularly the reference to “the line
of 4 June 1967”. Brazil and Argentina believe that it is
important to make progress in the search for a solution
to the Syrian-Israeli track of the Middle East conflict
so as to put an end to the occupation of the Golan
Heights. Therefore, on behalf of the Governments
of Brazil and Argentina, I once again stress the
importance of resuming negotiations in order to find a
definitive solution to the situation in the Syrian Golan,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote.
I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic for a statement.

14-650537/11

A/69/PV.61

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): We would like to express our deepest
appreciation and gratitude to the General Assembly for
adopting once again, as it has continually since 1981,
the resolution entitled “The Syrian Golan” (resolution
69/25), as well as the other resolutions under agenda
item 35, “The situation in the Middle East”, and agenda
item 36, “The question of Palestine”.
The untiring support of the majority of the Members
of the United Nations for those resolutions clearly
reflects their commitment to the principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations, their rejection of
foreign occupation and their support for our full rights
to recover our territories occupied by Israel since 5 June
1967. It goes without saying that the adoption by an
absolute majority of the two resolutions under agenda
item 35 sends a clear international message to Israel,
the occupying Power, that the occupation, killing,
policy of expansion, aggression, racial discrimination,
building of settlements, continuing status quo and
annexation of territories by force are all rejected and
violate international norms and instruments, first and
foremost the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. Such practices
lead only to denunciation and condemnation by all who
are committed to upholding international law.
I would like to reiterate the gratitude of my country,
Syria, to all States that voted in favour of resolution
69/25. I reiterate that my country is ready to achieve a
just and comprehensive peace on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolution and well-known terms of
reference. I also reiterate the unswerving resolve of the
Syrian Government and people to liberate the occupied
Golan and return to the line of 5 June 1967. We will rid
the Golan of settlers and settlements using all means
permitted by international law, whose principles bring
us together here.
The Acting President: I call on the observer of the
Observer State of Palestine for a statement.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me at the
beginning to express our gratitude to the five members
that sponsored our resolutions, those that introduced
them and all the countries that voted in favour. We
believe that this sends a very strong message from
the General Assembly and from the vast majority of
Member States in favour of justice, peace and the twoState solution.

8/11

25/11/2014

In that connection, we have the highest respect for
the judgement of all countries in the exercise of their
sovereign right to make decisions that advance the
cause of justice and peace. We respect the decisions of
all countries, even those that did not vote in favour of
the resolutions. I believe that those that disrespectfully
attack other countries or that have even gone so far as
to say that members of the General Assembly vote like
sheep have no respect for the spirit of multilateralism,
democracy or the collective judgment of the
international community. We are delighted to stand in
the camp of history and respect for international law
and for the decisions of the General Assembly.
We hope that those who think that these resolutions
do not serve their narrow view of the way things in
our region should proceed will change their minds.
We believe that this strong message from the General
Assembly upholds international law. We are in the
business of upholding international law, and that is
the essence of what the United Nations stands for, as
reflected in its Charter.
We are very happy that yet again this year the
General Assembly has strongly supported all our
resolutions, which address the fine details of the
national rights of the Palestinian people, including
our right to self-determination and the independence
of our State. We are fully committed to seeing two
States living side by side in peace and tranquillity. If
we wish to fulfil the consensus desire of all members
for a two-State solution, that would require the State
that is occupying the land of another to withdraw from
it so that our State can become independent, enabling
us to realize our common goal of a two-State solution.
Those who say that the issue is not two States are not, in
that sense, telling the truth. The issue is in essence the
two-State solution and ending the occupation in order
to achieve that goal. We are committed to it despite the
tremendous pain we are enduring, particularly in the
Gaza Strip and in other parts of the occupied territory,
especially East Jerusalem.
Despite our pain, we will not lose sight of the goal
of achieving a two-State solution. Together with the
Assembly, we will continue moving in that direction
until we see — soon, we hope — the end of the
occupation and the independence of our State, the State
of Palestine, in all the territory that Israel occupied
on 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
a just solution to the refugee question on the basis of
resolution 194 (III). We will continue to work together.

14-65053

25/11/2014

The Assembly has inspired our people with the strong
message it has sent today, and we will continue to march
together in the direction of peace until we have two
States living side by side in peace and security, with
a viable, contiguous and democratic State of Palestine
alongside the State of Israel.
The Acting President: Several representatives
have asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I speak in exercise of the right
of reply to certain statements that have been made
during this debate.
Israel is not what is wrong in the Middle East. Israel
is what is right in the Middle East. So let us talk about
the real problems in our region when we speak about
the situation in the Middle East.
The representative of Lebanon stood in this Hall
yesterday (see A/69/PV.59) and accused Israel of
violating Security Council resolutions, despite the fact
that his State has allowed Hizbullah to take control of
southern Lebanon and stockpile over 100,000 missiles
and rockets in populated areas. One does not need to
work for INTERPOL to make that discovery. A senior
Hizbullah official, Naeem Kassem, boasted only two
days ago that Hizbullah possesses Iranian-made missiles
with pinpoint accuracy. That is in blatant violation of
Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004), 1701 (2006),
1747 (2007) and 1929 (2010). I think we can agree that
smuggling arms to terrorist organizations and violating
Security Council arms embargoes is the real problem
with the situation in the Middle East.
The representative of Saudia Arabia (see A/69/
PV.59) used this forum to accuse my country of abusing
human rights and violating freedom of religion, despite
the fact that his kingdom executes anyone who dares
to import the Christian Bible, bans non-Muslims from
entering entire cities and has beheaded 70 people so
far this year alone. I think we can agree that beheading
people is the real problem in the Middle East.
The representative of Pakistan arrogantly stood in
the Assembly yesterday (see A/69/PV.59) and stated
what Israel must do. Let us talk about what Pakistan
also must do. Pakistan must fight the radical Islamist
factions in Pakistan and in the Pakistani Government.

A/69/PV.61

Pakistan has become the world’s foremost terrorist and
jihadi educational institution. I think we can agree that
churning out thousands of violent radical Islamists is
the real problem with the situation in the Middle East.
Earlier today, the representative of Qatar had a
great deal to say about Gaza (see A/69/PV.60). It seems
that Qatar has conveniently forgotten that every rocket
that flew out of Gaza and every terror tunnel could
have borne a sign that read “Made possible by the Emir
of Qatar”. I think we can agree that State sponsors of
terrorism are the real problem with the situation in the
Middle East.
Today the representative of Libya delivered a
series of accusations against Israel (see A/69/PV.60).
As I listened to him, I had to wonder which one of the
Governments and groups that control Libyan territory
that representative represents. I think we can agree that
failed States are the real problem with the situation in
the Middle East.
Finally, it is remarkable that the Syrian representative
believes once again that he has any standing to lecture
others in this Hall. Syria has become an expert in
blaming others for its problems. The responsibility
for the humanitarian crisis taking place in the Syrian
Arab Republic and the murder of 220,000 Syrians lies
solely with the Syrian Government. Blaming Israel
for the evacuation of troops of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) from the
area of separation is nothing more than revisionist
history. The truth of the matter is that the Syrian army
fled in the face of advancing Al-Nusra fighters, leaving
UNDOF troops unprotected and at risk. Recognizing
the danger, Israel opened its gates and provided
UNDOF safe harbour. I think that we can agree that
the Al-Assads’ brutal terror regime in Syria is the real
problem with the situation in the Middle East.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would like
to reply to the reference just made to my country by the
representative of the Israeli regime.
In the name of clarifying the real problems of
the region, the representative of the Israeli regime
has tried to divert attention from what is the real
problem of the region, namely, the criminal policies
and abhorrent atrocities of his regime. The illegal
Israeli policies and practices against the Palestinian
people, including, inter alia, the intensification of
illegal Israeli activities, widespread violence against
the Palestinians, the devastating blockade of the Gaza

14-650539/11

A/69/PV.61

Strip, the illegal construction of the apartheid wall, the
destructive impact of the socioeconomic conditions
of the Palestinians in Jerusalem, the incidents of the
mass imprisonment of Palestinians and administrative
detentions, and the routine demolition of homes and
the resulting displacement of Palestinians — and this
is just the tip if the iceberg — show that the regime
is continuing and even intensifying its heinous crimes
against the oppressed, defenceless Palestinian people.
The real problem of the region is occupation.
Today, my country voted in favour of the all resolutions
under agenda items 35 and 36, on the question of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle East, in order
to show solidarity with the Palestinian people. Iran
continues to emphasize the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and believes that the resolution of
the Palestinian crisis is achievable only if those rights
are fully restored. Due to lack of attention to the root
causes of the problem, the conflict has remained
unsolved for more than six decades. A durable peace
will be possible only through the end of the occupation
of the Palestinian territory by the Israeli regime and
the return of all Palestinian refugees to their homeland.
Mr. Hamed (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for giving me the floor to
respond to the claims and allegations made by the
representative of the Israeli occupation forces.
Having listened to all the condemnation of Israeli
policies of aggression and having seen the great support
for the resolutions we have just adopted, we believe
that it is clear that the representative of the occupation
authorities could not find a way to get out of their
awkward and empty position other than to level baseless
accusations and false claims against States Members of
the United Nations, accusations that do not spare even
countries that are historically supportive of the Israeli
entity.
Our statement and the statements of other Member
States in this Hall today were not in the vein of lecturing
as the representative of the occupation authorities claims.
Those statements cited facts that are included in various
United Nations reports and documents and have been
set forth in statements by officials of the Organization.
If the representative of Israel does not understand these
facts, then he is in need of several lectures, not just
one, on international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. The representative of the Israeli occupation
authorities should come out of his cocoon and see the
facts of Israel’s violations of international law and
10/11

25/11/2014

relevant United Nations resolutions, including Israel’s
policies on the occupation and annexation of other
peoples’ territories by force.
The Israeli occupation forces put forward the
pretext of humanitarian assistance to justify providing
assistance and treatment to members of terrorist groups
near its borders. However, it goes without saying
that humanitarian considerations should not include
assistance to Al-Qaida terrorists who, after receiving
treatment, are returned to the separation area, where
they continue their terrorist acts that threaten both
civilians and peacekeeping forces. Israel a country that
treats the injured of Daesh in its hospitals, returns them
to Syria or Iraq to pursue their terrorist and criminal
activities, and then comes to this Hall and claims to
be providing assistance on a purely humanitarian basis.
What Israel is doing in the separation area can only
be called assistance to terrorists. Such Israeli support
to terrorist groups in the separation area has been
documented in recent reports of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), which clearly indicate that Israel is treating
the injured of these armed groups and that UNDOF has
noted that Israel has delivered closed boxes to those
groups across the separation area.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I too am exercising our
right of reply in response to the comments just made by
the representative of Israel.
Pakistan is at the forefront of fighting terrorism.
We are fighting violent extremism. The remarks made
by the representative of Israel are therefore gratuitous.
They are an attempt to divert the attention of the
international community and the General Assembly
from the real issue that we are discussing today. I think
the representative of Israel forgot that what we are
discussing today is the Middle East, not Pakistan.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I regret that I have to take the
floor again. I will be brief.
In response to the Iranian statement that we have
just heard, I have to say that the statement by the Deputy
Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Naeem Kassem,
that I quoted just now was taken from Iranian media
and is in line with other statements made earlier over
the weekend by high-ranking officials of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, who admitted that Iran has
transferred arms to Hizbullah in Lebanon. I have to say
that the Iranian representative will simply not be able
to hide the truth behind his rhetoric. These are the facts

14-65053

25/11/2014

about Iran. Iran is destabilizing the Middle East. Iran
illegally transfers arms to its proxy terror organizations
in the Middle East, whether it be Hamas or Hizbullah
or many more.
I also have to reply to the representative of Syria,
who spoke about principles under the United Nations
Charter and international law. I would just echo some
of the numbers again. We are speaking about 220,000
civilian victims murdered by the Syrian regime; we are
speaking about 7.6 million internally displaced persons;
we are speaking about 3.2 million refugees in Syria,
all as a result of the Syrian Government’s atrocities,
and 220,000 who actually still live in hunger in areas
besieged by the regime’s armed forces. I would therefore
ask not to be preached to. Again, the reference to the
principles under the Charter of the United Nations and
humanitarian law voiced by the Syrian representative
is simply absurd.
Mr. Hamed (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): It seems that the representative of the
occupation authorities cannot refrain from repeating
those fictional figures of his. He was disturbed, it
seems, by my references to the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law. That is
no wonder, since it seems that Israel has never heard
of those principles and doctrines; if it had, we would
not be in the Hall discussing Israeli practices in the
occupied Arab territories.

A/69/PV.61

The representative of the occupation authorities can
only make false claims and fabrications. He is merely
hiding a black record of crimes against humanity,
war crimes and weapons used to kill Palestinians and
Syrian under occupation, while standing against the
will of the international community and the Charter
and relevant United Nations resolutions. Policies of
illegal settlement, siege, attacks and aggression are all
that Israel has to offer and nothing else.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am again
taking the floor in exercise of the right of reply to
the remarks made by the representative of the Israeli
regime.
It is regrettable that the representative of a regime
that is the main sponsor of State terrorism criticizes
others who give moral support to freedom fighters and
those who fight against the foreign occupation of their
homeland. It is obvious that making baseless allegations
against my country cannot justify or assist that regime
in hiding its long list of crimes and atrocities, which
include but are not limited to occupation, aggression,
militarism, State terrorism, masterminding the
assassination of innocent Iranian nuclear scientists and
crimes against humanity.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 35.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

14-6505311/11
