UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

__

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2467’”

MEETING:

NEW

COUNCIL

16 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

....................................

1

...............................................

1

Lettei dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent
Representative
of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15902)

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda

(S/Agenda/2467)

of the agenda

..

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such ,a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2467th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,

President: Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

16 August 1983, at 10.30 a.m.

which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

de NANTEUIL

Present: The representatives of the following States:
. China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Madar (Somalia)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaD467)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

3. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Sir, first of all I
wish to congratulate you most warmly on your assump
tion of the presidency for this month. Your well-known
diplomatic qualities and your experience, as well as your
personal knowledge of developments in the area under
consideration, will no doubt greatly facilitate our efforts
to find fair and realistic solutions to the concerns of the
people of Chad.

2. Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15902)
The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

4. I should also like through you, Sir, to congratulate
your predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing of China, for the most
exemplary and dignified manner in which he directed the
work of the Council in July.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15902)

5. Also, since this is the tirst time I have addressed the
Council in a formal meeting this month, I should like to
take this opportunity, on my own behalf and on behalf of
the Zimbabwe delegation, to welcome to New York and
to the Security Council Mr. van der Stoel, the new representative of the Netherlands. My delegation is happy to
observe that the excellent working relationships which
existed between our two Missions during his worthy
precedessor’s time at the United Nations continue to grow
to the mutual benefit of our two countries and peoples.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfromFrench):
In conformity with the decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2462nd, 2463rd and2465th meetings], I invite the
representatives of Chad and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
to take places at the Council table; I invite the representatives of Benin, Egypt, Guinea, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Liberia, the Niger, Senegal, the Sudan
and the United Republic of Cameroon to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. The Council is once again meeting at the request of
the Government of Chad. It will be recalled that previous
meetings [2419th and 2428th to 2430 meetings] in March
this year had been occasioned by Chad’s request that the
Council meet to consider

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Barma (Chad) and
Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) took places at the
Council table; Mr. Sogio (Benin), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr..
Kaba (Guinea), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of
Iran), Mr. Essy (Ivory Coast), Mr. Okeyo (Kenya), Mr. Kofa
(Liberia), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. SyiIa (Senegal). Mr.
Evaki (Sudan) and Mr. Towo Atangana (United Republic of
Cameroon) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

“the extremely serious situation prevailing in Chad as a
result of the occupation of a part of Chad territory by
Libya and of repeated acts of aggression by that country against the people of Chad” [S/15643].

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council,that I have
received a letter from the representative of Somalia in

7. It will be recalled also that, in addressing the Council
on 31 March [2428th meeting], the Zimbabwe delegation
expressed Zimbabwe’s deep regret that a dispute should
1

exist between Chad and Libya-two countries which are
so linked by geography and history that they have a common destiny. We pointed out then, as did other African
and non-aligned delegations, that our concern was all the
greater because the two countries were cherished
members of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries-the
two
organizations that are so vital to the solidarity and survival of the peoples of the third world.

intervention and interference in support of any of the
internal factions in Chad.
11. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): For the second
time this year the Council is being called upon to discuss
the question of Chad and, more specifically, the continuing crisis in relations between Chad and the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. Our debate this spring [2419th and 2428th to
2430th meetings] ended with the Council authorizing its
President on 6 April to issue a statement, inter alia, calling
on the parties to settle their differences without undue
delay and by peaceful means, on the basis of the relevant
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
Charter of the Organization of African Unity, which
demand respect for political independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The statement continued as
follows:

8. Our regrets and concerns are growing even deeper
because not only are the unhappy relations between Chad
and Libya persisting, but the situation in the area is also
dangerously escalating, mainly as a result of the increasing involvement of external factors and forces in the area.
In our view, this external involvement not only undermines any possibility of national reconciliation in Chad
itself but is also bound to frustrate, and even militate
against, efforts by the OAU to bring about a peaceful
settlement of the dispute between the two countries.

“In this connection the members of the Council have
taken note with appreciation
of’ the willingness
expressed by both parties to discuss their differences
and to resolve them peacefully and urge both sides to
refrain from any actions which could aggravate the
current situation” [see S/25688].

9. As Sir John Thomson has already reminded us, the
statement by the President of the Security Council in
April-having
expressed the Council’s concern that the
differences between Chad and Libya should not escalate
and endanger regional peace and security, and having also
called on the two parties to settle their differences peacefully and without undue delay-concluded
with an appeal
to Chad and Libya

12. Four months have passed since that statement was
issued. The hope that parties would succeed in settling
their differences has proved to be unfounded. On the contrary, the situation has dramatically worsened. War is raging in Chad, claiming many innocent victims amongst the
civilian population. We are now faced with what amounts
to a full-scale foreign armed intervention in the internal
affairs of Chad. In spite of the denial by the representative
of Libya, there is overwhelming evidence that Libyan
tank units have penetrated deeply into Chad territory,
and that the Libyan air force has repeatedly carried out
bombing raids, especially on the town of Faya-Largeau.
By acting in this way, Libya is clearly violating its obligations as a State Member of the United Nations, especially
its obligation to refrain from the use of force against the
territorial integrity of another State.

“to make fullest use of the mechanism available within
the regional organization for the peaceful settlements
of disputes, including the Good Offices Committee
established by the Organization of African Unity and
of those provided in Article 33 of the Charter of the
United Nations’* [see S/USSsJ.
10. It seems to our delegation that this appeal continues
to be just as valid and relevant, if not more so. It should
be addressed to the parties concerned with the utmost
urgency and clarity which this new situation demands.
Our delegation notes with encouragement and great
appreciation that the OAU, having successfully overcome
its temporary difficulties, as was clearly testified to by the
successful holding of its nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held at Addis
Ababa in June, took immediate steps to bring understanding and peace between Chad and Libya. The OAU initiative in this matter was first demonstrated by the meeting
of the Bureau of the nineteenth session of the Assembly,
held on 15 and 16 July at Addis Ababa. It will be recalled
that the Bureau, of which my own country is an active
member, appealed to the two parties to end hostilities
immediately. It also appealed to all other countries contemplating interference and intervention in Chad to
refrain from such action. As we all know, even as this
Council is meeting now, regional efforts under the aegis of
the OAU are intensifying. We are convinced, therefore,
that the best course of action open to the Council in these
circumstances is to throw all its weight and influence
behind the intensified initiatives of the OAU. In so doing,
the Council must also deplore and reject any external

13. The representative of Libya claims that Mr. Goukouni Weddey heads the legitimate Government of Chad.
I shall be brief on this subject. The Netherlands Govemment recognizes the Government of Chad headed by its
President Hissein Habre, whose representative is now
rightfully taking part in the deliberations of the Council,
as he did in April of this year, when the Council last
debated the complaint of his country against Libya. The
legitimacy of the Government of President HabrC has also
been confirmed at the nineteenth session of the Assembly
of Heads of State-and Government of the OAU, held at
Addis Ababa last June. It is also clear that the presidential statement of 6 April, in calling for a dialogue between
parties to settle their differences, was referring to a dialogue between Libya and the Government of Mr. Habri.
Finally, even if the Government of Libya rejects the legitimacy of the Habrt Government, that does not justify its
unprovoked armed intervention in the affairs of Chad.
14. In his letter of 3 August [S/15906], the’representative of Libya speaks of the “direct intervention of. , . the
n

L

United States and France in the affairs of Chad”. A
number of representatives, and notably the representative
of the Soviet Union, have spoken .along similar lines.
However, this presentation of the facts is deliberately misleading and obscures the picture. On the one hand, there
is the provision, at the request of its legitimate Gbvernment, of military assistance to a country acting in selfdefense. On the other hand, we witness an instance of
armed intervention in the affairs of a neighbouring State,
in clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
This distinction must be maintained.
15. My Government is shocked by the human suffering
in Chad. There ought to be an immediate end to the
fighting. Chad’s sovereignty over its territory must be
fully restored. Chad must be free to direct its: efforts
towards internal consolidation and economic ‘development and reconstruction. Any continued foreign armed
intervention against the Government of Chad is likely ‘to
aggravate further the conflict in that country. The dispute
between Chad and Libya should be solved by negotiations and not by force. Negotiations could be renewed
within the context of the OAU, in conformity with the
resolution’ which was adopted by the Heads of States and
Government of the OAU during its nineteenth session of
the Assembly, held at Addis Ababa in June, inviting
Chad and Libya to seek a negotiated solution to their
differences within the context of the Ad Hoc Mediation
Committee established by the OAU. We earnestly hope
that all parties will show the required restraint to solve the
present crisis along lines which are compatible with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
16. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from C/Gnese): The people of Chad have not been able to live in a
peaceful and stable environment long since the attainment
of independence. In the past year the Government of
Chad has been making extensive efforts to restore domestic peace and heal the war-torn country. However, tensions have now erupted again, plunging the tormented
population into new miseries. The Chinese delegation is
deeply concerned about this development and expresses
profound sympathy for the tribulations of the Chad
people.
17. The grave situation in Chad has been further complicated as a result of super-Power meddling. We always
hold. that the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Chad should be respected, the internal affairs
of that country should be left to the Chad people themselves and all outside intervention should stop.
1

18. In its resolution,* ‘the nineteenth session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
OAU, held last June at Addis Ababa, called on the two
parties to the dispute to refrain from any action likely to
worsen further the existing situation. Recently, the OAU
again appealed for an immediate cessation of outside
intervention
and called for an immediate ceasefire
between the two conflicting parties so as to achieve a just
and enduring peace on the basis of national reconciliation. We appreciate and support the positive efforts of the
OAU to bring peace to Chad. It is our hope that all

parties concerned will respond to the appeal of the OAU
and that the two parties to the dispute, in particular, will
seek a fair and reasonable settlement within the framework of the OAU through friendly consultation and dialogue on the basis of the principle of mutual respect for
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity without super-Power interference or sabotage.
19. The Chinese delegation sincerely wishes to see an
early return of peace to Chad so that the Chad people can
recuperate and rehabilitate their country while consolidating their hard-won independence.
20. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Somalia. I invite him
to. take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
21. Mr. MADAR (Somalia) (interpretationfrom Arabic):
I should like first of all, Sir, on behalf of my delegation to
convey to you our cordial congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for August. My delegation is quite
convinced that the work of the Council will be crowned
with success, thanks to your far-reaching knowledge and
experience in international
affairs and great political
experience.
22. I take this ‘opportunity to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of China, on the competent and
wise manner in which he conducted the Council’s deliberations at its recent meetings.
23. I shall now make a statement on behalf of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Somali Democratic Republic in respect of the matter of Chad.
“The Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Somali
Democratic Republic has learned with astonishment of
the wanton attacks by land and by air carried out by
the forces of the Qaddafi regime against the northern
Chad town of Faya-Largeau and its forcible occupation. It will be recalled that the Government of the
Somali Democratic Republic in the past repeatedly
warned the international community of Colonel Qaddafi’s policies of expansionism and destabilization of
the African continent. The events which are now
unfolding in Chad in full view of the entire world are
but a clear demonstration of those policies. Colonel
Qaddafi’s aggression against Chad also represents a
real threat to the territorial integrity and national independence of other neighbouring African States. In the
circumstances, the Government and people of the
Somali Democratic Republic unreservedly ,condemn
the invasion, of Chad by the Qaddafi regime and call
upon the regime to unconditionally withdraw its forces
from the territory of Chad and to refrain in the future
from its persistent interference in the internal affairs of
that sister country.
“Finally, the Government of the Somali Democratic
Republic wishes to underline to the international community the dangerous situation which now obtains in
Chad and its implications for the security and stability

‘of the African continent. It calls once again on the ,’ I tives of that Assembly is to elect the head of State of the
Organization of African Unity to shoulder its responsi--’ ‘People’s Republic of Benin.
bility for safeguarding the unity and national indepen-. ‘;,
‘? .:.31. The representative of Mr. Hissein Habre said,
dence of Chad.“*
‘moreover that President Ktrtkou
has as a tutor the
24. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): &re?“,: .leader of ;he Libyan Revolution, Muammar Qaddafi. In
representative of Benin has asked to exercise the right of :” that’ connection I should like to state the following.
reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
i.. __,.
to make his statement.
: ‘I
32. First, since the revolution of 26 October 1972 the
foreign policy of the People’s Republic of Benin has been
25. Mr.. SOGLO (Benin) (interpretation fro+ French): ‘2~ based on maintaining relations with all countries without
As everyone will recall, last Friday [246sth meerixgl the ‘, .. exception, provided that those relations are based on the
representative of Mr. Hissein HabrC, my brother Barma;’
’ principles of non-alignment, equality, mutual respect, sovengaged in an exercise in very poor taste in this hall, and I
ereignty, mutual benefit and national dignity. Present reiaexpressed a desire to reply to him right away. Unfortutions between the People’s Republic of Benin and Libya
‘are pre&iy
of aat
l&d.
The
People's
Republic
of Benin
nateiy the atmosphere in the chamber at the time did not
make it possible for YOU, Mr. President, to allow me ‘to do . has no need to blush at its f&&hips.
It is happy
and
so. So I am pleased, Sir, that you have given me this:. honoured to have.fruitful relations with the Libyan Arab
opportunity today to reply.
Jamahiriya based on mutual respect and sovereignty.
the revolution of 26 October
26. Last Friday, the representative of Mr. Hissein Habrk
.33. Secondly, by launching
used the most offensive language against my country and : : 1972,’ the people of Benin wished precisely to make a
against me. We would have ignored the form and. sub- .:radical break with the past and to embark on a new policy
stance of his remarks had he not added to his gratuitous’i
of national independence, the basis and aim of which
insults a baseless calumny and had he not engaged in
remain its interests and its identity. It intends to remain
personal attacks against the head of State of the People’s
master of its fate, a fate it has freely chosen. The barbaric
of
Republic of Benin, our great comrade-in-arms, President- : yaggression of which my country, the People’s Republic
Mathieu KCrekou.
Benin,
was
victim
on
16
January
1977
was
indeed
a
crimiI<
nal attempt by international imperialism to thwart Ben27. In replying to him I shall not stoop to his level nor ”+*m’s determination truly to fulfil its destiny. It is that very
resort to bad faith and lies, which he USES SO &ilfl$y.;;
~‘piot.whichisbeinghatchedto&yagainsttheLibyanrevo;
'.1_
-..;lution, a revolution which shares with my country the
28. He said for example, “Colonel KCrekou . . .‘&me to.
same ideals of peace and social justice and the same desire
,,‘: z,_, for independence. In the context of this plot, the confu-power and stays in power by ‘force”.
.sion in Chad is a mere pretext. International imperialism
29. The representative of Mr.. Hissein Habrk is :.. is protecting its puppets and hurrying to the assistance of
obviously unaware of what a democratic and popular ‘I’ ., its lackeys.
revolution means, but that is not his fault. The profound’:. :,
aspirations of the people of Chad continue to be stifled :: 34. Thirdly, the representative of Mr. Hissein H&r&
.’ my ‘brother Barma, attacked me personally and accused
and their only knowledge of political power is the,&rica:
ture provided today by the new-r&ime in NDjamena.
me of being a maitre-chantezz an instrument of black-.
But I should like him to know once and for all that,
mail. I should like simply to inform him, since he’seems’
following the revolution of 26 October 1972, President
not to know it, that I am first and foremost a representaMathieu KCrekou, today Brigadier-General,
came ,to tive;of my country and that I receive and carry out with
power. It was a democratic, popular revolution, which .I conviction the instructions of my superiors.
was intended to put an end to the policies of abdication
and betrayal practised by the preceding regimes. It was a
35; In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm that the Peorevolution whose objective was primarily the building of a
pie’s Republic of Benin remains convinced that a solution
new society where there would not be any exploitation of .%of the problem of Chad requires national reconciliation
man by man and where the pursuit of happiness would be
among all idealogies, without exception, under the aus. .‘.
possible for everyone.
p&es of the OAU and safe from bombardment by nonAfrican Powers.
30. I should also like him to know that ifour comradein-arms, President Mathieu Ktrekou, is still in power it is
36. Ready for the revolution. The struggle continues.
because of the unanimously expressed will of all the.
people of Benin. In our country, Benin, democratic insti- i ’ ‘37* The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
tutions do exist. I shall not dwell on al1 those in&.rtions;‘”
.representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked
but I should ;ust like to say that we have a Fundamental
to speak in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to
Law, a National Revolutionary Assembly, where all sec- make his statement.
tors of the population are represented and where they can
freely express their views. One of the principal preroga:
38. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (inrerpre’
zation from Arabic): I regret that I was unable to make a
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

.

:_
’

.

statement of reply last Friday. Along with the representa- .c non-Africans. Contacts have been established by the
OAU, and we .very much hope that they will lead to a
tive of Benin, I was prevented from doing so while others
successful outcome.
were allowed that privilege.
39. The question has been raised here ofdifficulties with
interpretation from Arabic into other languages. Arabic,
as we understand, is an official language, and bilateral
relations were invoked in the work of the Council.

46. The PRESIDENT
(interpretutiox from French): The
L representative of Chad has asked to k allowed to speak,
‘arid I call on him.

47. Mr. BARMA (Chad) (interpretdon from French): I
wish to make two brief comments. The first is to my
40. Mr. President, we are aware that your country is a
party to the conflict under discussion, and I should not.. -brother Soglo, the representative of Benin. I wish to point
like to have to invoke rule 20 of the provisional rules of .’ ,‘out that my official title is “the Permanent Representative
procedure. We realize that, although it is intervening in. :,:.of Chad to the United Nations”, and that Mr. Hissein
HabrC is the President of the Republic of Chad-whether
Chad, France is a civilized country, a’country which
waged world-wide revolution against social injustice and . he likes it or not.
the exploitation of man by man. We are all human, and,
while we do not expect complete impartiality and justice,, ,, 48. Secondly, he has given us an outline of the constituwe certainly do expect what might be called reasonable ..:‘.’ tional laws and institutions of his country. I shall not go
into them since they are his country’s -internal affairs.
justice.
What 1 maintain is that President KCrekou was brought
41. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
wishes to assure s ‘$0 power by a coup d&at, as happens around the world.
members of the Council of its respect for the Council, for
the Charter of the United Nations and for the Charter..of ’ 49. The’representative of Colonel Qaddafi considers me
the Organization of African Unity. It is thanks precisely
to..be a representative of American imperialism. I should
to this institution that Libya was able to move towards
like to say that my country, Chad, maintains close relaindependence. As a small country, Libya is keenly inter-,.’i tions.. of co-operation and friendship with the United
ested in the role played by the United Nations.
,,States of which we are proud.
42. I can assure you, Sir, that we are fully prepared to
,50. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
co-operate with the Council in the search for a positive
representative of the Sudan has asked to be allowed to
solution in keeping with the interests of the people, of.
speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him to take
Chad and not with those of the tools of imperialism, ,a’ .. :a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
solution which will not lead to interference in my country
and to the destabilization of its regime.
r. ‘I.-: 5I. Mr. ELFAKI (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
.have asked to be allowed to speak this morning as a result
43. I reject out of hand all the lies and fallacious allegaof the fallacious allegation made by my brother from
tions made by the representative of Mr. Hissein Habre t. ‘.+
:
Libya
that Sudanese forces are in Chad. I should like to
against my country. I should like simply to say that he ; assure the Council that we in the Sudanese delegation
and his patron are hired by American imperialism to spell :Yhave no knowledge of any Sudanese forces of any kind in
such lies.
..
Chad. And if they were there in response to an invitation
from the legitimate Government of N’Djamena,
what
44. Some speakers have overlooked the true causes of wrong would the Sudanese have committed and what
the conflict in Chad. As the press attache of the French
:wouldbe contrary to international documents and instrumission said to a television station, the situation in Chad.;. ,$:ments? That would be in response to an invitation from
is a complex one whose roots go well into the past. Thos&’
the Government of Chad to defend it.
roots still remain. Permit me to recall some of the underly-. :. :
ing causes of the conflict in Chad: they include ideologi:
‘. 52. .The representative of Libya is trying to divert the
cal, religious, tribal and other differences, cpersonal :,C ouncil’s attention from its responsibilities. We invite
interests, and the fact that Mr. Habrt co-operates neither
him to co-operate with the Council and the international
with the other entities in Chad nor with. the ‘legitimate
community as a whole. I can tell him that allegations and
Government. Nor does he co-operate with the OAU &i ‘:‘, false accusations will serve no useful purpose. I ask him to
the efforts it is making in this matter. Some speakers also:<, ‘work with the Council and help it meet its obligations and
overlooked the fact that French forces and United States ‘. responsibilities.
*
military advisers are present there, along with troops from
‘, ...,..
Zaire and the Sudan.
_.
.’
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.
.
45. There is another point that deserves some attent&,
‘
that is, the position of the OAU. The OAU is very inter:
ested in the internal situation in Chad and has issued ,, .j.
:;
NOTE
many statements, all of them calling for nationaP
reconciliation and non-interference by both Africans and “’ 1 A/38/312. annex, resolution AHGlRes.106 (XIX).

.’

‘5,

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United
world.

Nations
Consult

publications
your bookstore

may be obtained
from bookstores
aad distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

COM~IENTSEPROCL'RER~LES

PUBLICATIONSDESNATI~NSL-PIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente
du inonde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
de vdtre
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geni?ve.

KAK

IlOJlYYMTb

ki3JlaHwn

H areHWrnaX
Mara3HHe
nponaxe

M3LLAHMR

OpraHH3aUHs
06beLWHeHHbIX
80 Bcex paROHaX
Mnpa.
HJIR nmuI(Te
no anpecy:
Li3iIaHkiR.
HbKhMOpK
&hi

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

dam les librairles
et les agences
dCposn31relr
libraire
ou adressez-vous
i : Nation5
Unir\.

OPl-Akhi3AUMM
OI;%EIIMHEHHblX
Hauns MOXHO KynHTb B KHlI;t;HblX
HaeonHTe
OpraHlrlaurln
KeHeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PtiBLICAClONES
Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas pattes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

CnpaBKH
06 113naHmIx
06beLlllHeHHblX

HAUMfi

Mara3llHa~
B BaLUeSl KHi!.xHO\l

Haunil,

CeKIInn

II0

bE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Unidas
t&n
en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoraa
en
a sd librerd
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas.
Seccicin de Ventas.

00300

90-60205-August

1991-2,050
