S/PRST/2002/42

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 December 2002
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4680th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 December 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:

Côte d’Ivoire — statement by the President
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire and its serious consequences for the population of this country and the
region. The Council firmly condemns attempts to use force to influence the
political situation in Côte d’Ivoire and to overthrow the elected Government. It
calls for full respect for the constitutional order of Côte d’Ivoire and
emphasizes its full support for the country’s legitimate Government. It stresses
also the need to respect the sovereignty, political unity and territorial integrity
of Côte d’Ivoire. It calls on all States in the region to refrain from any
interference in Côte d’Ivoire.
“The Security Council stresses that the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire can be
resolved only through a negotiated political solution. It calls upon all parties
involved in the conflict to work actively to achieve such a solution and to
abstain from any act or declaration that could jeopardize efforts to that end.
Such a solution must address the underlying causes of the conflict.
“The Security Council strongly supports the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), currently chaired by Senegal,
to promote a peaceful resolution of the conflict. It urges ECOWAS leaders to
continue their efforts in a coordinated manner. In this regard it welcomes the
Final Communiqué adopted on 18 December 2002 (S/2002/1386) at the
extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS in
Dakar.
“In particular, the Security Council welcomes the commitment by the
President of Côte d’Ivoire to present in the coming days a comprehensive plan
to end the crisis. It stresses that such a plan is a crucial step towards achieving
a peaceful solution and calls upon the President of Côte d’Ivoire to involve all
parties fully and to seek consensus among them.

02-75307 (E)

201202

*0275307*

201202

S/PRST/2002/42

“The Security Council also takes note of paragraph 18 of the Final
Communiqué of the Dakar Summit, in which ECOWAS requests the United
Nations and the Secretary-General to contribute to the resolution of the crisis
in Côte d’Ivoire. The Council commends the Secretary-General for his efforts
to promote a negotiated settlement, in coordination with ECOWAS. The
Council requests him to continue those efforts, particularly by providing all
necessary support and assistance to the mediation efforts of ECOWAS. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it regularly informed about the
situation.
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the deployment in
Côte d’Ivoire of the ECOMOG force, under Senegalese command, by 31
December 2002, as called for in the Final Communiqué of the Dakar Summit.
It commends all ECOWAS countries which have decided to contribute troops
to this force and calls upon the international community to provide assistance
to it.
“The Security Council also commends France for the efforts it has made,
at the request of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, to prevent further fighting,
on a provisional basis pending the deployment of the ECOMOG force. It also
expresses its appreciation for the efforts of France to contribute to a political
solution of the crisis, including the possible hosting of meetings on the
situation in Côte d’Ivoire. It also recognizes the efforts of the African Union to
bring about a resolution of the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire.
“The Security Council expresses its deepest concern at reports of mass
killings and grave violations of human rights in Côte d’Ivoire. It calls on all
parties to ensure full respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law, particularly with regard to the civilian population, regardless of its origin,
and to bring to justice all those responsible for any violation thereof. The
Council welcomes the decision by the Secretary-General to request the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to gather precise information about violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law in Côte d’Ivoire, including
through the dispatch of a fact-finding mission to that country.
“The Security Council also expresses its concern at the humanitarian
consequences of the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire. It calls upon the international
community to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to those in need in all
the countries of the subregion that are affected by the Ivorian crisis. It also
calls on all parties to provide unhindered access to the affected populations.”

2
