VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Guam; 8
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Guam to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reaffirms its conviction that such factors as territorial size, geographical location, size of population and
limited natural resources should in no way delay the
implementation of the Declaration, which fully applies to
Guam;
4. Reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness
among the people of Guam of the possibilities open to
them with regard to their right to self-determination, and
calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to expedite the process of
decolonization strictly in accordance with the expressed
wishes of the people of the Territory;
5. Takes note of the statement by the representative of
the administering Power that the Guam Commission on
Self-Determination, which was appointed in February
1984 to deal with the status question in a manner acceptable to the people of the Territory for submission to the
Congress of the United States of America for approval,
hopes to hold a local referendum before the end of 1985;9
6. Takes note of the statement of the representative of
the United States affirming that his Government respects
the wish of the Guamanians to control their own destiny
both politically and economically;9
7. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in the Territory could constitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration and that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the existence of such bases and
installations does not hinder the population of the Territory from exercising its right to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
8. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures not to involve the Territory in any
offensive acts or interference against any other States and
to comply fully with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions
of the General Assembly relating to military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration;
9. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, for the economic and social
development of Guam, and, in this connection, calls upon
the administering Power to take all necessary steps to
strengthen and diversify the economy of the Territory,
with a view to reducing the Territory's economic dependence on the administering Power;
I 0. Reiterates the view that one obstacle to economic
development, particularly in the agricultural sector, stems
from the fact that large tracts of land are held by the federal authorities, and calls upon the administering Power,
in co-operation with the local authorities, to continue the
transfer of land to the people of the Territory;
11. Notes that a settlement was reached in 1984
between representatives of former Guamanian landowners
and the administering Power under which the former will
receive $39.5 million in compensation for land taken over
8 Ibid., Fortieth Session, Sr,pplement No
9 Ibid., para. 9.

n (Al40!23), chap. XVI!.

261

by the United States Government from 1944 to 1963, it
being the right of individual claimants not to participate in
this settlement and continue to press their own claims;
12. Reiterates its call upon the administering Power to
support measures by the territorial Government aimed at
removing constraints to growth in the areas of agriculture
and commercial fishing and to ensure their development
to the fullest extent;
13. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the right of the
people of Guam to their natural resources and to establish
and maintain control over their future development, and
requests the administering Power to take all necessary
steps to protect the property rights of the people of the
Territory;
14. Reaffirms the importance of further efforts by the
territorial Government, with the support of the administering Power, to develop and promote the language and
culture of the Chamorro people, who are the indigenous
people of the Territory;
15. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Guam at an appropriate time should be
kept under review;
16. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Guam
at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/43. Question of Bermuda
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Bermuda, including in particular its resolution 39/33 of 5
December 1984,
Noting the stated position of the administering Power
that it will fully respect the wishes of the people of Bermuda in determining the future constitutional status of the
Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Welcoming the continued co-operation of the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee in
regard to Bermuda, which contributes to informed consideration of conditions in the Territory with a view to accelerating the process of decolonization for the purpose of the
full implementation of the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of Bermuda, and bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening
further its economy as a matter of priority in order to promote economic stability.
IO //,Id .. Supp/e,r,ent No !3 (i\ 40 21)-. ch'IJ)s.-11, IV-VI and XIX.

262

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories, and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda; 11
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Bermuda to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to Bermuda;
4. Urges the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, taking into
account the rights, interests and wishes of the people of
Bermuda expressed freely in conditions leading to real selfdetermination, to continue to take all necessary steps to
ensure the full and speedy implementation of resolution
1514 (XV);
5. Reiterates that it is the obligation of the administering Power to create such conditions in Bermuda as will
enable the people of that Territory to exercise freely and
without interference their inalienable right to self-determination and independence in accordance with resolution
1514 (XV), and, in that connection, reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness among the people of Bermuda of the possibilities open to them in the exercise of
that right;
6. Reaffirms that, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration contained in resolution 1514 (XV), it is ultimately
for the people of Bermuda themselves to determine their
own future political status;
7. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in Bermuda could constitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration and that it is the responsibility of the administering
Power to ensure that the existence of such bases and installations does not hinder the population of the Territory
from exercising its right to self-determination and independence in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the Charter;
8. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures not to involve the Territory in any
offensive acts or interference directed against other States
and to comply fully with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions
of the General Assembly relating to military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration;
9. Urges once again the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to
take all effective measures to guarantee the right of the
people of Bermuda to own and dispose of their natural
resources and to establish and maintain control over their
future development with a view to creating conditions for
a balanced and viable economy;
10. Welcomes the role being played in the Territory by
the United Nations Development Programme, specifically
11 Ibid., chap. XIX.

in programmes of agriculture, forestry and fisheries, and
urges the specialized agencies and all other organizations
of the United Nations system to continue to pay special
attention to the development needs of Bermuda;
11. Urges the administering Power to continue, in cooperation with the territorial Government, the assistance
necessary for the employment of the local population in
the civil service, particularly at senior levels;
12. Emphasizes the desirability of sending a visiting
mission to the Territory at the earliest possible opportunity;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to Bermuda at
an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/44. Question of the British Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the British Virgin
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,' 2
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the British Virgin Islands, including in particular its resolution 39/34 of 5 December 1984,
Noting the stated position of the administering Power
that it will fully respect the wishes of the people of the British Virgin Islands in determining the future political status
of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting with appreciation the continued active participation of the administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the British Virgin Islands, thereby
enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful
examination of the situation in the Territory with a view
to accelerating the process of decolonization for the purpose of the full implementation of the Declaration,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering
Power to promote the economic and social development
of the Territory,
Noting with concern that during the period under review
the international economic crisis caused tourism and its
supportive services, the mainstay of the economy, to slow
down, and taking note that construction activities
increased and that the territorial Government, in its continued efforts to broaden the base of the economy, was reexamining its industrialization programme,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the British Virgin
Islands, and bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying
and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order to promote economic stability,
Welcoming the contribution to the development of the
Territory by the United Nations Development Pro12 /bid., chaps. II, IV. V and XX.
