A /69/PV.30

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

30th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 28 October 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 40
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/98)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.4)
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to address the General Assembly today on
behalf of the 120 Members of the United Nations that
are members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
I take this opportunity to extend the Movement’s
warmest welcome to the General Assembly His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
Today the General Assembly is prepared to
express, for the twenty-third time, its support and
solidarity with the Government and the people of Cuba
through a decisive vote in favour of the draft resolution
(A/69/L.4) calling for lifting of the United States of
America embargo against Cuba. Last year, 188 of the
193 Member States voted for the resolution on the same
subject (resolution 68/8).
The Non-Aligned Movement has always reiterated
its strongest opposition to unilateral coercive measures
with extraterritorial effect. NAM has repeatedly
reiterated its call on the Government of the Unites States
of America to put an end to its unilateral economic,

commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, which
is contrary to international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms and principles governing
peaceful relations among States. It also violates Cuba’s
right to interact with the international community.
The embargo has had grave adverse impacts on the
well-being of the people of Cuba. The direct and indirect
damage caused by this undeserved embargo against
Cuba is enormous. It affects all crucial sectors of the
economy, such as public health, nutrition, agriculture,
banking, trade, investment and tourism. It denies Cuba
access to markets, development aid from international
financial institutions and technology transfers and
creates impediments to the socioeconomic development
of the country. The embargo is also the main obstacle
to broader access to the Internet, the exchange of ideas
and the development of cultural, sports and scientific
relations. The continuation of the embargo is totally
unjustifiable and runs counter to Cuba’s efforts to
achieve sustainable development. In addition, the
measures the United States has taken unilaterally
encroach upon the rights and legitimate interests of
Cuban nationals and third-country nationals.
Despite the enormous pressure the people of Cuba
have endured and the hardships they have been through
as a result of the embargo during the past decades,
they are indeed worthy of praise for the significant
progress they have made, especially in areas such as
education, health care and international cooperation.
The role of Cuba in the global fight against Ebola is
just the most recent example, where the largest number
of health care workers deployed in the Ebola-infected

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-59193 (E)

*1459193*

A/69/PV.30

countries in West Africa is from Cuba. Cuba’s response
to Ebola was and continues to be far more robust than
that of many countries that are far wealthier, and it is
further proof of the constructive role that Cuba plays in
international affairs.
We again recall that last year 188 States Members
voted in favour of this resolution — an almost
unanimous vote in demanding an end to the five-decade
embargo and emphasizing the need to fully adhere to
the principles of mutual respect and non-interference
in the internal affairs of Cuba. Currently, over 190
nations engage economically and politically with Cuba,
while the United States remains alone in pursuing its
unjustified policy.
The Non-Aligned Movement once again urges the
United States of America to yield to the will of the
overwhelming majority of the international community
and to rectify its failed policies by fully complying
with all General Assembly resolutions calling for an
immediate end to the embargo imposed on Cuba.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 134 Member States that form part of
the Group of 77 and China at this 30th plenary meeting
of the General Assembly on agenda item 40, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”.
For a moment, let us imagine a Cuban newborn
with a blood circulation defect that needs immediate
administration of a scarce or unavailable medicine,
such as nitric oxide, to survive. The baby’s life is
at risk, but because of the financial, economic and
commercial blockade of the United States policy
against Cuba, the medicine cannot be bought directly
from the manufacturer. That example illustrates how
human lives are threatened and how public health care
is undermined by the embargo.
Sadly, the embargo also severely impacts sectors
such as education, culture, sport, finance and banking,
foreign trade and foreign investment. Furthermore,
international cooperation provided and received by the
Cuban people is extremely affected by the blockade.
There are also substantial costs to Cuba’s strategic
economic sectors, such as construction, tourism,
industry, communications, energy, mining and
transportation.

2/26

28/10/2014

In an open violation of all the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, the Government of the United Sates of America
has been systematically suffocating Cuba for more
than five decades, causing irreparable human and
social damage as well as huge material and economic
losses for the people of Cuba, seriously threatening the
freedom of trade and investment in that sisterly nation.
Once again, the Group of 77 and China demands
the Government of the United States of America to
put an end to the inhumane and genocidal economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and
exhorts the international community to adopt urgent and
effective measures to prevent the application of coercive
unilateral economic measures and unsolicited listings
against developing countries. The Group denounces
the persecution of Cuba’s international financial
transactions abroad, which has been exacerbated by
the United States Office of Foreign Assets Control in
recent years, and firmly rejects the inclusion of Cuba in
the list of States that sponsor terrorism published by the
State Department of the United States in a unilateral
manner.
Despite the countless difficulties and limitations
experienced by Cuba due to the blockade, the country
has consistently provided generous medical and
humanitarian international assistance of the highest
quality. Currently, there are more than 50,000 Cubantrained health workers providing services in 66 countries.
Recently, a medical team of 165 professionals was sent
to Sierra Leone to help on the front line of response
efforts to Ebola.
I would like to recall the words of President Nelson
Mandela:
“During all my years in prison, Cuba was an
inspiration and Fidel Castro a tower of strength
... [Cuban victories] destroyed the myth of the
invincibility of the white oppressor [and] inspired
the fighting masses of South Africa ... a turning
point for the liberation of our continent — and
of my people — from the scourge of apartheid ...
What other country can point to a record of greater
selflessness than Cuba has displayed in its relations
to Africa? Cuba is an example in the delivery of the
most services while expecting nothing in return.”
In conclusion, the Group firmly urges strict
compliance with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions on the issue of the blockade and expresses

14-59193

28/10/2014

its deep aspiration that the days of the embargo are
coming to an end and that they will soon be relegated
to the pages of history. As President Evo Morales Ayma
rightly stated, “The world is with Cuba”.
Allow me to say a few final words in my national
capacity.
I would like to thank Cuba’s Foreign Minister,
comrad Rodríguez Parrilla, for being in the Assembly
today. Quite simply, Bolivia would like to thank Cuba.
They might temporarily be able to cut off economic
flows. They might temporaritly be able to hamper
foreign trade. They might temporarily be able to prevent
medications from reaching Cuba. But they will never
be able to block Cuba’s independence, sovereignty,
rebellious nature or the absolute solidarity of the Cuban
people. I wish to thank Cuba very much — until victory
always!
Mr. Msosa (Malawi): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the African Group. I join colleagues who
have spoken before me to add our voice on the necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba.
More than 50 years have elapsed since the sanctions
against Cuba were imposed. More than two decades
have passed since this item was placed on the agenda of
the United Nations. The General Assembly has adopted
resolutions on this agenda item year in and year out,
yet the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba has not been lifted.
The African Group is of the view that economic
sanctions against Cuba have caused great economic
hardship, especially for the poor and vulnerable
populations in the country. We believe that an
immediate end to the economic embargo against Cuba is
necessary, and it can serve to promote social and better
standards of life for the people of Cuba. In that regard,
we encourage the spirit of dialogue to be employed to
resolve the issue and therefore allow Cuba to continue
to effectively contribute to global development.
In June, at the twenty-third ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union, held in Malabo, our
Heads of State and Government reaffirmed their full
support for the resolution on the necessity of ending the
economic, financial and commercial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba. We
therefore reiterate the call of our principals inviting the

A/69/PV.30

Government of the United States of America to lift the
long-standing embargo.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC) on the
occasion of the introduction of draft resolution
A/69/L.4, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”.
Since the adoption of resolution 47/19, on
24 November 1992, the General Assembly has
successively adopted, each year, a resolution
emphasizing the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba. It will be
recalled that, at its sixty-eighth session, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 68/8 with the same title,
with the overwhelming support of 188 States Members
of the United. Since 1992, 22 resolutions of the most
representative and democratic organ of the United
Nations, namely, the General Assembly, have each
time called for an end to the embargo imposed against
Cuba. Today we are meeting to consider once again this
draft resolution, and the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States wishes to ratify its support for
what will be the twenty-third resolution of the General
Assembly on the question.
It is important to reiterate the reasons underlying
the convictions of CELAC on this subject. In our view,
the commercial, economic and financial embargo
imposed on Cuba is contrary to the letter and spirit and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of international law. The Charter enshrines
rights, obligations and principles that have become part
of the legal corpus, not only of international law but of
humankind. It must not be violated or undermined by
any Member. Member States must align their national
and international behaviour with the rights, obligations
and principles enshrined in our constituent Charter.
CELAC reiterates the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, inter alia, the principles
of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention
and non-interference in internal affairs, the freedom
of trade and navigation, as well as the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed against Cuba began in 1959 and has continued

14-591933/26

A/69/PV.30

to this day. Today we observe that the embargo has been
transformed into a strict system of unilateral measures
that has continued over time, creating severe economic
losses for the Cuban people that are felt in the most
sensitive areas of Cuban people’s life.
We express our deep concern at the strengthening
of the extraterritorial dimension of the embargo, as well
as at the increasing persecution of Cuba’s international
financial transactions in disregard of the international
community’s political will, as reflected in the draft
resolution. CELAC reiterates its concern, already
expressed in resolution 68/8, regarding the application
by Members States of laws and regulations such as the
Helms-Burton Act, the extraterritorial effects of which
affect the sovereignty of other States and the legitimate
interests of entities and persons under their jurisdiction
and the freedom of trade and navigation. The unilateral
measures applied under the embargo imposed on Cuba
are affecting many companies that are conducting
business with Cuba in accordance with international
law, including the norms established by the rules-based
World Trade Organization. In the last year, several
restrictions and fines were imposed on international
companies, some of them belonging to members of our
Community.
CELAC member States call for an end to
the persecution of Cuba’s international financial
transactions abroad, which have been exacerbated by
the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United
States in recent years. We would like to recall that at
the CELAC Summit held in Havana on 29 January,
the member States of our Community issued a special
declaration on the need to put an end to the economic,
trade and financial blockade imposed by the United
States of America on Cuba, in which they reiterated
their strongest condemnation of the application of laws
and measures contrary to international law, such as the
Helms-Burton Act, including its extraterritorial effect,
and urged the Government of the United States to put
an end to the application of that Act. In that context,
CELAC member States also adopted on 29 September
a special communiqué on the strengthening of the
extraterritorial dimension of the economic, commercial
and financial blockade of the United States of America
against Cuba, as well as the increasing persecution of
Cuban international financial transactions.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States is strongly in favour of the adoption of the
draft resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the

4/26

28/10/2014

economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”. We
emphasize the inconsistency that exists between the
application of unilateral measures that have no backing
in international law and the letter and spirit and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We make an urgent appeal to the United States
of America to align its relevant national legislation with
the Charter of the United Nations, General Assembly
resolutions, the views of the countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean and all the regions of the world, and
the voice of its own people. CELAC is counting on
the support traditionally given to the draft resolution
submitted today for consideration by this body, which
refers to the adverse effects being inflicted on one of
our members.
In conclusion, we call for respect, without excuses,
for the sovereignty and self-determination of the Cuban
nation.
Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I am
very pleased to address the Assembly today on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), whose
established position, consistent with international law,
is based on rejecting some States’ use of unilateral
sanctions against others, and on putting an end to the
sanctions against Cuba. In that regard, I refer to the
Secretary-General’s report on the necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States against Cuba (A/69/98),
and the General Assembly’s inclusion of this crucial
item on its agenda in 1991. The debate on the subject
has continued since then, without reaching a definitive
solution.
The OIC looks forward to finding a way to deal
definitively with this situation. Despite the minor
progress that has been achieved through some measures
aimed at mitigating the sanctions, the effect of those
steps is still limited. The embargo continues to affect,
and has greatly affected, the general welfare of the
Cuban people, obstructing their efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, eradicate poverty and
ensure such basic human rights as education, food,
national progress and health care.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
OIC’s general support for the right of every State to
take whatever measures that seem necessary to it in
order to advance its development in accordance with
international law. The OIC opposes any unjustified
unilateral action that might affect the sovereignty and
14-59193

28/10/2014

interests of another State and its people. The OIC calls
for an end to the embargo on Cuba, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
Mr. Goddard (Barbados): I have the honour
to address the General Assembly on behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM).
CARICOM aligns itself with the statements made
by representatives on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Group of 77 and China and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
For the past 22 consecutive years, CARICOM
member States have gathered in this same setting to add
our voices to the many others opposed to the imposition
by the United Stats of its economic, commercial and
financial embargo on the Republic of Cuba. Today we
reiterate our long-standing position on the issue. For 54
years, the people of Cuba have endured severe economic
loss and stagnation, preventing the expansion of their
country’s commercial ties with the rest of the world and
with all the consequences that flow from that.
As a bloc of States, the Caribbean Community
greatly values the strength that lies in its collective
capacity, its will and its firm stance on common
principles that promote our shared objectives. Those
principles include adherence to the Charter of the United
Nations, multilateralism, sovereignty and free trade.
Accordingly, CARICOM has remained unstinting in its
solidarity with Cuba and in calling for an end to the
unilateral and unwarranted extra-territorial application
by the United States of its Helms-Burton Act, which
runs counter to both the letter and spirit of the Charter
and serves no justifiable legal, political or moral
purpose within contemporary international relations.
Last year, 188 of the 193 States Members of the
United Nations voted in favour of resolution 68/8,
under the same agenda item as today’s draft resolution
(A/68/L.4), representing an overwhelming majority of
the international community in their demand for an end
to a blockade that has stifled the people of Cuba for more
than 50 years. In spite of such significant challenges,
Cuba continues to show itself to be a key regional and
international partner and actor. CARICOM member
States, in keeping with our policy of mutual respect,
good-neighbourliness and adherence to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, have maintained
warm and fraternal relations with Cuba that have

A/69/PV.30

remained resilient despite the continually evolving
hemispheric and international geopolitical landscape.
In the Caribbean subregion, Cuba has built
hospitals and clinics, provided medicines and furnished
doctors, nurses and other health-care professionals.
Additionally, students from the Caribbean Community
have benefitted from free university educations in
Cuba, and Cuba has been unselfishly generous to the
CARICOM member State of Haiti after the earthquake
there. CARICOM looks forward to the upcoming fifth
CARICOM-Cuba Summit, to be held on 8 December
in Havana. We note with appreciation that Cuba is in
the process of mobilizing 160 doctors and nurses — the
largest medical contingent from any single country — to
travel to West Africa to offer assistance in the fight
against Ebola there.
The CARICOM member States also continue
to maintain excellent relations with all countries in
the region. In that spirit, we join the international
community in calling for an immediate end to the
embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba and its
people. We furthermore urge the Government of the
United States of America to engage in a constructive
dialogue with the Government of Cuba aimed at
normalizing their relations. Such a step would remove a
source of tension and conflict in the region and improve
the prospects for peace, development and cooperation
within it.
In support of the principles of international law and
the United Nations Charter, CARICOM, as in previous
years, fully supports the draft resolution before the
General Assembly, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”, and will
vote in favour of its adoption by the Assembly.
The President: Before proceeding any further,
I would like to propose that the list of speakers be
closed, in view of the large number of speakers already
inscribed on it.
It was so decided.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR): Brazil,
Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela and my own country,
Argentina. The associated States of Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru and Suriname also
align themselves with this statement.

14-591935/26

A/69/PV.30

At the outset, I would like to welcome the presence
of Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba.
Every year since 1992, the General Assembly has
adopted a resolution calling for an end to the embargo
on Cuba, with the support of the vast majority of
Member States and world opinion. The humanitarian
and economic costs the embargo imposes on the Cuban
population, as well as the anachronistic rationale behind
it, are evident to all. Despite repeated calls from the
international community and the General Assembly,
those resolutions have not been implemented. Without a
doubt, such disregard for the international community’s
collective will undermines United Nations credibility
and weakens multilateralism.
MERCOSUR was founded on the principles of
solidarity, interdependence and good-neighbourly
relations. We believe that tolerance is the foundation
that has made possible the historic convergence on our
continent of peoples from all corners of the world. We
are linked to our Latin American neighbours by the
desire to live in peace, promote mutual understanding,
defend independence and equality among States and
their sovereignty, and promote respect for international
law.
MERCOSUR and its associated States believe that
the embargo imposed by the United States against Cuba
violates the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law, in particular
the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in their internal affairs, the freedom
of international trade and navigation, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. However, the embargo also
violates the principles of justice and human rights. It
generates shortages and suffering for the entire Cuban
population. It limits and delays economic and social
progress and prevents the achievement of international
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
We therefore lament the fact that the unilaterally
imposed embargo against Cuba, which has been in
place for over half a century, continues unchanged.
We also see with concern an increase in restrictions on
Cuba’s financial transactions with third countries that
prevent greater transparency through direct dialogue.
The member and associated States of MERCOSUR
reject on principle unilateral and extraterritorial
measures. We believe that such measures cause

6/26

28/10/2014

irreparable harm to the well-being of peoples and
obstruct regional integration processes. We also
condemn the application of unilateral, coercive
measures that contravene the principles of free trade. In
reaffirming our unwavering support for the new draft
resolution (A/69/L.4), MERCOSUR and its associated
States reiterate their commitment to multilateralism
as a legitimate instrument for settling disputes and an
effective way to promote international cooperation and
understanding among peoples.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed on Cuba is nothing more than an example
of obsolete policies that have no place in today’s
world. In that sense, MERCOSUR and its associated
States believe that the time has come to put an end
to a unilateral embargo that is morally unjustifiable,
legally indefensible and contrary in all its aspects to
international law. By adopting the draft resolution, the
General Assembly will prove once again its undeniable
political will to defend the ideals of freedom, solidarity
and respect for sovereignty and international law.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
discussion of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla. We are grateful
to the Secretary-General for preparing a comprehensive
report (A/69/98), which lays out the positions of
Member States on ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo of Cuba by the United States
of America and includes an assessment by bodies and
agencies of the United Nations system of the impact of
those sanctions.
We believe a swift lifting of the anti-Cuban embargo
is an objective and long-overdue necessity. We believe
that unilateral economic pressure by the United States
on Cuba, for purely political purposes, runs counter to
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
and has had a pernicious impact on the entire system of
international relations.
Now, on the eve of the adoption of the post2015 global development agenda, the matter of the
embargo on Cuba is particularly crucial and pertinent.
Its ongoing existence threatens possibilities for the
country’s further progressive development and meeting
future sustainable development goals. Against that
background, the Cuban people, while subject to
sanctions and experiencing significant deprivation
because of them, has acted as a responsible member of
the international community and, despite the deadly
14-59193

28/10/2014

A/69/PV.30

threat, were among the first people to assist West Africa
in fighting the Ebola epidemic.

region, which is another of many examples of how Cuba
improves the quality of life in developing countries.

Guided by the fundamental principles of the Charter
on the inadmissibility of any discriminatory measures
or interference in a State’s domestic affairs, the Russian
Federation and the majority of States Members of the
United Nations are decisively in favour of lifting the
Cuban embargo urgently. More broadly, we also favour
rejecting political and coercive pressure on sovereign
States, which stokes confrontational tendencies in
international relations.

Mexico recognizes and supports the process of
modernizing Cuba’s economic and social model, and
we support each other when so required. Mexico wishes
Cuba every success in that important task, which is
crucial for the sustainable future of its economy and the
welfare of its population. The Government of Mexico
is consolidating its political and trade relations with
Cuba, taking as a framework the strengthening of the
Economic Complementation Agreement No.51. In a
context of change, Mexico believes that the elimination
of the economic, commercial and financial blockade
against Cuba would facilitate the restructuring of its
economy, allowing its full reintegration and access to
international trade and investment, with clear benefits
for our region.

Given those reasons, the Russian Federation
supports the draft resolution of the Assembly’s sixtyninth session on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba (A/69/L.4) and
will vote to adopt it. We urge all Member States to vote
for it as well.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
rejects the unilateral actions against the Republic
of Cuba, including the imposition for more than five
decades of the economic, commercial and financial
blockade, which is contrary to international law and the
foundation of relations between States.
We recognize that each State is free and sovereign.
In accordance with the principles established in the
Charter of the United Nations, we must respect the
free self-determination of the peoples of the world.
We reiterate in this forum that the only bodies with
the capacity to apply political, economic and military
sanctions are the Security Council and the General
Assembly. No State should use its power to impose
unilateral actions that affect the development and
prosperity of other nations.
Despite the adverse circumstances it has faced for
more than 50 years, the Republic of Cuba shows high
levels of human development, and its achievements with
regard to the targets in the Millennium Development
Goals are more than satisfactory. The full and
sustainable development of all persons should come
before any political or economic interest, and that is
why we commend the actions carried out by the Cuban
Government to meet its international commitments in
the area of development for the benefit of its people.
We emphasize that historically Cuba has transformed
solidarity into a priority of its foreign policy, as
confirmed by its support in the head-on fight against
Ebola in Africa and its prevention activities in the

Mexico has never broken its fraternal bonds of
friendship, solidarity and respect for the Cuban people.
Once again, we express our support for the draft
resolution submitted for the Assembly’s consideration
to end the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba .
Mr. Narang (India): At the outset, I wish to
acknowledge the presence here of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
India associates itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Bolivia on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, and also with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The five-decade economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba
is the subject of discussion for the twenty-third year in
succession in the General Assembly. In all those years,
the Assembly has repeatedly rejected the imposition of
laws and regulations with extraterritorial impact and
all other forms of coercive economic measures that
hurt the progress and prosperity of people the world
over. The Assembly has also called upon all States, in
conformity with their obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, to refrain
from promulgating and applying, and to repeal and
invalidate, laws and measures that have extraterritorial
impacts affecting the sovereignty of other States.
The continued existence of the embargo, in
contravention of world opinion as expressed by
the Assembly, undermines multilateralism and the

14-591937/26

A/69/PV.30

credibility of the United Nations itself. The embargo is a
violation of the right of a sovereign State to development
and to enjoy the freedom of trade, economy and
navigation. India strongly supports the unambiguous
rejection by the international community of domestic
laws having extraterritorial impact. Embargoes
impede the full achievement of economic and social
development by the population of the affected country,
in particular children and women. They also hinder the
full enjoyment of human rights, including the rights to
development, food, medical care and social services,
among other things.
This embargo, particularly through its extraterritorial
effects, is adversely affecting the Cuban people and the
development efforts of that country. At a time of slow
global recovery from the global financial crisis and
overall deceleration in global growth, the embargo has
had a deleterious impact on the Cuban economy. The
denial to Cuba of access to the United States market,
investment, technology, financial services and scientific,
educational, cultural and sporting institutions has had
enormous consequences. The Cuban economy has been
forced to bear considerable extra costs for sourcing
products, technology and services from third countries
located thousands of kilometres away. Moreover,
the extraterritorial application of the United States
embargo has discouraged investment and technology
transfer and has suppressed other forms of business
collaboration between Cuba and third countries.
The report of the Secretary General on the agenda
item under consideration (A/69/98) is illustrative of the
detrimental impact the embargo has had on international
efforts to undertake socioeconomic advancement in
Cuba. The Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean notes in its report how the embargo
seriously impairs the economic development of the
island and inflicts grave harm on the Cuban population,
including by curtailing the positive effects of measures
recently implemented in Cuba in connection with its
economic and social policy guidelines and the updating
of its economic model. The Commission pointed out
that the embargo forces Cuba to pay extra insurance
and freight charges and more for foreign exchange
transactions, which in turn drives up the credit risk
premiums in trade with Cuba.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
assertion that the embargo has very negative
implications for Cuba’s food supply and agriculture
and that it has a direct effect the food security of

8/26

28/10/2014

vulnerable segments of the Cuban population is indeed
a serious one. In fact, as FAO attests in its submission,
the embargo even affects the operation of entities and
international organizations like FAO in Cuba, raising
their operating costs and costs of procuring essential
supplies and processing financial transactions. On the
human side, the International Labour Organization has
pointed out how the restrictions imposed on the transfer
of remittances from Cuban workers living in the United
States limit the available family income of their Cuban
relatives at home.
The Office of the Resident Coordinator of the
United Nations system for Operational Activities for
Development has documented what it calls the pervasive
impact of the embargo on the social, economic and
environmental dimensions of human development in
Cuba, affecting the most vulnerable socioeconomic
groups of the Cuban population in particular.
In today’s age of the Internet, when the United
Nations repeatedly emphasizes the importance and
the catalytic role of information and communications
technologies, it is paradoxical that the embargo has
contributed to a significantly low level of Internet
penetration in Cuba, as the submission of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development notes. In
that context, in spite of the difficult conditions imposed
upon it, the human development achievements of
Cuba, in particular its high Human Development index
ranking and its achievement of several Millennium
Development Goals before the deadline, are even more
remarkable and commendable.
The continued existence of the embargo and
its devastating effects on a developing country are
particularly incongruous in a year when the international
community is getting together to chart a new collective
vision for sustainable development under the post-2015
development agenda. India believes in the need to create
and strengthen an enabling international economic
environment capable of providing equal opportunities
to all countries. Even more important, we feel that the
international community needs to redouble its efforts
to promote an environment free from sanctions and
embargoes.
I would like to conclude by affirming that India
joins other nations in calling for an immediate end to
the United States embargo against Cuba, and that India
supports the draft resolution to be introduced by Cuba
today.

14-59193

28/10/2014

Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): First, I would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and to
convey through him the greetings of the people and the
Government of Algeria.
Algeria wishes to associate itself with the
statements delivered earlier by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
representative of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, the representative of Malawi on behalf of
the Group of African States, and the representative
of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.
Algeria reiterates its deep concern about the
continuation of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo unilaterally imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba for more than five decades. For
many years now, members of the General Assembly
have adopted almost unanimously a resolution
calling for the lifting of that embargo. Through those
resolutions, the international community has continued
to affirm that Cuba, like all other States Members of
the United Nations, has the right to freedom of trade
and navigation and to expand its relations with all its
economic partners.
Algeria’s principled positions are well known and
remain unchanged. In accordance with the principles of
its foreign policy, Algeria cannot accept the very idea of
the extraterritorial application of laws nor all forms of
coercive economic and trade measures. They contradict
international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Every Member State
should respect the principles of the Charter, including
in particular the sovereign equality of States, territorial
integrity and non-intervention and non-interference in
a country’s internal affairs.
No one one can deny that the blockade has a
negative effect on the well-being of the Cuban people
on a daily basis and causes huge material losses and
economic damages to Cuba. Those consequences have
been exacerbated by the adverse effects of the ongoing
global economic and financial crisis, which has
seriously compromised Cuba’s development efforts.
That is highlighted in the report of the Secretary
General (A/69/98), which presents the views and
information provided by more than 120 countries and
by a great number of entities and agencies of the United
Nations system concerning the implementation of last
year’s resolution 68/8. The embargo frustrates efforts

A/69/PV.30

to achieve all the internationally agreed development
goals, including the all-important Millennium
Development Goals, and negatively affects South-South
cooperation and international cooperation generally.
We must add that we are convinced that the lifting of
the embargo against Cuba will benefit everyone. Cuba
has demonstrated its positive and constructive share in
international relations. Today I have to mention Cuba’s
extremely positive commitment to the international
fight against Ebola. It deserves praise and respect.
One must also recall the long-standing positions of
the Non-Aligned Movement and of the Group of 77 and
China on this issue. Accordingly, Algeria will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): As this is
the first time I take the floor at this session, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to serve
as the President of the General Assembly. I would also
like to extend my warmest welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representative of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, and by the representative
of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Since 1992, the General Assembly has adopted, by
an overwhelming majority, annual resolutions calling
for the lifting of the embargo unilaterally imposed by
the United States against Cuba. We share the view of the
international community that the embargo contravenes
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. It also violates universally
recognized norms governing relations among States,
such as sovereign equality, non-interference in each
other’s internal affairs, the right of self-determination
and peaceful coexistence.
The embargo has resulted in enormous suffering
for the Cuban people, hindered international investment
and commercial relations of other countries with Cuba,
as well as Cuba’s efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. It also constitutes an obstacle to
the future implementation of the post-2015 development
agenda.
Despite hardship, the Government and people of
Cuba have attained significant achievements in many
important areas, especially education and health care.
We appreciate Cuba’s continued active contribution to

14-591939/26

A/69/PV.30

promoting international cooperation to address global
challenges. The deployment of 165 Cuban medical
professionals in West Africa to fight against the ongoing
Ebola crisis has clearly demonstrated that Cuba is an
active and responsible member of the international
community.
Viet Nam champions peaceful solutions to all disputes
and differences between States in accordance with
international law, as dialogue and negotiation — not
violence, coercion and embargoes — are key to a just
and lasting peace. Viet Nam joins the international
community to call on the United States to fully
implement the General Assembly resolutions and to
end its five-decades-old embargo against Cuba. That
would significantly contribute to peace, stability and
development in the world.
My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
Viet Nam’s friendship, cooperation and solidarity with
the people of Cuba. Viet Nam will do its utmost to help
Cuba overcome the difficulties and challenges caused
by the embargo.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
aligns itself with the statement made earlier by the
representative of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
For 22 consecutive years, the General Assembly
has adopted, by an overwhelming majority, resolutions
on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba, urging all countries to comply
with the Charter of the United Nations and norms
of international law and to repeal or invalidate any
laws or measures with extraterritorial effects on the
sovereignty of other States, the legitimate rights and
interests of entities and persons under their jurisdiction
and the freedom of trade and navigation.
Regrettably, however, over the years those
resolutions have not been implemented effectively,
and the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States against Cuba has not
been lifted. That has not only violated the purposes
and principles of the Charter and the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, but has also inflicted huge
economic and financial losses on Cuba. It impedes
efforts by the Cuban people to eradicate poverty,
promote economic and social development and attain
the Millennium Development Goals. It impairs their

10/26

28/10/2014

rights to survival and development and adversely
affects normal economic, commercial and financial
relations between Cuba and other countries.
At a time when the recovery of the world economy
is still weak and the international community suffers
from a multitude of challenges, such as the food and
energy crises and climate change, the existence of
the embargo and sanctions against Cuba is even more
unjustifiable.
The Chinese Government has always maintained
that relations between countries should be based on
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
The right of all countries to independently choose
their social system and path of development should
be respected. The unilateral imposition of military,
political, economic or other sanctions against certain
countries should be opposed. For its own part, China
has always strictly observed and implemented the
relevant General Assembly resolutions. At present,
China and Cuba have maintained normal economic and
trade relations and conducting personnel exchanges
over the years. Our mutually beneficial and friendly
cooperation in various areas continues to grow. That is
consistent with the aspirations of the two peoples and is
conducive to Cuba’s economic and social development.
Against the backdrop of a multipolar world,
economic globalization, cultural diversity and the
democratization of international relations, there is
an irreversible trend towards communication and
cooperation on an equal footing among all countries.
When differences arise between countries, dialogue on
an equal footing and consultation on a friendly basis
are the best means of reaching a solution.
Like most other countries, China hopes that the
United States, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and the General Assembly’s
resolutions, will end its embargo against Cuba as soon
as possible and that relations between the two countries
will continue to improve, thereby promoting stability
and development in the entire Latin American and
Caribbean region.
China will again vote in favour of draft resolution
A/69/L.4, to be submitted by Cuba under this agenda
item.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Allow me to join
others in welcoming the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba to New York.

14-59193

28/10/2014

A/69/PV.30

I would like to begin by aligning this statement
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

States; replace confrontation with engagement, open
the doors of diplomacy and allow the seeds of mutual
cooperation to bear fruit.

My delegation takes the floor to speak on agenda
item 40 and, in particular on draft resolution A/69/L.4,
entitled “Necessity of ending economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by United States of
America against Cuba”. My delegation thanks His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
annual report (A/69/98). Solomon Islands and eight
other Pacific small island developing States made
submissions to the report, joining the more than 150
countries that contributed to the report’s content.

Because of a crisis in the past century, the United
States of America imposed an embargo against Cuba.
Because of a crisis in the twenty-first century, an
opportunity exists to reset relations between the two
neighbouring States. The United States contribution in
combating Ebola and garnering international support
against it, and Cuba’s human-resources response to
affected countries, send a message of hope to the
world. Both countries, united against a common cause,
can do more for the world. My delegation appeals for
strong political will on the part of the United States
to lift the embargo on Cuba and to allow trust and
confidence-building cooperation between the two
Governments to develop and expand.

This item has come before the General Assembly
for the last 21 sessions, and this is the twenty-second
session in which we, the international community,
continue to consider it.
All of us, particularly small developing States,
value international law and multilateralism. Our
interests are better served when everyone operates
under the same rules and in strict compliance with the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and various legal instruments. The
Charter for us is our first and last line of defence of
our sovereignty and security. Multilateralism for us is
an equalizer. The draft resolution before the Assembly
upholds the Charter’s principles and calls for respect
for the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
That is central to all our foreign policies.
Draft resolution A/69/L.4 also is about the freedom
of international trade, the freedom to choose one’s
political system and the freedom to adopt one’s own
economic system. Cuba has demanded that freedom
peacefully and multilaterally for more than two decades
now. It is now more than 50 years since United States
unilateral embargo was imposed on Cuba. The long and
firm grip of the United States over Cuba has challenged
the notion that everyone is born equal. We on the
periphery of the international system keep calling for
a just, fair and equitable system. We hope that those
with absolute power will provide that space. In that
connection, the draft resolution speaks of our interests.
To our friend and partner the United States, se
say: in the name of justice, freedom and human rights,
cast off the chains of the economic, commercial and
financial embargo on Cuba; allow freedom and good
neighbourly relations to grow roots between the two

My delegation wishes to acknowledge the resilience
of the Government and people of Cuba, as stated by
Cuban Foreign Minister Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla
last month at the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.15).
In the five decades of the blockade, Cuba has sent
out 324,000 health workers assisting 158 countries
and trained more than 38,000 medical doctors in 121
countries. Eight Pacific small island developing States
have sent just under 200 medical students to Cuba for
training. Solomon Islands saw its first 100 medical
students graduate last July. More than 20 are expected
to graduate next summer. Health remains a prerequisite
for sustainable development. Cuba continues to invest
in our youth, which will not only change our health
system as more doctors serve among our people but will
also create a healthy, vibrant and productive society.
We thank Cuba for that.
Solomon Islands supports the draft resolution in its
entirety. We do so in solidarity with Cuba. We vote for
peace, equality and justice.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like first to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and assure him of
Egypt’s continued support and solidarity.
In an era in which the free people of the world
are taking the lead in shaping the future of global
cooperation and in bridging the gaps in views and goals,
focusing on paving the path towards the sustainable
development goals and setting aside the grudges of
the past; in a world marked by years of suffering and
tears — a cost that made the world wiser and more

14-5919311/26

A/69/PV.30

mature — unfortunately we still hear echoes from the
past that insist on recalling the ugly age of confrontation
and unilateral aggressive measures, which the world
surpassed a long time ago.
On 19 October 1960, the United States imposed
its unjust and unjustifiable unilateral embargo
on Cuba, which has lasted longer than any other
embargo in the modern era. The world has profoundly
changed since then. Yet, “el bloqueo” persists, in
total violation of international law, the principles
of the United Nations Charter and the principles of
the Organization of American States — the regional
organization to which the United States belongs.
Needless to say, the extraterritorial measures imposed
by the embargo contravene the sovereign equality of
States, non-intervention in their internal affairs and
the freedom of trade and navigation as paramount
principles in the conduct of international affairs.
For five decades, the United States has tightened
limits on the Cuban people’s access to food, medicine,
education and high-technology goods. The embargo
has inflicted damaging repercussions not only on the
financial, banking, trade and investment sectors of the
Cuban economy, but also on health, nutrition, water
quality, education and culture. The economic sanctions
against Cuba have cost the country $3.9 billion in
foreign trade over the past year, raising the overall
estimate of economic damage to $116.8 billion over the
past 55 years. In spite of the detrimental repercussions
of the embargo, the Government of Cuba has made
enormous efforts to meet the needs of its people.
What has been proven over the course of more
than 54 years of the embargo against Cuba is that in
this globalized world, Cuban people can still survive,
thanks to their perseverance. The embargo is a relic of
the Cold War that is increasingly hard to justify morally
or politically. We do not need to remind ourselves that
insistence on an historical mistake for years will never
make it right.
Finally, we once again urge the United States
to immediately and fully comply with the General
Assembly resolutions that since 1992 have called for
the immediate end of the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed against Cuba.
Egypt will continue sending a clear message to the
United States:

12/26

28/10/2014

(spoke in Spanish)
End the embargo now and long live the Cuban
people!
Mr. Moncada (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
Venezuela endorses the statements delivered by the
representatives of Costa Rica and the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States and the Non-Aligned Movement,
respectively.
Our country reiterates its rejection of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba for more than
54 years. It is an illegal policy that flagrantly violates
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, namely, non-intervention, the legal
equality of States, respect for sovereignty, refraining
from threats or the use of force, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
The United States has deliberately ignored calls
by the international community urging it to take
urgent measures to stop that immoral policy. With its
dismissive attitude towards world opinion, the United
States has become the most isolated country in the
world.
The embargo is an aggressive action that seeks
to overthrow the Government of Cuba and, as such,
violates the principle of non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States. The United States is thereby
losing all authority when it seeks to accuse other
countries of deficiencies.
Venezuela reiterates its strongest condemnation
of the enactment and enforcement of laws contrary to
international law, such as the Torricelli Act and the
Helms-Burton Act, and their extraterritorial effects,
which affect the freedom of international trade and
prevent third countries from undertaking economic,
financial and commercial transactions with Cuba. The
United States Government does not have universal
authority over the sovereignty of other States, and its
intention to convert its national laws into universal
laws is spurious.
The embargo systematically violates the human
rights of Cuban citizens, in particular their economic
and social rights, making it difficult for the Government
of Cuba to buy food, medical equipment, medicine
14-59193

28/10/2014

and services on the international market to meet the
basic needs of its people. Generations of Cubans have
therefore been victims of the effects of that measure,
which deals a serious blow to their quality of life.
The embargo also attempts to extend itself to the
financial arena. The United States illegally threatens
and punishes financial institutions beyond its territory
for performing perfectly legal transactions with the
Government of Cuba. In that regard, we reject the
harassment by the United States authorities of banks
that work with that brother country despite United
States efforts to economically suffocate Cuba. We
must denounce the fact that the Cuban Consulate in
Washington, D.C., has been deprived of financial
services for over a year.
Unfortunately, the United States’ conduct runs
counter to the spirit of the Charter, and its violations
of human rights run counter to the letter of the Charter.
Venezuela will continue to demand that the United
States Government respect the fundamental rights of
the Cuban people.
Finally, Venezuela will once again vote in favour
of draft resolution A/69/L.4, demanding an end to that
destructive policy.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): We wish to
acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba.
My delegation would also like to align itself with
statements delivered by the representative of Bolivia on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
by the representative of Malawi on behalf of the Africa
Group.
We would also like to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/69/98) entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”. This is the twenty-third consecutive year
that the Assembly considers a draft resolution entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba” (A/69/L.4). We meet here
again because the United States has ignored the
overwhelming will of the international community that
that debilitating embargo be lifted.
The embargo imposed on Cuba by the United
States violates the rights of the people of Cuba in every

A/69/PV.30

social sector and is a long-standing obstacle to its right
as a country to develop. The future and dreams of
Cuban children continue to remain bleak and blurred
by the draconian legislation that imposed the blockade,
which fails to recognize the sovereignty of States
and their responsibility to protect their citizens under
international law.
The blockade against Cuba must end now, lest
history blame us for failing the Cuban people. All
countries deserve to enjoy the fruits of globalization,
which needs to be made meaningful and tangible for
their people. The United States’ unilateral action is
counter to the letter and the spirit of international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations and other
international laws.
The United States has a historical and moral
responsibility to end the embargo, as it is
counterproductive and pugnacious in its form and
nature. Yet the United States Government persists
with its intransigence, as illustrated by the recently
approved Consolidated Appropriations Act for fiscal
year 2014, which reiterates clauses prohibiting United
States banking institutions from engaging in financial
transactions with several countries, including Cuba.
The United States blockade policy against Cuba is
rendering it impossible for that sister country of
ours to have an unfettered right to export and import
products and services to and from the United States
and is being barred from using the United States dollar
in its international financial transactions or to have
accounts in that currency in third-country banking
institutions. That is, inter alia, inconsistent with the
values espoused under the Doha Declaration and the
Monterrey Consensus on financing for developmen,and
the goals that we are attempting to set for ourselves in
the post-2015 development agenda process.
The imposition of the embargo negatively impacts
foreign trade and the promotion of foreign direct
investment in Cuba. The Cuban Government has in the
past asked the World Trade Organization to rule against
the four-decade-long United States embargo. That is
another example to indicate that Cuba seeks to act in
accordance with the rules-based global governance
system and strives to comply with international rules
governing relations, both economic or political, among
States.
Cuba is also barred from accessing bank credit
in the United States and credit from affiliates in third
countries or from international financial institutions,

14-5919313/26

A/69/PV.30

such as the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank.
Those measures continue to harm the Cuban economy
and must be stopped now.
The blockade is an enormous assault on the social
and psycho-social fibre of the Cuban people, and it
imposes serious obstacles upon its economic, cultural
and social development. That illegal policy touches on
each and every aspect of the existence of the Cuban
people, and its effects run deep.
Despite all the challenges imposed by the blockade,
the Cuban people have remained staunch and resilient
in their national consciousness and identity, so as to
keep on fighting this injustice. They remain hopeful
that one day victory will be realized. The Cubans are a
peace-loving nation. They are not at war with the United
States, nor do they wish to engage in any belligerent
exchanges with the Americans and their allies.
In spite of the embargo, Cuba’s goodwill as a
responsible international partner is evident all over
the world, as is illustrated in its early and heroic
interventions to assist in the fights against the spread of
Ebola in West Africa. Ironically, even the United States
has now agreed to cooperate with Cuba in that global
crisis.
Currently, our Deputy Minister of the Department of
International Relations and Cooperation, Mr. Luwellyn
Landers, is in Cuba leading the South African delegation
participating in several events to commemorate 20
years of freedom and diplomatic relations between the
two countries. South Africa has been a beneficiary
of Cuba’s ongoing assistance in support of the five
priorities of the South African Government, through
joint programmes in health, labour, social development,
housing and infrastructure. More than 1,800 South
African students are currently receiving medical
training in Cuba this year, under the auspices of the
South Africa-Cuba health cooperation agreement, with
a further 620 students preparing to join the group in
October. More than 420 South African students from
disadvantaged backgrounds have graduated in Cuba
as medical doctors, providing much-needed primary
health-care services to their local communities.
South Africa unequivocally supports the Cuban
people in their struggle for economic freedom through
the lifting of the economic, financial and commercial
blockade. The United States Government should heed
the calls of the international community and allow

14/26

28/10/2014

the people of Cuba to break free from the unjust and
archaic act of economic repression against the Cuban
people. I wish to reiterate here that South African will
support the draft resolution (A/69/L.4) to be introduced
by the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia associates itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the representative
of Costa Rica on behalf of the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean, and the
representative of Argentina on behalf of the Common
Market of the South and associated States.
I would like to welcome Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and his
delegation who are here today. As everyone who has
taken the floor before me has said, the commercial,
economic and financial embargo imposed against
Cuba is contrary to international law and to the spirit
and principles that inspired the Charter of the United
Nations.
Since the adoption of resolution 47/19, on
24 November 1992, Colombia, together with all of the
countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and the
vast majority of the Member States, has expressed its
support for Cuba by voting for the annual resolution
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.” That support was reflected in
the 188 votes in favour of resolution 68/8, adopted at
the previous session of the General Assembly, which
emphasizes the need to end that policy, which dates
back over 50 years, as has been expressed on various
occasions by the President of Colombia, Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón.
In accordance with this year’s draft resolution
(A/69/L.4), my country reaffirms its policy of respect
for international law and the principles of political
independence, the free self-determination of peoples
and non-intervention and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other nations.
Colombia does not support the kind of measures that
run counter to the economic, commercial development
and welfare of Cuba’s population. My country considers
it indispensable that Member States make progress in
building links of cooperation and friendship based on

14-59193

28/10/2014

multilateralism and the principle of sovereign equality,
enshrined in Chapter I of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to welcome Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, who honours us
with his presence in the Hall.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Bolivia on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, the representative of Costa
Rica on behalf of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean, and the representative
of Argentina on behalf of the Common Market of the
South. We would now like to deliver the following
statement in our national capacity.
Brazil reiterates its firm rejection of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, as we
reject the extraterritorial application of domestic trade
laws and of discriminatory trade practices that hinder
the development of Cuba and ultimately affect the
lives and well-being of its citizens. Brazil calls upon
Governments not complying with resolution 68/8 to
take urgent steps to decisively eliminate discriminatory
trade practices and to end economic, commercial and
financial embargoes adopted unilaterally.
As a founding nation of the United Nations, which
next year will celebrate its seventieth anniversary of
promoting a culture of peace in the world, Brazil calls
upon all Governments to show respect and commitment
to international law, diplomacy, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, trade and economic cooperation, and
respect for the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
In addition to the adverse impacts of unilateral
measures on the Cuban people, the extraterritorial
nature of those measures shows that they are in
contradiction with the basic principles of international
law, in particular respect for the sovereignty and the
freedom to trade and to navigate. We consider the
effects of the embargo unacceptable, especially when
they have an impact on humanitarian aid.
Unilateral blockades and embargoes — apart from
being illegal under the Charter of the United Nations — are
contrary to human rights law, humanitarian law and
refugee law, and they harm populations, especially
women and children, who should be protected as a
priority, especially the poorest and most vulnerable
segments of the population.

A/69/PV.30

Brazil welcomes the progress that Cuba has made
in modernizing its economic model. To continue on that
path, Cuba requires the support of its partners near and
far. Cooperation with Cuba, however, is systematically
hampered by an illegal, illegitimate and inhuman
economic embargo.
The Government of Brazil will continue not only
to oppose the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba, but we will also develop a
growing and promising relationship of social, political
and economic friendship with that country to promote
its development, in the spirit of Latin American and
Caribbean integration, according to the principles of
solidarity.
Today there is consensus among Latin American
and Caribbean countries with regard to the impossibility
of future Summits of the Americas taking place without
the participation of Cuba. There are no Americas
without the full participation of Cuba in all areas of
regional relations. Brazil will vote in favour of the draft
resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” (A/69/L.4).
Mr. Silwamba (Zambia): I appreciate this
opportunity to contribute to the discussion on this
important agenda item.
Zambia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and Bolivia on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (A/69/98) and the views expressed therein.
Zambia has been supporting, voting and speaking in
favour of the resolutions on this agenda item for over
two decades, the period in which the Assembly has
been considering the item. Today, we again reaffirm
our full support for this year’s draft resolution on the
subject (A/69/L.4).
Zambia continues to be greatly concerned that,
after 52 years of the embargo and 22 consecutive annual
Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the unilateral
coercive measures against Cuba, little has changed on
the ground. In keeping with the norms of international
law, including the overwhelming annual votes in the
Assembly, Zambia strongly urges the Government
of the United States of America to lift the embargo.
Zambia regrets the untold suffering that the decadeslong economic, commercial and financial embargo has

14-5919315/26

A/69/PV.30

caused the Cuban people. In particular, the right of
Cubans to influence their own development path has
been severely restricted, with access to international
technology and expertise in critical sectors such as
finance, technology, education and health greatly
curtailed.
Zambia therefore strongly supports the United
Nations decisions on the subject, particularly through
the most recent resolution (resolution 68/8), which
reaffirmed the resounding call to end the sanctions on
Cuba. It remains Zambia’s concern that the continued
application of laws such as the 1996 Helms-Burton Act
create extraterritorial effects that affect the sovereignty
of third States, the legitimate interests of entities or
persons under their jurisdiction and the freedoms of
trade and navigation.
My delegation applauds and admires the people of
Cuba and their leadership for their resilience, hard work
and dedication to the advancement of their great country
despite the embargo. They have remained steadfast and
have risen above the challenges to succeed in various
fields for the benefit of themselves and friends abroad,
including many Zambians.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reassure
the people of Cuba of Zambia’s continued solidarity on
this issue, and welcomes the law passed in March 2014
by the Government of Cuba aimed at further attracting
foreign investment and easing travel restrictions.
Mr. Pisarevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I
would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba.
Belarus has repeatedly underscored the unacceptable
nature of the use of coercive economic measures and
believes that economic sanctions are essentially a way
of exerting political pressure on sovereign States. The
imposition by the United States of economic sanctions
on Cuba runs counter to the Charter of the United
Nations and a number of international commitments,
and creates artificial barriers. Unilateral sanctions,
economic pressure and coercive measures taken against
independent States are counterproductive and can lead
to a stoking of tensions in relations between sovereign
States and in the international arena as a whole. Belarus
supports the principle of equal and mutually respectful
dialogue, which can assist in settling disagreements.

16/26

28/10/2014

Belarus, like Cuba, is has experienced and is
continuing to experience the negative impact of the
imposition of economic sanctions by the United States
and the European Union. They are mainly intended to
deprive ordinary citizens in Belarus of their rights.
Despite the clear signal coming from the international
community on the need to end the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
against Cuba, the United Nations has failed to respond
properly to the United States’ actions against Cuba and
other sovereign States. That is prompting other Western
countries to use the same nefarious practices as a way
of subordinating the independent policies of States to
their own political ambitions.
In line with Human Rights Council resolution
19/32, on 5 April 2013 there was an interactive dialogue
in Geneva on unilateral coercive measures and their
impact on human rights. Following that, a report was
drafted by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (A/HRC/27/20). The
report noted that the participants in the meeting were
unanimous in their assessment that policies consisting
of unilateral coercive measures lead first and foremost
to violations of human rights, such as the rights to food,
work, health care and education. Thus, as the report
notes, entirely innocent civilians not only fail to receive
help in asserting their rights, but are doubly punished.
We welcome the creation of the mandate of a
Special Rapporteur on unilateral coercive measures.
We trust that the Special Rapporteur will significantly
strengthen activities aimed at drawing the attention of
the international community, including the population
of those countries who impose unilateral measures
themselves, to the counterproductive nature and harm
caused by such measures, which undermine the basis for
development. The Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Secretary-General and other senior
United Nations civil servants should take appropriate
measures to end the use of individual measures of
economic sanctions. Belarus is in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Cuba (A/69/L.4).
Mr. Mwinyi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
are taking the floor to extend our solidarity to the
Cuban Government and people, who continue to suffer
under a 50-year-long unjust economic, commercial
and financial embargo. It is with profound regret that
Tanzania, an ally of both the United States of America
and Cuba, once again stands at this rostrum to speak

14-59193

28/10/2014

about this unfortunate situation, which continues
unchanged despite the many resolution on the subject
adopted by this body.
The situation is regrettable for two main reasons.
First, the delay in resolving the matter continues to
undermine the credibility and legitimacy of the United
Nations, the main goal of which is the preservation
of world peace and security, the promotion of human
rights and social justice, and the advancement of
economic prosperity for all. Every unfulfilled or unimplemented resolution or decision adopted by this body
is a great failure for its entire membership. Secondly,
it is regrettable that a friendly nation and founder of
this world Organization continues to ignore repeated
petitions made by the overwhelming majority of nations
in this Hall calling for the immediate and unconditional
cessation of the embargo against Cuba. The embargo
may be a bilateral matter, but its prolongation has
extraterritorial ramifications.
We strongly believe that the time has come for
the United States of America and Cuba to mend their
diplomatic relations and join forces against the common
enemies of humanity, namely, poverty, disease,
illiteracy and climate change.
We have witnessed the sacrifices of many
countries, including the United States of America and
Cuba, who have deployed medical personnel, troops,
equipment and resources to the Ebola battlefield in the
Western African States of Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Guinea. The Ebola outbreak has exposed the true foes
of humanity. From the ravages of the outbreak, we must
build a stronger united front against those enemies and
not against each other. Truly, we cannot afford to miss
this historic opportunity.
Let me conclude by citing the words of Mwalimu
Julius Kambarage Nyerere, founder of the Tanzanian
nation, who said at this very rostrum in September
1983:
“We may not like each other. We may distrust
each other. But neither liking nor distrust is
relevant. In this twentieth century our nations have
to work together in order to survive. The alternative
is to die, all of us, and all our peoples. The choice
is ours: cooperation slowly and painfully built up,
or inevitable and pervading chaos, insecurity and
disaster ... Let us decide to work together for the
good of humanity.” (A/38/PV.14, paras. 47 and 48)

A/69/PV.30

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.4.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Today is the twenty-third time that the General
Assembly is considering this issue, which is of such
importance for the international community, as it has
to do with international law, which protects all States,
whether big or small, rich or poor, and guarantees
their independence and the exercise of their national
sovereignty, which is the basis for sovereign equality. It
is also directly linked to the enjoyment of human rights
by all persons and all peoples. This matter concerns
freedoms of trade and navigation, which protects the
interests of States, companies and individuals.
However, we are gathered here at a very odd
international juncture characterized by serious threats
to international peace and security: terrible wars,
terrorist acts of extreme cruelty, the risk posed by the
existence of huge nuclear arsenals, and unbelievable
levels of military expenditures, which are of no use in
solving any of the serious problems facing the world’s
population, which is quickly approaching 8 billion. This
is a crucial moment in terms of the impact of climate
change, which leads to, among other catastrophic
consequences, unprecedented famine, extreme poverty
across entire regions and massive waves of migration.
We are living in an age characterized by a systemic
global crisis with its constituent economic, food, energy
and water components.
Together with poverty, which takes a higher toll
on human lives than wars, we are at increased risk of
serious diseases such as Ebola, which could become
one of the worst pandemics in history, if not stopped
and eradicated in the affected nations of Western Africa
through urgent and effective cooperation by all. As was
recently stated by President Raul Castro Ruz:
“This noble and urgent endeavour demands the
indispensable commitment and dedication of every
nation in the world, to the extent of everyone’s
possibilities. We are of the view that this grave
problem should not be politicized, as that would
distract us from the main objective, which is to help
confront the epidemic in Africa and prevent it in
other regions.”
All of those factors present an unprecedented
combination of old and new problems that could

14-5919317/26

A/69/PV.30

make human life unsustainable. None of them can
be resolved, if we do not change our attitude and our
way of dealing with and shaping reality and engage
in genuine cooperation in the interest of the survival
of humankind. As recently written by Comrade Fidel
Castro:
“Any sensible person knows that political
decisions that entail some risk for highly qualified
staff involve a higher level of responsibility for
those who call on them to fulfil that risky task.
That is something far more difficult than sending
soldiers to fight and even die for a just political
cause, who do so because they believe it to be
their duty. Medical staff who are prepared to go
anywhere to save lives, even at the risk of losing
their own, offer the best example of solidarity that
human beings can show.”
It is a fact that, in recent times, the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
United States against Cuba has been tightened and
that its extraterritorial application to every region of
the world has been reinforced, in particular through
the imposition of huge and unprecedented fines in the
amount of $11 billion against 38 banks, including the
French bank BNP Paribas, for having transactions with
Cuba and other countries.
The cumulative economic damage, which has
been huge for a small economy like ours, amounts
to $1,112,534 million, calculated on the basis of the
price of gold. That price is being manipulated by
those who created the harmful monetary system
currently in force, which is already feeling the effects
of the insurmountable crisis that has struck the poorest
countries.
The human damage caused by the blockade is
increasing. Already, 77 per cent of Cubans have been
born under the blockade. Our families’ suffering cannot
be measured. There are many international conventions
that proscribe the blockade, including the 1948
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide. The exercise of their human rights
by an entire people is being impaired. The economic
development of the country is seriously hampered.
Although our health-care and social systems have
managed to prevent any loss of human life, no honest
person, whether in the United States or anywhere else in
the world, could support the devastating consequences
of the blockade. Despite everything, our national

18/26

28/10/2014

culture, our education system and our guarantee of
equal rights and opportunities allow us to be a nation
that is educated and compassionate.
On both sides of the Florida Straits, the peoples of
the United States and Cuba have always had close links.
Despite the systematic slanderous campaigns launched
against our country for the past half century, the people
of the United States supported the return to his family
of the Cuban child who was kidnapped in 1999. Cuba
extended every possible assistance in the immediate
aftermath of the terrible terrorist acts of 11 September
2001, when thousands of flying planes were left without
a place to land, and, later, helped fill the gap in the
supply of antibiotics at the time of the anthrax attacks
in the United States.
In 2005, truly concerned about the damage that was
being caused by hurricane Katrina, we offered medical
assistance to the people of New Orleans. That led to the
establishment of the Henry Reeve medical contingent,
which specializes in the management of disaster
situations and epidemics. It is named after a heroic
young American who fought for Cuba’s independence
back in the nineteenth century. That contingent is
deployed in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea. Its
prestigious name was borne by the brigade that assisted
Pakistan in 2005 in the aftermath of the earthquake
there. It has continued to engage in fruitful cooperation
with United States military medical personnel, which
started in El Salvador after the earthquake of 2001 and
in Guatemala in 2002 and 2003 to treat onchocerciasis,
or river blindness. In 2010, after the earthquake in
Haiti, the United States and Cuba also cooperated to
assist that long-suffering nation.
The Cuban Government has invariably shared
information on planned terrorist actions or attacks
against the United States with that country’s
Government. Despite the old tensions and the attempts
by violent extremists and terrorist groups to inflame
them, there has not been a war, nor have any young
Americans died in Cuba. Despite having been
slandered, Cuba has never been a threat to the national
security of the United States. There is no hostility
between our peoples. Cuba hospitably welcomes the
few Americans who are allowed by their Government
to visit or who brave the legal consequences that might
result from doing so and those who come to offer
humanitarian assistance, such as Pastors for Peace, or
to study medicine.

14-59193

28/10/2014

There are well-known opinion polls that show the
increasing and majority support from absolutely all
sectors of United States society for the lifting of the
blockade and the normalization of bilateral relations.
It is particularly noteworthy that that support is even
more marked in Florida, as confirmed by the electoral
trends in the most recent presidential elections.
Political personalities of the most diverse stripes
and scholars have recognized that the policy has
failed to meet its purpose and has not served the
national interests of that Power. It is enough to read the
editorials published by The New York Times in recent
weeks. Religious leaders have cited legitimate and
indisputable ethical and humanitarian reasons to ask
for change. American citizens are demanding the right
to travel to the only place on the planet where they are
prevented from going and to receive direct and personal
information on the reality of the situation in Cuba.
Entrepreneurial organizations and businesspeople
believe that the blockade harms their economic interests.
The majority public opinion is opposed to maintaining
the current state of affairs and is expressing that in an
increasingly critical way. Cuban émigrés have suffered
under discriminatory measures and have had to cope
with numerous obstacles hindering family reunification
and travelling in both directions, excessive costs
imposed on them, political manipulation and even
terrorist violence. The majority want peace and wellbeing for their families and their people and normal ties
with their mother country.
What is the point of encouraging the illegal use
of information technologies instead of authorizing
mutually beneficial businesses in the area of
telecommunications? What is the point of preventing
Cuba’s connection to nearby submarine cables, thus
limiting and hindering our connectivity? The blockade
is harmful to Cuba, but it is also harmful to the United
States. The absurd and ridiculous inclusion of Cuba on
the list of States sponsors of international terrorism,
which has been used to justify the imposition of
additional financial sanctions, is to the discredit of the
United States.
The 16 years that three Cuban anti-terrorist fighters
have been unjustly imprisoned under false pretences
have not weakened them. On the contrary, they have
become heroes, examples for future generations of
Cubans and a source of pride for those whose sacrifice
paved the way towards a new Cuba.

A/69/PV.30

The decision to end the blockade will be welcomed
at the global level and will have a singular impact on
global peace and the peaceful settlement of conflicts
and differences.
After the limited but welcome measures of 2009
and 2011 on family visits, remittances from Cubans
who settled in United States territory and travel licenses
enabling certain categories of United States citizens
to engage in exchanges of various sorts, the technical
dialogue has been expanded to include other issues,
and cooperation has been enhanced in areas such as
the fight against drug trafficking, transnational crime
and trafficking in persons; the prevention of oil spills;
search and rescue operations; air safety; and other
specific areas. The reaction of United States society and
the international community to those modest advances
has been one of support and encouragement.
President Barack Obama has been entrusted with
every constitutional prerogative and does not require
support from Congress to modify certain crucial
aspects of the blockade and introduce a new and
decisive dynamic in bilateral relations. We invite the
Government of the United States to establish mutually
respectful relations based on reciprocity, sovereign
equality, the principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. We can seek solutions
to our differences through respectful dialogue and
cooperation in areas of common interest. We can live
and deal with each other in a civilized manner, despite
our differences.
Cuba will never renounce its sovereignty or the
path freely chosen by its people to build a more just,
efficient, prosperous and sustainable socialism — nor
will it give up in its quest for a different international
order or cease in its struggle for worldwide equilibrium.
At this difficult and special juncture, I ask members
to vote in favour of draft resolution A/69/L.4, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”, in order to give weight to
the idea that the serious problems currently facing
humankind require us to change our way of relating
to each other, so that we can solve those problems and
preserve peace and human life.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in the debate on this item. We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/69/L.4.

14-5919319/26

A/69/PV.30

Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and shall
be delivered by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Godard (United States of America): As do all
Member States, the United States conducts its economic
relationships with other countries in accordance with
its national interests and its principles. Our sanctions
toward Cuba are part of our overall effort to help the
Cuban people freely exercise their human rights and
fundamental freedoms and determine their own future,
consistent with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the democratic principles to which the
United Nations itself is committed. We therefore stand
in opposition to the draft resolution.
The Cuban Government uses this annual draft
resolution in an attempt to shift blame for the island’s
economic problems away from its own policy failures.
The Cuban Government now publicly recognizes
that its economic woes are caused by the economic
policies that it has pursued for the past half-century.
We note and welcome recent changes that reflect that
acknowledgement, such as those that allow greater selfemployment and liberalization of the real-estate market.
But the Cuban economy will not thrive until the Cuban
Government permits a free and fair labour market,
fully empowers Cuban independent entrepreneurs,
respects intellectual property rights, allows unfettered
access to information via the Internet, opens its State
monopolies to private competition and adopts the sound
macro-economic policies that have contributed to the
success of Cuba’s neighbours in Latin America.
The United States remains a deep and abiding
friend of the Cuban people. The Cuban people continue
to receive as much as $2 billion per year in remittances
and other private contributions from the United States.
That support has been made possible by United States
policy choices. By the Cuban Government’s own
account, the United States is one of Cuba’s principal
trading partners. In 2013, the United States exported
approximately $359 million in agricultural products,
medical devices, medicine and humanitarian items to
Cuba. Far from restricting aid to the Cuban people,
we are proud that the people of the United States
and its companies are among the leading providers
of humanitarian assistance to Cuba. All of that trade
and assistance is conducted in conformity with our
sanctions programme, which is carefully calibrated

20/26

28/10/2014

to allow and encourage the provision of support to the
Cuban people.
The United States places the highest priority on
building and strengthening connections between the
Cuban people and the people of the United States.
United States travel, remittance, information exchange,
humanitarian and people-to-people policies, which were
updated in 2009 and 2011, provide the Cuban people
with alternative sources of information, help them take
advantage of limited opportunities for self-employment
and private property and strengthen independent civil
society. The hundreds of thousands of Americans who
have sent remittances and travelled to the island, under
categories of purposeful travel promoted by President
Obama, remain the best ambassadors for our democratic
ideals.
The United States strongly supports the Cuban
people’s desire to determine their own future through
the free flow of information to, from, and within Cuba.
The right to receive and impart information and ideas
through any media is set forth in article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is the Cuban
Government’s policies that continue to prevent the
enjoyment of that right. The Cuban Government now
claims to share our goal of helping the Cuban people
to access the Internet. Yet the Cuban Government
has failed to offer widespread access to the Internet
through its high-speed cable with Venezuela. Instead,
it continues to impose barriers to information for the
Cuban people, while disingenuously blaming United
States policy.
Moreover, the Cuban Government continues to
detain Alan Gross, a United States citizen who was
sentenced to 15 years in prison for facilitating Internet
access for Cuba’s small Jewish community. The United
States calls on Cuba to release Mr. Gross immediately,
allow unrestricted access to the Internet and tear down
the digital wall of censorship that it has erected around
the Cuban people.
The draft resolution only serves to distract from the
real problems facing the Cuban people, and therefore my
delegation will oppose it. Though Cuba’s contributions
to the fight against Ebola are laudable, they do not
excuse or diminish the regime’s treatment of its own
people. We encourage this world body to support the
desires of the Cuban people to choose their own future.
By doing so, it would truly advance the principles upon
which the Charter of the United Nations was founded,

14-59193

28/10/2014

and the purposes for which the United Nations was
created.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Once again, the international community
meets in the General Assembly to discuss and approve
the draft resolution submitted by the sister Republic
of Cuba entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”.
Nicaragua, in explaining its vote on the draft
resolution, would like to begin by quoting a Cuban
comrade, who, while recently visiting Nicaragua, said
in reference to our country: “Our patriotic sentiments,
our spirituality are linked to Nicaragua and all that
hurts these people we feel at first hand”. Nicaragua
will vote in favour of the draft resolution because we
share those sentiments, our people and Government
feel at first hand all that happens to the brother people
and Government of Cuba. There have been fifty-five
years of blockade, economic war and aggression, which
represents, to our knowledge, the most prolonged and
ruthless such exercise in contemporary times.
We wish to emphasize that the statements of
support for the people and Government of Cuba recently
expressed by representatives of the Group of 77 and
China, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, the Caribbean
Community, the Union of South American Nations, the
Southern Common Market and the African Union are
the most irrefutable proof that the world almost entirely
rejects and condemns that criminal blockade.
We appreciate the information provided by
our fellow Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, that the United States
Administration not only continues to maintain the
blockade, but has not taken any steps toward ending
that illegal and unjust policy. The United States
continues to reinforce its inhumane embargo and its
use of extraterritorial measures, especially in the
banking and financial sectors, and to prosecute those
who engage in international financial transactions with
Cuba, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law.
It is against that backdrop that we would like, once
again, to denounce before the Assembly the fact that
the Consulate of the Republic of Cuba in Washington,
D.C., has been deprived of financial services for the past
year. As always, we are saddened and infuriated when

A/69/PV.30

we see how those measures impact the development and
lives of the Cuban people, as detailed by the Foreign
Minister. The effects on imports and exports and the
lack of access to international credit impacts the Cuban
people’s health and education system, their right to
food and their lack of access to international markets.
In short, the measures inflict damage in all spheres
of the Cuban people’s lives. The blockade is the main
obstacle to the sustainable development and economic
and social programmes of that sister-nation.
Today, we would like to indicate that, despite this
war of aggression and embargo, that heroic people
will never surrender, and we are convinced that we
can continue to count on them, on their solidarity and
unconditional support, for any emergency or needs that
any of our peoples have. Today, faced with the Ebola
epidemic, Cuba is as always at the forefront of helping
humanity, in defence of developing countries and also,
why not say it, in defence of developed countries.
Nicaragua once again condemns the inhumane and
criminal economic, commercial and financial blockade
against Cuba. We demand its immediate cessation.
We demand the return of the occupied territory of
Guantanamo, the immediate and unconditional release
of the five Cuban anti-terrorist heroes, the cessation of
the recent immoral, illegal and covert activity called
ZunZuneo and the immediate removal of Cuba from the
list of countries that sponsor terrorism, which is nothing
more than the United States Government’s justification
and pretext for intensifying its aggressive practices and
policies against Cuba.
Unfortunately, and despite what we heard this
morning in this Hall, the same United States delegate
once again put forward the same incongruous arguments
and fallacies that the United States puts forward every
year to justify its criminal blockade policy. Once again,
the United States is trying to confuse the General
Assembly with its arguments that convince no one,
a reflection of its stubborn and outdated policies,
selfishness, its imperial arrogance and exceptionalism.
Nicaragua will once again vote in favour of
the draft resolution (A/69/L.4) and urges the rest of
the international community to once again vote in
favour of Cuba, reject the United States policies, their
pretensions and justifications, and to continue walking
alongside Cuba, in solidarity, united in cooperation,
hand in hand, to eradicate the inequities that afflict our
peoples, as we seek to eradicate poverty and improve
health, education, happiness and well-being for all.

14-5919321/26

A/69/PV.30

In conclusion, I wish to quote our President Ortega
Saavedra, who, in referring to the embargo, has said:
“It is time to end this blockade. The situation
has changed, including within the United States,
the majority of people are against the blockade. The
conditions have been created for President Barack
Obama to decide to take that step, even if it goes
against the system. Every day, it is increasingly
clear that Cuba is not isolated from the world, that
it is the American policy that remains alone and
isolated. That is the reality.”
Hopefully, the United States will decide to rectify
its policies and end its own isolation. We invite the
delegation of the United States and the United States
Government to join the international community in
putting an end to this ancient history, and to build
together a future of friendship, mutual cooperation and
respect.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.4, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cabo Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,

22/26

28/10/2014

Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Palau
Draft resolution A/69/L.4 was adopted by 188 votes
to 2, with 3 abstentions (resolution 69/5).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted, I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.

14-59193

28/10/2014

United States trade policy towards Cuba is
fundamentally a bilateral issue. However, the effects
and side effects of extraterritorial legislation and
unilateral administrative and judicial measures also
influence business decisions in the EU and have a
negative effect on EU interests. American legislation
such as the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and the
Helms-Burton Act of 1996 has extended the effects of
the United States embargo to third-party countries. In
the framework of its common commercial policy, the
European Union has firmly and continuously opposed
such extraterritorial measures. While we acknowledge
the decision of the Government of the United States
to lift restrictions on remittances and family travel to
Cuba, we cannot allow unilaterally imposed measures
to interfere with our economic and commercial relations
with Cuba.
In order to address the problem, in November 1996
the EU Council of Ministers adopted a regulation and
a joint action to protect the interests of natural or legal
persons residing in Europe from the consequences of
those Acts. At the summit between the European Union
and the United States held in London in May 1998, a
package was agreed on that also sought to alleviate
the problems created by extraterritorial legislation. It
covered waivers to Titles III and IV of the Helms-Burton
Act, a commitment by the United States Government to
resisting future extraterritorial legislation of that kind,
and an understanding regarding the disciplines for
strengthening investment protection. It is vital that the
United States implement that agreement.
The European Union’s policy towards Cuba was set
out in a common position in 1996. In a reaffirmation
of its validity, in June 2008 the European Union lifted
the restrictive measures that had been imposed on Cuba
in 2003. A dialogue with the authorities in Havana
was resumed without preconditions and on a basis of
reciprocity and non-discrimination. Five ministerial
political dialogue sessions have been held with the
Cuban Government to address issues of common
interest, including human rights — a question at the
core of our relations with all third countries, including
Cuba. We reaffirm our determination to pursue a
results-oriented, comprehensive dialogue with the
Cuban authorities and with representatives of civil
society and the peaceful pro-democracy opposition,
in accordance with EU policies, as well as the right of
Cuban citizens to make independent decisions about
their future.

A/69/PV.30

We reiterate our call on the Cuban Government
to grant its citizens full, internationally recognized
civil, political and economic rights and freedoms,
including freedom of assembly and expression and
free access to information. We call on it to ratify the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and, in the wake of the visit of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to food,
to extend invitations to other Rapporteurs to visit Cuba.
In that context, we welcome the Cuban Government’s
adoption of a migration law in 2013 as an important
step towards granting full freedom of movement to
Cuban citizens.
Cuba’s existing restrictions on rights and freedoms
undermine and offset its achievements in health care and
education. Similarly, Cuban domestic economic policy
seriously hampers its own economic development. In
that context, we note the Cuban Parliament’s adoption
in August 2011 of a package of economic and social
reforms, and we expect them to be extended and
implemented so as to address the Cuban people’s key
concerns. The economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States contributes to
Cuba’s economic problems, producing negative effects
on Cubans’ living standards, as well as consequences in
humanitarian areas. Lifting the embargo could help open
up the Cuban economy to the people’s benefit. We once
again unite in expressing our rejection of all unilateral
measures directed against Cuba that negatively affect
the interests of third parties and thereby violate
commonly accepted rules of international trade.
We urge the Cuban authorities to bring about real
improvements in all the aforementioned areas. While
the EU continues to have concerns and criticisms
about governance and human rights in Cuba, in April
it nevertheless launched a negotiation process with
Cuba. We are encouraged by the fact that no subjects
will be off-limits in that process, including human
rights, governance and civil society, and respect for
the principle of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Against that backdrop, the member States of the
European Union unanimously voted in favour of today’s
resolution (rsolution 69/5).
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would first like to welcome Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, and to express to him once again my country’s
full support for the Government and friendly people of

14-5919323/26

A/69/PV.30

Cuba in the face of the unjust embargo that consecutive
United States administrations have unrelentingly
imposed on Cuba for many years.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Iran, on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, and Bolivia, on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
The embargo imposed on Cuba for many decades
has created a deplorable precedent in dealings between
States in a manner that contravenes international law. It
has arbitrarily subjected Cuba and its people to a great
deal of economic, political and social hardship. It has
deepened their suffering and put the United States in
direct confrontation with the international consensus
declares that the embargo should be rejected. As the
Minister for Foreign Affairs has said, the embargo
has resulted in material losses to Cuba of more than
$1 trillion.
For the twenty-third consecutive time, the General
Assembly has met to reaffirm, by an overwhelming
majority, the illegitimacy and inhumanity of the
embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba and its
people. It is contrary to the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law, notably the principles of equal sovereignty among
States and non-interference in their internal affairs.
It also runs contrary to international instruments
pertaining to human rights, international humanitarian
law and international trade.
Regrettably, despite all the many resolutions
adopted by an overwhelming majority of the General
Assembly and other decisions proclaimed by other
political, regional and international organizations, the
embargo on Cuba imposed in 1959 is still in force.
It is as though nothing had happened and as if our
discussions of international law and the United Nations
Charter were the mere idle chatter of the weak. The
fact that 188 States voted in favour of today’s resolution
(resolution 69/5) testifies once again to the fact that
almost all our members consider that the embargo is
illegitimate and should be lifted.
The fact that Israel, together with the United States,
is one of only two States to have voted against the
resolution is proof that it continues to turn a blind eye to
international law and to support illegitimate practices
against other States Members of the United Nations, as
it has been doing with respect to the Palestinian people
and to the Syrians in the occupied Syrian Golan. The

24/26

28/10/2014

Israeli vote is self-explanatory and adds insult to injury
regarding the United States policy.
My country confirms once again that the coercive
unilateral measures imposed by the United States, the
European Union and their allies represent a blatant
violation and breach of the principles of international
law. They are also an instrument for imposing Western
hegemony on other countries and peoples, designed
to interfere in the internal affairs of other States
in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. The embargo is also a
tool for advancing the collective punishment policies
embraced by the United States and the States members
of the European Union with a view to weakening other
States or putting pressure on them in order to change
the national choices and policies available to them
as independent nations. We recall, in that regard, the
disastrous impact of the economic embargoes on Iraq
and Libya, especially on the civilians of those countries.
Accordingly, Syria would like once again to
condemn and reject the oppressive and coercive
measures imposed by the European Union and the
United States against the Syrian people. We would
like to highlight the negative impact of those unilateral
illegitimate measures, as they stand in the way of the
access of ordinary Syrian people to basic commodities,
such as food, medicine, medical equipment, fuel,
agricultural products and other items, as well as civil
aviation and communications tools. Those measures
represent a blatant breach of the human rights of the
Syrian people, in addition to the grave damage to the
Syrian economic. We further note that, when States
that impose coercive measures on the Syrian people go
on to deplore the situation of the Syrian people, it is
pure hypocrisy on their part.
I would like to remind the Assembly that the
imposition of coercive and unilateral measures violates
relevant General Assembly resolutions, including
resolution 68/200, entitled “Unilateral economic
measures as a means of political and economic
coercion against developing countries”, and resolution
68/162, entitled “Human rights and unilateral coercive
measures”, in which the Assembly condemned rejected
unilateral economic measures, considering them to
be an obstacle to commercial and trade relationships
among countries and violations of international human
rights instruments. Under that mandate, the General
Assembly is called upon to take the necessary steps
to put an end to the unjust embargo policy and other

14-59193

28/10/2014

unilateral aggressive or coercive measures that some
States embrace in contravention of the international law
framework. Such measures can be seen as constituting
aggression and as being in violation of the United
Nations Charter. In that regard, my delegation hopes
that all types of embargoes and other unilateral coercive
measures imposed on Cuba and on other countries,
including my country, Syria, will be lifted.
My delegation calls once again for the lifting of the
unjust, inhuman and unethical Israeli embargo imposed
on the inhabitants of the occupied Arab territories,
including the Syrian Golan. We hope that the voice of the
international community, as expressed by the General
Assembly and other international organizations, will be
respected by the United States, and we hope that the
United States legislative authorities will harken to that
voice and the resolution just adopted.
Based on the foregoing, my country, Syria, voted in
favour of resolution 69/5.
Mr. Phansourivong (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): I would like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
under agenda item 40 (A/69/98). My delegation
wishes to align itself with the statements made by the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, and of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
We are here once again to express our sympathy
for the innocent and peace-loving people of Cuba,
who have continued to endure the misery resulting
from the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed against them. Under the embargo, the Cuban
Government is unable to utilize its full capacity to
eliminate poverty, promote economic and social
development and attain the Millennium Development
Goals. In addition, the embargo violates international
law and is against the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. It also constitutes a
transgression against the right of a sovereign State to
peace, development and security.
The General Assembly has called upon all States to
refrain from promulgating and applying law, regulations
and measures that affect the sovereignty of other
Member States and from repealing and invalidating
laws, if so doing has a similar impact. States have the
right to participate freely in international, financial and
commercial systems, based on the notion of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, and no

A/69/PV.30

nation has the right to interfere in the sovereignty,
internal affairs and legitimate interests of entities or
States, despite their different sociopolitical systems.
Since Cuba is an independent State, it has the right to
choose the political system and the path of development
that best suit its specific conditions.
Last year, 188 States Members of the United
Nations voted in favour of resolution 68/200, and
again this year, 188 Member States have just voted
in favour of resolution 69/5, which is irrefutable
proof that the battle for the lifting of the blockade is
recognized and supported by the vast majority of the
international community. Therefore, the blockade must
be immediately and unconditionally lifted.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic joins the
majority of the States Members of the United Nations
in supporting the Cuban people in this fight. As
States Members of the United Nations, we should do
everything we can to help Cuba to fully reclaim its
legitimate right to become integrated into the global
economy. In that spirit, my delegation voted in favour
of resolution 69/5.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the fact that the General Assembly has adopted,
by an overwhelming majority, a new resolution on the
blockade against Cuba (resolution 69/5). We would like
to congratulate the Cuban Government and the Cuban
mission to the United Nations on the excellent work that
they have done.
Argentina voted in favour of resolution 69/5 so as
to demonstrate once again our firm opposition to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
against Cuba, the use of unilateral coercive measures,
the extraterritorial application of certain national
trade laws and the adoption of discriminatory trade
practices. Argentina rejects the embargo policy against
Cuba that has been carried out by the Government
of the United States of America for practically half a
century. In addition to being morally unjustifiable, it
violates the Charter of the United Nations, the norms of
international law and the spirit of multilateralism.
Argentina reiterates its absolute commitment to
the principles of sovereign equality among States,
non-interference in internal matters and the ability to
be free to trade and navigate. The embargo is immoral,
unjust and illegal. It is very clear to the international
community that the embargo is the main obstacle to the
economic and social development of the Cuban people.

14-5919325/26

A/69/PV.30

The figure given by the Foreign Minister of Cuba a few
moments ago shows the full extent of the consequences
of those measures on all aspects of life for Cubans. The
embargo, which has been condemned in successive
General Assembly resolutions with virtually unanimous
support, has had serious humanitarian and economic
effects that cause irreparable harm to the well-being of
the Cuban people.
As we have stated earlier today, the embargo
impacts on basic matters, such as health, education,
diet, tourism, transportation, industry and culture,
just to mention a few areas. It also produces harm to
all areas of the country’s economy. It functions as a
barrier impeding the country’s access to international
financing on favourable conditions that would enable
it to obtain cutting-edge technology and attract foreign
investment and direct investment, all of which prevents
Cuba from becoming fully part of the international
economic system. As an example, the damage to Cuba’s
foreign trade over the past year was an estimated
$3.9 billion, and in a conservative estimate, has led,
during the years of the United States’ economic and
financial embargo, to damage to the Cuban people of
more than $116.88 billion.
However, despite the limitations imposed by the
blockade, Cuba has been able to be an actor and a
leader in various areas of cooperation and international
solidarity. We cannot fail to mention the Cuban
contributions in the area of health. The recent decision
of the Cuban Government to train and send hundreds of
physicians to West Africa, at the risk of their own lives,
to help tackle Ebola is an example of the solidarity of
the people that has not been vanquished.
Since this will be the Secretary-General’s last
report on the subject, Argentina should like to express

26/26

28/10/2014

our support for it. We would like to highlight one of
the pillars of the bilateral links between Argentina and
Cuba. We have an Argentine law relevant to Cuba that
establishes our approach to the extraterritorial nature
of foreign laws in our country. Article 1 of that law
states that foreign laws will be inapplicable and have no
legal effect if they attempt to generate extraterritorial
legal effects by imposing an economic embargo on a
particular country with the aim of producing a change
of Government or affecting that country’s right to selfdetermination.
Argentina stands in solidarity with Cuba, and
we express our full support for the international
community’s struggle for Cuba. We adhere to the
principle of the legal equality of all States with regard
to their sovereignty. We affirm that strict respect must
be given to all differences, whether economic, political
or of another kind. The blockade against Cuba must
stop. The system of unilateral sanctions is the most
persistent and severe measure of that kind applied
against any country. Every year since 1992, the General
Assembly has expressed its opinion on that matter and
has, by an overwhelming majority, called for respect
for international law and for the fulfilment of the aims
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the rights of the Cuban people to choose for themselves
their own destiny. We hope that we will not have to
adopt additional resolutions of this kind in the future.
We hope that the unjust embargo imposed on the
Cuban people will, once and for all, be lifted by the
Government of the United States.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the explanation of vote after the vote for this meeting.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

14-59193
