S/PRST/2005/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 February 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5127th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 February 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Small arms”, the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of his recommendations to the Council entitled ‘Small
Arms’ (S/2005/69) of 7 February 2005, and reaffirms the statements of its
President of 19 January 2004 (S/PRST/2004/1), of 31 October 2002
(S/PRST/2002/30), and of 31 August 2001 (S/PRST/2001/21), and of
24 September 1999 (S/PRST/1999/28).
“The Security Council recalls its primary responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security.
In this regard, the Security Council recognizes that the dissemination of illicit
small arms and light weapons has hampered the peaceful settlement of
disputes, fuelled such disputes into armed conflicts and contributed to the
prolongation of such armed conflicts. The Council reaffirms the inherent right
of individual or collective self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations and, subject to the Charter, the right of each
State to import, produce and retain small arms and light weapons for its selfdefence and security needs.
“The Council encourages the arms-exporting countries to exercise the
highest degree of responsibility in small arms and light weapons transactions
according to their existing responsibilities under relevant international law. It
also encourages international and regional cooperation in identifying the origin
and transfer of small arms and light weapons in order to prevent their
diversion, in particular, to Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups. The Council
welcomes the significant steps that have been taken by Member States and
international and regional organizations in this regard. The obligation of
Member States to enforce the arms embargo should be coupled with enhanced
international and regional cooperation concerning arms exports. The Council
encourages Members to undertake vigorous actions aimed at restricting the
supply of small arms, light weapons and ammunitions to areas of instability.
“The Security Council takes note that the United Nations Second
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
05-24269 (E) 170205

*0524269*

S/PRST/2005/7

and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects will be held July 2005 and encourages
Member States to fully cooperate with the Chair of the Meeting to have a
successful outcome.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation that regional actions on
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects have been
strengthened in recent years, and encourages the continuation of assistance at
national, regional and international levels that would fit the needs of Member
States to implement the recommendations contained in the Programme of
Action adopted by the July 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
“The Council welcomes the ongoing efforts by open-ended working
group established by resolution 58/241 of 23 December 2003 of the General
Assembly to negotiate an international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons
and calls upon all Member States to support all efforts aimed at this purpose. It
expresses the wish that the ongoing work within the group will lead to a
positive conclusion at its third session as scheduled.
“The Security Council welcomes the adoption of resolution 59/86 of
10 December 2004 of the General Assembly by which, among other things, it
requested the Secretary-General to continue broad-based consultations on
further steps to enhance international cooperation in preventing, combating
and eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons with a view
to establishing a Group of Governmental Experts to consider the issue.
“The Security Council welcomes the inclusion of Man-Portable AirDefence Systems (MANPADS) on an exceptional basis in the United Nations
Register on Conventional Arms.
“The Security Council further encourages Member States that have not
already done so to establish the necessary legislative or other measures,
including the use of authenticated end-user certificates, to ensure effective
control over the export and transit of small arms and light weapons.
“The Security Council renews the support given to the plan of ECOWAS
to strengthen the moratorium signed in Abuja on 31 October 1998 on the
import, export and manufacture of small arms and light weapons, and to
replace it with a mandatory convention. It welcomes the decision by the
European Council on 2 December 2004 to significantly support this initiative
and calls upon all States and organizations in a position to do so to support this
endeavour.
“The Council calls upon all Member States to enforce all Security
Council resolutions on sanctions, including those imposing arms embargoes, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and to bring their own
domestic implementation into compliance with the Council’s measures on
sanctions. The Council calls upon all Member States to continue to make
available to the Sanctions Committees all pertinent information on any alleged
violations of arms embargoes and to take appropriate measures to investigate
such allegations. The Council urges Member States in a position to do so to
provide assistance to interested States in strengthening their capacity to fulfil
their obligations in this regard.

2

S/PRST/2005/7

“The Security Council underlines the issue of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons must be addressed together with the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process in the post-conflict phases.
The Council recognizes that DDR is closely linked with the long-term peace
and security in a post-conflict situation and recalls that a growing number of
peacekeeping missions contain the DDR element as part of their mandate. In
this regard, the Council stresses the importance of a comprehensive
international and regional approach to DDR that is not limited to the political
and security aspects of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, but addresses also its social and economic aspects,
including special needs of child soldiers and women.
“The Security Council, while bearing in mind that the issue of the illicit
small arms and light weapons has a multidisciplinary nature, encourages
Member States, in a position to do so, to provide assistance and support to the
United Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms (CASA) mechanism.
“The Council continues to recognize the need to engage the relevant
international organizations, non-governmental organizations, business and
financial institutions and other actors at the international, regional and local
levels to contribute to the implementation of arms embargoes and contribute to
the wider objective of preventing illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to update the
Council on 28 February 2006 for its earliest possible consideration of the
implementation of all the recommendations contained in his report entitled
‘Small arms’ of 20 September 2002 (S/2002/1053).”

3
