304th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
.

Saturday, 4 November 1950, at 10.45 a.m•

FIFTHSESSION
OlJicial Records

Flushing Meadow, New York

,")

CONTENTS
Page
Relations of States Members and specialized agencies with Spain: report of the
. Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1473) ...•. '.' ••..••..••..•..•.•.•.•• 371

-President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEzAu (Iran).

6. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): r

Relations. of States Members and specialized agencies with Spain: report of the A.d BocPalitical
Committee (A/1473)
·[Agenda item 62]

1. The PRESIDENT (translated .from Ft'ench): I
call upon Mr. Lopez, Rapporteur, to present the report
of the AdHoc Political Committee on relations of
States Meitlbers and specialized agencies with Spain.
2. Mr. LOPEZ (Philippines)_ Rapporteur of the
Ad Hoc Political Committee: The .resolution recommended by the Committee sfteks to revoke therecommendations embodied in resfJlution 39 (1) of the General Assembly of 12 December 1946,. asking Member
States to withdraw their ambassadors and ministers
. from Madrid. and e:x:cluding Spain from .. membership
in the specialized agencies of the United Nations.
3. The delegations opposing .this draft based their
stand on the principle that_ since no cl1ange'had taken
place id the . present Government of Spain, there was
no justification for aJter-ing in .anymanner or form the
resolution of 12 December 1946.
4.
think it important to record two points whieh
were stressed by many of the delegations that voted in
.favour of this draft resolution in tbe Committee: first,
that their affirmative votes did not imply ,"pprovalof the
domestic policies of thee present Government of Spain,
.but meant only that the Member Statestlnd the specializedagencies should be free to decide for themselves
the extent of their relations with the Spanish' Government; and_ secondly_ that this resolution would revoke
only the recommendations contained in the 1946 reso-·
r lution, leaving·intaetthe remainder' of that resolution.
t 5. The PRESIDENT (translated fram .French).: I
l shal1 ask the members of the General Assembly to indi! cate whether they think it ..necessary to discuss the
I Committee's report.
.
.

r

It 'Was decitlettby. 3.3 "otes laS, with 15 abstentions,
not todisCftS$ Ii~' re'/Jort,

l
tt...

.

.

'

\'

shalt therefore put· to the vote, without discussion, the
draft resolution attached to the report of the Ad Hoc·
Political Committee [A/1473].
7. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) (translated from
Spanish): My delegation only wants to put it on record
that it abstained from voting on whether or not there
should bea debate. The delegation of El Salv.ador was
ready and willing to take part in the debate. had the
Assembly decided that there should be one. I, wanted
to explain the position and to point out that my delegation, which is one of the sponsors of the draft resolution, simply desired to comply with the wishes of the
Assembly as to whether or not there should be a
debate.
8. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I still have three speakers on my list. I assume that they
wish merely to e:x:plain their votes, without initiating a
discussion.
9. Mr. Ki\TZ-SUCHY (Poland): Before the . General Assembly proceeds to a vote.C!n the dra~t resolu...
tion approved by the Ad Hoc Poltttcal Conumttee, my
delegation finds it necessary, in view of the importance
of the matter and of its far-reaching implications, fully
to expIain its position and the reasons why We. cast a
negative vote. We·want to have these rea~ons on record
for ,the consideration of any future session of the General Assembly which may .deal with this probleM. The
decision of the Assembly that there should be no general
debate on this question forces us to mak"t this statement
because we believe that before the Assertlbly adopts that
.resolution, it must be fully aware of what it is. doing.
10. The reasons for the indecent and unusual haste
with which the sponsors and .supporters of .the draft
resolution before us have attemptea to push it throu~h
the Ad Hoc Political Committee and now through the
General Assembly are quite clear. For it is e'rident th~t·
. they .are fully aware that its passage wilt come as a.
profound shock to all freedom-loving humanity,and
they wish tc bring the debate on this draft to a quick

lm

A1PV.304

371

General A••embly-Fifth Se8t5ion-Plenary Meeting•.
lS,

,

, t

finish t in the' vain '~hope that world public opinion will
the United States---.in the face of anti=Franco sentiment
therehy not be too greatly alerted and aroused. It is for. and in 'View of the feelings of the trade unions of !:Very
the same reason that it has been claimed again and ."" !~ljtical· hue and the feelings of the peoples of western
again that the draft resolution deals only with technical
I1lJrope-was trying to hide its role in this action. The
members of the Committee were also fully aware that
questions, does not constitute a basic revision of'· our
9riginal estim~te of the Franco regime and does not
'they were betraying the faith and convictions of millions
Impose any actIon on anyone except those who desire to
of men and women throughout the world. Yet they
take action-and hence is of no great importance.
yielded and thought, by shortening the discussion and
11. But that strange attempt to minimize the impor..
cutting down the length of the' meeting by hasty ap..
t~nce .of the draft re.solu~io~ and to belittle its implicaproval, to conceal the bluntness of the actiolt, whiehwas
to be taken. They thought they could fool·world opinion
ttons also· attests to Its sIgnIficance and to the fact that
its passage will represent a definite and disgraceful re..
by technicalities, glib words andhigb..sounding phrases.
treat Qf the United Nations from its first action, underNevertheless, no one in this Assembly will escape havtaken almost fo?r yea".s ago, in defence of freedom and . ing to give a clear answer to tht; question as to whether
this Organization is to support fascism or reject it, and
democracy and tu fulfilment of the solemn pledges given
by the United Nations to the people of Spain.
no one will be able to hide behind excuses and a mean..
ingless flow of eXplanations.
.
12~ Let me remind the Assembly in this explanation
with what great acclaim resolutions 39 (I) and 114
16. It is enough to remind the General Assembly that
(11), of 12 December 1946 and 17 November 1947,
the resolutions of 12 December 1946 and 17 November
were received. Let me remind you tbat those resolutions
1947 presented a confirmation by the United Nations of
were greeted.everywhere-and not least of all by the
decisions taken at the Potsdam Conference and the Sari
Spanish people-.a.s initial and vital steps towards fur..
Francisco Conference-decisions which made it clear
not only that Franco. Spain w.as to be barred from the
thering the principles of the United Nations and reUnited Nationsand its activities, but also that, in view
solving one of theoutstanding probiems which we of the
United Nations inherited from the Second World War
of the fact that the Franco regime was the only governand . from t~e dOtl]ination of the greater part of Europe
ment of a fonner Axis ally still in existence, concrete
by the faSCIst AXIS. The memory of that warm and en..
steps were to be taken to help the Spanish people to cast
. thusiastic support of our action by world public opinion
off the yoke of oppression and establish a democratic
would in ,itself be sufficient to demonstrate that the
government.
problem of Franco Spain is not a minor or unimportant
17. It was in those terms and in that spirit that we in
one ~o. be prushedaside ~y specious ar~ents, by
the United Nations. implementing the desires not only
legalistic tw1StS or by tilocktng debate. Fot It would not
of the Potsdam Conference but also those expressed in
be in keepLt'1g with our,obligations to the great people
the declaration made by France, the United Kingdom
of S~p., and 'it wouldp not be in accordance-with the
and the United States in March .1946,1 took steps to
Jl(Anciples of this Orgt,mization, if we passed over this
solve the problem· o£ Spain and to achieve what was
,~~4testion lightly and cYASt our vote in favour of this draft.
clearly understood to Qe one of the basic aims of the
13... The problem of Franco Spain is and has been a great struggle against the fascist Axis. When, in resotouchstone o£ out democratic convictions,. and haste or
lution 39 Cl), we specifically mentioned the specialized
mild woro.s will !:.ttot obscure the meaning of the draft
agenci~s.andsuggested the witqdrawal of ambassadors
resolu,ti~:m on which we are invited to vote without
and mttusters, we laid down clearly that this was not
de1>"ate~ I cannot bu~, state that whoever submits such a .the total sum of our action to aid the suffering people
draft resolutiQn mUl be. marked as a betrayer of demoof Spain and. to help them in· their unceasing.atruggle to
~?c p!inciples, ~ni~' ~ose. who. su,pport it, either. by
bring about the speedy downfall of the fascist regime.
voting In theaffirrnattveor by UStng' the conven1(.~nt
The resolution showed clearly .that Members voting
mechanism o~: abstention, will be qualified as the underfor it were expressing the hope that stronger:and more
writers of fascism. !\fy delegation will not be a 'party
definite measures would be taken if, after a reasonable
t.o such a shameful deed.
time, the ?ituation ,had not improved. .
14. During its discussion of this item the Committee
18. Today, almost three years later, we are confronted
was, faced with a sad sight indeed. A heavy cloud of
wifh a. draft. resolution which attempts to caneel the
~ression bung over all .the representatives, who sat
operative part of the resolutions. of 1946 and 1947. But
in silence fully aware of the shameful task which the
before such a draft resolufion din be approved it must
maj0t!\'t of the Committee had undertaken, the pressure
be demonstrated-·and :Jhould have been demonstrated
befQre any attempt I.>t this kind was made to justify its
to whIch they had been subjected, and the harmfulness
of. their action. Everyone was aware that this· draft
adbption-that our initial and basiccharactetization of
resolution which we are invited to adopt today was a
the Franco regime was . incorrect,- and that the basic
shameful draft, and that it had been introduced as long
premises which were thereas611S for our action were
l3.g0 as 18 January 1950 by the United .States Secrewroxtg Or' had undergone some change.
tatyo£ State,,_Jq~n Acheson, when, in a letter to Senator
19.• The r~solutiol1S pteviously adopted were based'on
Connally, ChaIrman· of the Forei~n Rel.~tions Commit..
findmgs whIch showed that the Franco regime had been
tee, he expressed the readiness of the 'United. States to
established with the help of the Axis Powers and that
send an ambassador to Spain and to have Spain adFranco had been a guiltyparty.in the conspiracy of war
rnitted to the specialized agencies.
against. the United Nations. Those s~me findings conIS.The members of the Ad Hoc l'olitical Committee,
1 See Official Records of tkt Security Council, First Year,
and we among them, were fully awar~ ()fth~ fact that
First Series, Special Supplement, revised edition, p. 76.
o.

304th Meetillg-4 November 1950

firmed the .fascist character of the Franco regime.
Therefore,. before any relations with Franco' can be

established in any other manner than that provided for
in the resolution of 1946, it must.be proved that at least
one of our pretniseshas changed--it must be proved
that the Franco Government is no longer in P9wer.
20. I cannot in this explanation take up the time-of the
General Assembly by quoting from. lengthy· documents
showing the close alliance between Hitler, Mussolini and
-Franco... There are many documents in the possession
of the Members of the Organization which show how
th~ substantial aid which Franco gave to Hitler arid
Mussolini during the war -was extended;·· the Same
documents will show how Franco rejoiced in every Axis
victory. He expressed joy at the fall of France. He
congratulated the Japanese on Pearl Harbor and on
the capture of Manila. - .
21. Only one or two of those who spoke in the Ad
Hoc Political Committee dared to suggest that the
characterization of· the _Franco regime did not remain
true in all its details j but if th':lt basic·characterization
remains true, then our originalconc1usion that .the
existence and activities of the Franco regime constitute
a situation likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security also remains true, and must
constitute our basic line of reference with respect to the
.
.
draft resolution now before us. .
22. It therefore follows that the draft resolution must
be rejected. My delegation will vote most categorically
against it. This draft resolution must be rejected if the
General Assembly has any respect either for its own
estimate of the Franco regime-an estimate which cannot be c~staside--or for the opinion of mankind and
the Charter of the United Nations.
23. It.is clear that themecbamcal majority whichapproved the draft resolution in the Ad Hoc Politkal
Conunittee has attempted here to have a no less mechanicalapproval of it. I know. that the reason which
that mechanical majority gives is that the draft does not
c0!lstitute anything important and represents only a
nunor' change; lam aware of the attempt to present
this draft hi that way, despite the fact that such an
action would be a blunt and cynical rejection of the facts
on the basis of which the Potsdam and. San Francisco
Conferences branded the Franco regime as a fascist
regime, as a regime which had been imposed by force
on the Spanish people, and the continuance of which in
power rendered Spain's full co-operation with. the nations of the worldinipossible. They try to present this
draft resoluti01l in that way despite th~ obvious fact
that it is an attemptto smuggle Franco into the ·United
Nations through the back door, that .it i$ a deliberate
connivance with Franco to defeat the aims of the nations
which joined together to defeat the Axis Powers and
their ally Franco and. which promised to do everything
to assist the suffering people of Spain to establish a
democratic regime and thus. eliminate a continuing
threat to peace...
'. ,
':j
24. It waS evident in the Committee· that in pressing
for the passage of this draft resolution-a draft which is
contrarY to tqe facts and so opposed to the sentiments
of the people the world .over-strange and pqwerful
consiUerations motivated its sponsors and supporters.
I say" strange considerations" for they have nothing to

373

do with the. cause of international peace and security.
They do not aim to further the purposes for which tne
Charter Was established. I say "powerful considera,.
tions" because the speed with which this draft resol~tion
is being rushed th.. ~ugh, and the contempt which is
being shown for world public opinion, indicates that
from the point of view of certain Powers this action
is needed to further their aims, aJ ns which have nothing
to do with the furthering of peace or aiding the Span....
ish people. The simple truth is that the attitude of
certain Members towards Spain is now determined
wholly by military and strategic considerations, and
this is the main reason why the resolutions of 1946 and1947 were circumvented, sabotaged, weakened and m~Ae
inoperative.
..
.
25. The main responsibility for the existence of the
Franco regime today and the continuation of the reign
of terror against the Spanish people resides entirely
with United States action taken in the political,eco...
nomic and military field. With .the change· in its foreign
policy and the increase of United States domination in
Spain, the United States threw in its lot with the Fran...
co regime. Spain began to play an important tolein.
the strategic plans of the United States. That can ·be
proved by .the visits of the United States military and
naval officers, by military alliances, by visits of warships and the establishment of a· Spanish military mission in Germany. Some could. ask whether this mission
is helping or supervising the denazification of Germany~
In the same connexion I cited in the Committee the fact
that loans were being granted, war material was being
delivered and military bases were being equipped and
supervised. I may recall only that now, in 1950, there.
exist 54 airports, 37 aerodromes, 7 airplane bases and
54 ports built, reconstructed or converted under the
supeI'V'ision of United States officers, ready to serve the
caUse of war.
26. The eagerness with which Franco is preparing to
turn Spain into a war base is appreciated by the United
States, the spokesmen of which often call Franco their
best and most reliable ally. Franco has become a part of
the preparations for the so-called preventive war. Only
a few months ago, in discussing "the possible course of
the third world war/'. the American Press described
Spain and Britain as expendable territory, thus placing
the United Kingdom in the invidious position of sharing with Franco Spain the doubtful honour of being the
main United States base in Europe.
27. I submit, and these are the reasons for our negative vote, that such economic and militaryconsiderations, however important they may be for the profits and
war plans, furnish no .ground for changing even one
comma of onr previous resolutions. lask this General
Assenlbly, before we take a vote, to stdke, as we did,
a simple balance sheet on the problem of Spain. On the
one hand place these economic and strategic considera- ~
tions, and on theothet hand the facts of the internal
situaH..:J1l, the increased terror and religious and political
persecution, and the desperate economic plight of the
Spanish people. When. these considerations are weighed,
which of them weigh most in determining our attitude
to the draft resolution before us, a resolution which can
only strengthen the fascist regime .and its hold on the
Spanish pepple? There can be only one answer, and.:tny
delegation gives it: the rejection of this dr~ft resolution,

374
Franco and into becoming cannon fodder for the pro-,
unless those wbo vote for it or e'Venabstain from voting
jected preventive war, they are sadly mistaken. Three
are determined to disr~d their obligations incumbent
years of atruggle$ ~ust the combined P-Qwer of Getupon them, under the Ciu\tter, and to disreprd the
c Spanish people themselves.'
man~ Italian' and Spamsh fascism and against the assis..
tancegiven to that combination by tbe, ao"'caJled non..
28. Those who submitted this draft, who, voted in
interventionist policy of the western 'Powers did not
f~your 'Of closing, th~ debate and-who, want quietly to
succeed
in. breaking the spirit of democratic Spain.
pass over the problem, ca.nnot ~ aware, as we are, that
the state of civil war proclaimed in July 1936 still pre33. Thisdtaft does not take ~ount of the <letermination of the Spanish 1K!9ple to overthrow tbe Franco
v~ls jn Spain. They r..now that, for ten years, ,28 million
regime. Its adoption will not help the Spanish people
Spanlards have been kept in a state of bondage by an
army of otci.1pation instructed in the art of terror by
to get Franco off thelr backs; it will only Elharpenthe
spurs which he is digging intothetn. The adoption of
~estapooffiters still, functioni~ under assumed names.
this draft will not assist the attempts which are being
1 hey ale aware,that thousand~ have been tortured and
hundreta's are being executed. They know of the plunmade to ease world tension. Verbal professions of sym..
dering of villages by the civil ~ds. They know(\i
pathyfor the Spanish people 81!d arguments which rely.
on legal twists. turns and technicalities will fool no one,
tbe le:y~q ~ga which is being used to cover up hundreds
of politic:al murders. They are well aware, of the police
wlll shield neither those who vote for nor those who
abstain from voting on this draft resolution.
terror against the Protestant Church in S~ They
ha.d an opportunity to read of the religious and political
34. In e4plaining our vote, I have not lost confidence
~rsecution fJf the Mosl€:1U population in Spallish Mo,that this draft resolution can still be defeated, if the
rocco. They cannot brush aside these dalllning facts
members of the General Assembly will brusbaside all
about the .fI\r~co regime and the situation in Spain;
special considerations. They can do. this despite the
They d~onptrate that the situation in SPa-in.which molaughter of the United States delegation, The draft
tivated our resolution ,remains unchanged. We cannot
can still be defeated if members will adhere to their
therefore change the position which we took on the basis
duty. They must realize that there can, be noc:ompro..
of those fads.
mise on the draft resolutio.n before the Assembly. It
29. Facts are facts. Neither ·hypocrltical talk about
reverses our previous p<>1icyand can bring only shame
concern for the plight of, the Spanish people not
and dishonour to the United Nations. My delegation
promises that ambassadors will not be dispatched and rewill vote against it, because it considers that we, must
lations will not improve can hide ,the fact that the
not surrender to fascism. We shall vote against it,
adoption of the draft, resolution before the Assembly
because we consider ;U1at we must not betray the Span..
will be a victory for Franco and will encourage bw to
ish people- We shall vote agairist, it, because we consider
take further repressive measures against the Spanish
that we must not betn':ly the aims pursued and the
people.. It will be a victory which can only encourage
pledges given by the Al1!es-tJ}e United Nations-dur..
Franco to express even more sharply his tontetnpt for
ing the war. We shall reJect this proposal, and we sball .
the United. Nations, for this Organi~tion which he
uphold the cause, of democracy and peace and of the
ea11ed a "filutrid corpse", and for the sponsors of the· United Nations Charter. We shall vote against the
draft resolution.
'
draft resolution, because we believe that only 'those who
vote against it have the right to hold their heads high
30. My delegation noticed that, on the day thi$draft
when they leave this room.
was introduced in the Committee, the entire Falangist
Press started 'a, campaign against the United Nations, .. 35. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
stating that Sllain would. 'refuse a partial settlement in
I noticed that .during the,speech of the representative
the form of8,dtnission to the specialized agencies or the
of .Poland a l1umber of representatives looked at me as
returwng (.fe!~:Yoys. It lashed out at the sponsors of the
though 'they wished to raise a 'pc?int of order. If that
draft resoItltion, demanding a t(.\tal sUlrender and, bewas their intention, they were quite right. It is hardly
rating them for not proposing, it. After the Yote had
fair that a representative should deliver a. half-hour
taken place in the Ad H ocPolitical Cotritnittee, Franco
speech on the 'pretext of explaining his vote. I t1~ght
himself made it clear--to quote the New York Times'
to have limited the length of speeches, and 1'did not do
stunmary of his remarks-that any improvement in
so. I shall profit by this experience in the future.
r<"lations with the United S;',.rtes and the United Nations
36.' Therea.i'~ several names on my list of speakers.
could not be based on a half-way meeting; he must be
I shall 'limit the lellgth of explanations of votes to
met on his own terms. Facts are facts.
seven minutes. That is long enough for a statement.
31. The PRESIDENT: How many pages have you
37. Mr~ KATZ..SUCHY (Poland): I wish to raise a
left, Mr. Katz-Suchy?
'
.
point of order.
32. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): 1 shall speak for
38., The PRESIDENT (translattd from FrenCch): If
. only,a few minutes more. No sugar-coating cart disguise
your
point of order is not in order, I shall be obliged
the bitterness of the pill which the Spanish people ate
to stop you. Perhaps you wish to reproach me for not
being a.sked to swallow by the sponsors of this draft
interrupting'
you during your r~marks?
resolution. The brave and proud Spanish people, who
have in, the past demonstrated that they prefer to die
39. Mr. KATZ-S'O'CHY (Poland): 1 wish to raise a
,standing for, freedom rather "than to remain a,liveon
point of order in connex!n~ ~ith th~ President's retheir knees, have not ceased their struggle for freedom.
marks. I wish to point out that ~.a delegatiun has the
If the. sponsors., of this draft ~---pe that itei adoption will
right to d~ermine the time which it will take to explain
cow the Spanish people iuta oomplete submission to
its '\Tote.
I

¥

304th Meettu..-t Novem~r 1950
d

4

40. The PRESIDENT (tran.-flated from. Pn1nt:h):
Please refet to thettdes of procedure, Mr. Katz..Suchy.
I believe I knowtbem as well as you do. I am even
entitled to refuse to allow a representative to explain
his vote.
41. Rule 88 of the ~"Ulf~s of procedure reads as ·follows:
"The President may peru.it Members to explain their
votes, ·either before ora-ftef .the voting, except .when
the vote is taken by 5e'(':ret ballot. The President may
limit the time to~,:: allowed for such expla'J.ations".
42. Thfs(~onfetd di!lt~etionary power on the President.
I cannot acc~?t yOt1rpoint of order, Mr. Katz-Suchy.
43. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from. Russian): The USSR
delegation deems it necessary to give some explanation
of the reasons for its vote on the draft resQration re.·
gardii1g the relations of States Members
the United
Nations and the specialized agencies with Spain. The
.eight·Power draft resolution wMch received the support
of the majodty in~he Ad Hoc Po!iti~al Co~itteeand
which that CommIttee has submIttea to the General
Assembly for approval is unatteptable,and the delegation of the Soviet Union will vote against it for rea$01~~
which I shall ptoeee(l to give.
44. .The USSR de~egation will vote against the proposal for revoking the recommendation in General Assembly resolution 39 (1) of 12 Decembet 1.946 on the
withdrawal of ambassadors and ministers from Madrid,
as there is no justification for revoking tb.at recommendaHon.The Committee'S report notes. t~tat .none of the
delegations which spoke in the Comm;/ttee in favour of
revoking that recommendation assert~d that the present
Govemmentin Spain had changed ~n the slightest degree since 1946, when the General Assembly adopted
its recommendation on the withc!rawal of ambassadors
and ministers from Maddd. Moreovet:, some of the
delegations which spondored the draft resolution now
before us, ·as well as some' of the other delegations,
stressed that the condemnation oithe Francoregim~
contained ir. the General Assembly resolution of 1946
still· remaiv.ed in force.
45. Sinc~~ this is the case-and there is no reason to
doubt th?4t this is in fact .the case, because the Franco
regime femains an anti"popttlar fascist regime opposed
to the interests of the Spa1!ish people-there is ob~
viOtts~y no need for any cha.nge in the. ;felations of the
United Nations and its Members with the Franco
regim~. A change in ou~ relations with th~ regime
which now .holds sway in Spai11 would be poSSIble only
if there were a change in the state of affairs in that
cO'l1ntry. In the present. circumstances, revocation of
the General Assembly resolution of 1946 can only serve
to cloak support of the. anti-popular Franco regime in
complete and flagrant dellanceof the interests of the
Spanish people. In the interests of the Spanish people,
the decision taken by the General Assembly in 1946 on
the withdrawal from Madrid of ambassadors and mini$t~rs of the Member 5tatesof the United Nations must
be· upheld.
46. It is stated in the preamble of the draft resolution
before us that the establishment of diplomatic relations
and the excha.nge of ambassadors and fniuisterswith
.1 government does .notimply any judgment upon the
dome$tic policy of th~t government.
.

m

.

$751
. 1

47. The General Assembly's grounds for dedding. j
in 1946, to recommend the withdrawal of ambassadors 1

and miriisters from Madrid, were not simply that the j
domestic policy of the Franco regime was objectionable;
its grounds were also that the Franco Government "vas
a fascist government, that it had been imposed on the
Spanish people by force with the aid of the Axis
Powers, that it had given substantial aid to those
Powers during the war and that it did not represent
the Spanish people. By remaining in power in Spain,
Franco's fascist government makes it impossible for the
Spanish people to take part in international affairs·
together with the peoples of the United Natifms.
48. Those were the reasons for the General Assembly
resolution of 1946. All admit that the Franco regime
remains exactly the same as it was in 1946. There is
therefore no justification whatever for cbttngingthat
part of the General Assembly resolution of ·1946 which
definies the relations of Member States of the United
Nations with the Franco regime. in SI?ain.. Consequently the General Assembly ~~dsion ,.in·· the wit~­
drawal· of ambassadors and mlntsters from. Madrid
should remain in force.
49. Those are the reasons why the USISR delegation
will vote against the proposal for (evoking the General
Assembly decision regarding the withdrawal of ambassadots and ministers from Madrid.
5<1 As regards the proposal for revoking the recommendation that Franco Snain should be debarred from
membership in international specialized agencies,. the
delegation of the Soviet Union will vote against it for
reasons which I shall explain.
51. The preamble of the draft resolution points out
that the specialized agencies of the United Nations are
technical and largely non-political in character and have
been established in order·to benefit the peoples of all
nations, and that they should therefore be free to decide
for themselves whether the participa.tion of Franco
Spa~n in their activities is desirable.
52. The USSR delegation considers· it wrong to·allege
that the specialized agencies are non"political organi..
zations and can therefore disregard in their activities
the principles and tasks arising out of the political
policy laid down by the Unite? Nations. It cons!ders it
wrong to say that those. agenCIes need not be gUIded by
that policy or may even pursue a policy contrary to that
of the United Nations. If that were tl'"t so, those or';
ganizations· could not be regarded as i.nternationa,l speI
cialized agencies of the United Nations.
·1
53. Here again it ,,:ould be. appropriate to poi~t out 1
that even the delegatIOns whIch propose revocatton of 1j
the General Assembly.recommendation of 1946 em..
Ij
phasize the fact that the condemnation of the Franco
regime ctontained therein remains in f()rce~
54. How is it possible to allow the anti-popular Franco regime, which was condemned and remains CQn..
demned to this day, to. be represented in the Unit-ed
Nations specialized agencies, which must carry on their
work in their respective specia.lfields in ac.cord.ance With.•
thegelleral policy of the United Nations? For this reason the General Assembly decision of 1946 to debar the
Franco Government £1'0111 roembershipin international
agertciesmust be maintained in force.
1

~;

Si

'ss. The USSR ~~etegadon therefore considers the pro-

posal for revoking that General Assembly decisi!)n both
wrol1g and incompatible wt:h the purposes and prin..
ciples of the United Nations. It "'ill accordingly "Vote
against the proposal for revoking the recommenda,~
\ don that the Franco regime should be debarred from
membership in the specialized agencies.
~S6.Thoseare the reasons why the delegation of the
'S9viet Union will vote against the draft resolution
sm"mitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee on the
que'stion of the relations' of States Members and specializt.'<1 agencies with Franco Spain.
.
57. I thank the President. I think I have exceeded
the time he allowed me by only one minute.
58. The PRESIDENT .(translated from French):
I believe Mr. Arutiunian has not even exhausted the
seven:" minutes' limit. Besides, when I fixed the limit at
seven minutes, I merely meant not more than seven
minutes; no representative should feel obliged to use
that entire time.
59. Mr. DEMCHENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from R'ussian): The delegation of the .Ukrainian SSR wishes toindi~tc the
reasons why it will vote against the draft resolution
submitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee.
60. The draft resolution submitted to the General
Assembly proposes the revocation of two. of the most
important clauses of the General Assembly resolution
of 12 .December 1946-the recommendation for the
witbdrawal of ambassadors and ministers from Madrid
and the recommendation for debarring the Franco Gov'ernment from membership inintern:ational age:o.cies established by or brought into relationship with thl~ United
Nations.
61. Those clauses of the 1946 resolution are not independent; they are the direct consequence of the
General Assembly's appraisal of the Franco regime in
Spain, which it found to be in origin, nature, structure
and general conduct a fa.scist regime patterned pn" andestablished largely asa result of aid received from
Hitler'snazi Germany and Mussotilni's fascist Italy. On
the strength of that finding, the General Assembly
adopted the two above..mentione,d recommendations
with a view to isolating the fascist regime from Member
States of the United Nations and its agencies nntil such
time as a new and acceptable government was formed
in Spain.
62. The situation in Spain bears out the fact that the
rewme in power in that country has not become any
more democratic since the adoption of those decisions
by the General Assembly. That fact is also borne out
by the report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee, which
emphasized that no representative in: that Contmittee
claimed that the present Spanish regime had undergone
any change .along the tines indicated. in the. General
Assembly resolution of 12 De.cember 1946. If, therefore,
the situation which led to the adoption of the General
Assembly resolution of 12 December 1946 remains unchanged, there are no grounds for revoking it.
63. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR accordingly
considers that the revision of the resolution of 12 December 1946 is illegal and contrary to tbe United Nations Lnarter; its adoption wotdd serve to strengthen

the fascis~regime 'and w~uld be .an act of betray~l. of
theSpamsb people. The d~e~tl0n.of the. Uk~aln1an
SSR will therefor~~ vote against the draft resolution.
64. Mr. GOLDSTUCKER (Czechoslovakia): The
CzechosloV'dk delegation will vote against the draft resolution submitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee for
reasons which I shallelJ.umerate.
65. First, this resolution would amount to a friendly
gesture on the l-1art of th~ United ~ations t?w~rds
fascist Franco. We do not want thiS Orgamzatlon,
which was born out of· the war against fascists, to betray
its principles and appease the greatest fascist war, criminal to have, escaped so far his just x>ltnishnl~nt, thanks
to. his friends in the ruling circles of the Untted States;
the Vatican, and elsewhere.
66. Secondly, this resolution would. reverse the' operative part of the General Assembly resolution of 12 December 1946, by which Franco's regime was branded
as acfascist regime established by Hitler and Mussolini,
as having entered into a conspiracy with those dictators
which brought about the Second World War, and as an
active participant in that war on the siete of Hitler and
Mussolini. We .consider that resolution of· 12 December
1946 to be the minimum expression, .on the part of the
United Nations, of the views and c;entiments concerning
fascist dictatorship in Spain of hundreds of millions ~f
people everyw~ere. We consider those ~iews and sent!ments as.a baSIC lesson learned bymankmd a.t the terrible cost of lives and. property lost in the Second. WorId
War, and we consider it highly immoral to act in contradiction to them.
67. Thirdly, it is the more immoral since it is evident
that the Franco regime has not changed at all in its
origin nature, structure and general conduct, and the
betrayal of this' Organization's principles is sought
purely for the benefit of' the United States expansionist
and aggrel3sive policy of war preparations. The 'United
States is building naval and air bases in Spain and it
wants this Organization to make a friendly gesture
,towards the fascist criminal, Franco, in order to make
him more amenable to accept that part which the United
States wishes him to plaY in the framework of its ~g­
~ressive North A tlant1c Treaty system. We do not thmk
the principles .and· prestige of this Organization should
be sacrificed for sttch an unworthy purpose.
68. Fourthly, this proposed resolution means a betrayal of the Spanish people, who are looking to the
United Nations for moral support in their effort to free
themselves of the Franco dictatorship forced upon them
by Hitler and Mussolini, having ?~ its conscience the
lives of almost one and a half mtllton people and oppressing the Spanish people i~ a horrible manner. We
do not want to be associated with such a betrayal, and
we wish to assure the Spanish'people of our sympathy.
69. Fifthly, we see in this draft resolution a clear indication of two very serious phenomena, namely, that
the United States is today conducting a foreign policy
in the framework of which Franto, the fascist war
criminal, fil1ds a ready place-.f~cts are, on this poi!1t ,
more eloquent than words of dental--and that the poltey
of the United States and its associates is a direct continuation of thl~ policy which is .for us and for .the
whole world cbaracterized by the ugly name of Munich. Then, as flOW, fascists were~ppeased~ given moral

377
and materialsup~rt, as well as a~sistance of !1 strategic

character. We see, the same thing happenu:J.g today,
whatever prc,}te13t,s are made to the contrary.
70. Vle want our peoples, and other peoples, to know
this and to reach their own conclusions as to the ,reactionary aggressive facts of such a policy. We think the
Unitedi Nations should not become an instrument for
the furthering of such a policy. That is why the Czechoslovak delegation will vote against this shameful draft
resolution.
71. Mr~"SKOROBOGATY (Byelorussian Soviet So..
cialist Republic) (translated from Russian) : The dele..
gation of the Byelorussian SSRalso deems it necessal'"Y to explain .the reaSons for its vote on the draft
.
resolution before the General Assembly.
72. In the Ad Hoc Political Committee my delegation
spoke and voted against the draft resolution for reasons
which I shall outline.
73. 'rhe Franco. regime in SpaIn was established. by
the brutal force of arms against the will and wishes of
the ·Spanish people and with t."le assistance of the Axis
Powers. During the Secor~d World War, Franco
abetted Hitler and Mussolini, in their struggle against
the Allies and helped hitlel'ite Germany and fascist
Italy by sending them arms, fth."(\ s'upplies and strategic
raw materials and by pladng air and naval bases at
their disposal. Substantial arm~d forces from Franco
Spain took a .direct part in the war on the eastern
front against the So-viet Union.
74. After the collapse of hitlerite Germany and fascist
Italy, the Members of the United Nations pledged themselves to eradicate the remnants ot fascism as the worst
enemy of mankind;. that is why at the first session of the
General Assembly they adopted a resolution providing
that the requisite measures should be taken against the
Franco regime in Spain.
75~ In the period which has elapsed since the first
session of the General Assembly, no political changes
have taken place in Spain. Spain is still ruled by the
anti..pop'alar Franco regime, a regime whose methods
are imprisonment,political terror and the ensla-vement
of the Spanish people. As in the past, hundreds of
thousands of Spanish patriots are languisWng in prison
or wandering through foreign countries seeking for
shelter. The fascist Falange is the only organization
which is allowed to exist in Spain. The trade unions,
schools and churches areaU made to serve the fascist
cause.
76. In the light of these facts, there is no justification
whatsoever for. revoking the recommendation in regard to the Franco r~gime contained in General Assembly resolution 39 (I) of 12 December 1946 or for
adopting .a new reeommendation legalizing the anti..
popular Franco regime in Spain and favouring its con..
tinuedexistence.
77.' From the numerous facts published in the world
Press, as well a~ from· those emanating from various
official sources, it is clear that it is essential to the ruling
circles ot certain States that the Franco regime should
be rehabilitated so that .Spain 'may' beinc1uded in the
aggressive North Atlantic bloc and be used more readily
asa .military arsenal in Europe. That is contrary to. the
ptjndpJ~sunderlyittg the United 'Nations struggle for

international peace and security. The revocation of the
resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 12 De..
cember 1946 wor!d outrage the feelings oftbe herpic,
freedom..loving Spanish people ,and of all those who aTe
honestly stri-ving for peace, human rights and freedoms
and for international friendship and co..operation; in ~e
eyes of world public opinion it would lower the prestige
of the United Nations, which came into being in the
ardour of the struggle against the forces of fascism.
78. For these reasons the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR will also vote against the draft resolution
before the General Assembly.
79. Mr. ANZE MATIENZO (Bolivia) (translated
from Spanish) : I shall be· very brief andshatl not speak
for the entire seven minutes allotted to me, because I
fully realize that the President, however kindly disposed
he may be to me, cannot allow me to speak in ex:plana"
tion of my delegation's vote on the draft resolution
submitted by the Ad Roc Political Committee to the
Assembly, since, as everybody knows, my delegation is
one of the sponsors of that draft resolution.
80. . My reason tor speaking is not to explain my dele..
gation's vote on this draft resolution. I am spealdng,
rather late, to e:lCplain its vote on the Assembly's de..
cision not to discuss the item but to proceed directly to
the vote on the draft resolution.
81. There would have been no need for me to justify
the abstention of my delegation, because, like the dele..
gation of El Salvador, it is· one of the ·sponsors of d~;c;
draft and was prepared; to ,discuss it if the majority
had so wished. My delegation's interpretation of rule
67 of our rules of procedure is objective, in other words,
it is based on the wording of.·that rvle. My delegation
eOllsiders, thetefore,. that the sole purpose of that rule
is to prevent further ~iisc.ussion .on.a questio.n.. which
has already been sufficiently studied Jfi Cotnnllttee and
on which an overwhelming majority has been securedwhich is precisely what has happened in the case ot the
draft resolution now under consideration. ,My delegation therefoteabstained from voting becrtusecertain
representatives, speaking from thisrostru1tl, had· tried
to show that, other representatives were seeking to impose the adoption, by shameful and underhand means,
of a draft resolution Which, according to them, we did
not want to discuss because we were not sure of the
rightness of our action. It is my duty to explain that
my country cal1.i1ot tolerate such statements which, di..
rectly or inditeetly,are derogatory to its dignity.
82. The case is very simple and I shall confine myself
to saying something which is perfectly clear: this room..
ing's vote was the, :expression of circumstances against
which words and rJhrases are of no avail. The fact is that
by .resolution. 39 ,tI), adopted in 1946, Memt>er States
volul'lt:u:ily limi.tedtheirso-vereignty in order to eliminate the remaining traces of nazism and fascism which
had perished in blood in the Second World War after
having plunged the world, by their arrogance, into one
of the worst tragedies in history..Yet, when that resolution was adopted, nobody could have forseen the tragic
fact that those totalitarian systems were to be reproduced in other parts of' the world~ under different
names, and that the same politieal phenumenon would
con.ti1'J.l,1e, ~o threaten our liberty and indepelldence. That
is why all the speakers who try to prove to' us that the

818
Franco~~e should still be subject to the sanctions of
1946 faUtomeet wi~h atly re~QOnse from world opinion,
bctcause they aretrYlng tl) maKe us embark upon a course
of" action which
futile,'inopportunean{i devoid of
mo1\'\l sii!lificance.
83. We, for our part, cannot contioue along the. same
lines as in 1946, while efforts are being made to make
us accept the re~me of Mao Tse-tung, who is now helpi~g to kill soldlers in Korea,\Vhen at the same time
~nera\ Franco, on the other hand" is mlllking a friendly
vi~t(rthe Canary Islands. I ~msaying !tbis to show.the
contrast between the two attttude~, and my delegatton,
when it $)llOnsored this draft reboluiion, did so in the firm
conviction that it wasservin~ the Spanish peoJ.le as a
whole, and respecting all their domestic proble.ms and
also the feelings of the Spanish patriots, whatever may
be· the circumstances in which their feelings as citizens
have placed them.
84. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) (translated from
Spanlsh): I wish briefly to ~plain my delegation's
vote, though it might appear unnecessa~ since El Sal..
vador is one of the sponsors of the draft resolution. So
many efforts, however, have been made to obscure the
issue that it has become necessary to define the bases
upon wbi~h the draft resolution rests.
85. 'the draft under discussion really comprises two
resolutions.
86. Paragraph 1 of the operative part would have the
effect of restoring to Members of the United Nations
their right to decide for themselves, that is, without any
outside intervention, what rank they wish to bestow on
the diplomapc representatives, accl'editedby them not
only to Spam but to any other State in the world. To
decldeupon the rank of diplomati~ representatives, to
send or to withdraw diplomatic missions, is the sov~reign prerogative of each State.
S? In view of the circumstances prevailing at the
time, the majority of the Members of the United Nations voted in 1946 for resolution 39 (1) wlUch re.;:
stricted that right, although it is one of the sovereign
rights of every State. Four years have elapsed since
then. The resolution then approved has been quite
ineffectual, and indeed, CQuld hardly have beta otherwise. For persons not fully acquainted with such matte-ra, the resolution appeared equivalent to the breaking
off of diplomatic relations; yet that was not so. It implied simpl~ the withdrawal of ministers and ambassaat:lrs trom Madrid and their replacement by charges
d'affaires. That meant that diplomatic relations continued, but in a different form. Such diplomatic relations continued unchanged. A c,harge d'affaires has the
same functions as ambassador or a minister. The resolution produced no results and that is why the Members
of the United Nations are .reconsidering their former
attitude and finding that it is absolutely· unnecessary to
continue to renounce their ,right to decide for them"
selves, that is, without outside intervention, what rank
t() bestow on their diplomatic· envoys.
88. Paragraph 2 of tbeoperative part· of the draft resolution refers to the specialized, ~ncies which are con..
cerned with the interest~ of Mankind. Thus the goal of
the World Health Or~nization is to p'rotect health
throughout the world: it should be a sufficient answer
those who make such protestations of their love for

is

to

the Spariish people to point out.to them that to, exclUde
the Spanish people. from' th~ World Health Organlzation meaus withholding {fonl them the informadon
whiclt could help them to combat the .epidemics wbich
ulight befall them.
89. As regards'trade, or the Universal Postal Union,
we can also see that the Spanish peopt~'i"'I repea.t, the
Spanish people--have both an interest and a need to
restore their trade relations. since otherwise they must
suffer hunger an.d d.\stre.. ss, and tb.at is iust. w.bat.sottl.e
delegations are trying to for~ on the Spanish people,
in spiteo£ their many professions of love for and f1e"lotion to that people.
90. There is no reason at all why Spain S~lould be
excluded frottlthespecialized agencies, for they have
no political character and are designed purely to promote the general interests of humanity.
91. I shall conclude by saying that I shall not even
reply to the unjust and offensive allegations of the
Polish representative. fhe Assembly will itself give tha~
reply. The vote to which we are about to proceed-and
I ask that it should b<= taken by roll..call-will be tbe best
answer to attacks of that kind, which should never be
made in the General Assembly of the 'United Nations.'
92. The PRESIDENT (translated fr01u Freneh):
Before calling on the next speaker, who wishes. to explain his vote, 1·wish to make a statement for .the record
and, if the Assembly agrees,. to set a precedent.
.
93. The representatives of Bolivia and El Salvador
stated that tbey were the authors of this draft resolution.. I .do not· regard them as such because.the draft
resoluti9n was submitted by the Ad !foe Political Com"
mittee. If I had considered that they were in fact the
authors· of the draft resoluti~m, I should have bt.en
obliged, under ride 88 of the rules of procedure, to
refuse to allow them to explain their votes. Rule 88 lays.
down· that the President Cfshall not permittbe proposer
of a proposal or of an amendmen't to explain his vote on
his own proposal oramendmentu •
.
94. I cOl1sidered tbis draft resolution to have been
submitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee.
95. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union
to speak on a point of otder.
,
96. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN -(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated . from Russian):, I have taken
the liberty of speaking after hearing the President's
ruling because I believe it to be of significance from tbe
point of view of principte. Besides having a bearing on
the present.case, it tn~v also set a precedent.. I must
state that I cannot a,61-eeat an with the President's
interpretation of the last part of rule 88 of the rules
of procedure.of the General Assembly.
97. The President is of the view thatthe author of any
draft resolution submitted by a Comm~ttee for consideration by the General Assembly must be the Committee
itself. If that is so, it must be askG<!. to what proposals
or amendments rule 88 refers. Does it reler. ontyto
draft resolutions submitted by minorities? Sucli an
interpretation can certainty not be accepted. Rule 88
is not a discriminatory rule . direeted agamst .tbe rights
of mino~it!es. Suppose a minority !ere unable to ~gree .
to a deCISIon - to a draft resolution -- adopted by a·

.

804tth Mteb1'1-' November 1960
Committee, and submitted its ow~\ draft resolutiont~
be considered in the Assembly, and suppose the
majority in the Assem.bly decidfA not .to permit a
debate al' even .to allow repr-esentathres of the minority
to explailltheir votes. "rlte result would be that the
represcntativesof the mitmrity would be deprived in
e'V~ry way of the possibilitrand the 'right to defend
their position in the Assembly.
.
98. How can such an int~rpretation of rule 88 -or
rathert of the last ~rt of that rule - be admitted? I feel
tl-41.ttbe last partQf the rule.. where it is stated that the
President '(shall not pertnit the proposer of a proposal'
or of an amer.Jment to explain .his vote on his own
proposal c;>ramendment", refers to tbeproposers of any
proposals, wherever they may bave beell previously
considered. In . the present case, the l>roposers are
Bolivia, Costa Rica.. tile Dominican Republic, El Salva..
dor, Honduras, Nicaragu.a, Peru and the Philippines,
and no one questions the fact thatthey are the.sponsors
.of the draft resolution before us. . .
99. The majority in the .Ad H o~ Political Coml11ittee
app-roved this dl-aft resolution. Should someone arrive at
a christening to christen a child, it does not mean that
he is t.ne father of that child. The child's father remains
thefatber. The author of this draft resolution is the
group of eight delegations which Spol'lsored it:1ndno
one els~, Th.e Committee is not the proposer. As a
matter of fact, it cannot even write. It. may approve a
draft resolution submitted· by a delegation. The Committee, as such, does not submit any draft resolution for
its own consideration. Every draft resolut.ion, therefore,
has its own 'proposer --a specific delegation. 111 the
present case, there are eight sponsoring delegations.
That, of course, is why· statements made by the repre..
sentatives ot Bolivia and of El Salvador were not
in order.
100: ~ can .ullde~stand our President. F:rotn the. very
beg1l1nmg, hiS attttude has, been to refram from l11terrupting speakers on such politically delicate issues as
the relations of States Members and of the specialized
agencies with the fascist Franco Government of Spain.
I understand such an attitude. It probably accounts for
the fact that the President refrained from interrupting
the representatives of Bolivia and of El Salvador. I can
understand such a position but I cannot understand 01"
in any way agree with the general interpretation of the
last part of rule 88,. which would result in restricting
therigbts of minorities alone in the Assenlbly. I believe
that such a restriction cannot be accepted and I feel
that the President cannot have intended to interpret
the clause in such a way 'as to restrict the rights of the
minority. We cannot agree to such a restriction or to
an interpretation which would unquesti01'1ably' set a
precedent unacceptable to tl1e General Assenlbly.
101. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
r have explained how I understand this rule, but I do
not want to set a precedent. We have more important
. work to do than to~et lf~gal· prece~et1~s. The record will
showtbat the PreSident stated Ius 'VIews and that one
delegation opposed. them. Let future Presidents or
jurists study the legal aspects of the .question if they
wish to, For the.thne being I am not giving a ruling or
setting any precedents.
102. Mr. AN.UTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Fr,nch): It is not only

879
@I

~. deiegQ-wn which objects to the President's inter..
pretation. Th~\'e may perhaps be several otlters .which

also object to it.
1.03. The PRESIDENT (translatl1dJrom FrffflCh):
The President bas made a statement an . one delegation
has opposed that stat.M1ent. No delegation bassupported
the President's opinio~. The record will show that the
President explained hi\~ point of view. Other delegations
have made no criticisms, pethapsout of courtesy to the
Chair. The Ptesid('.nt'$' interpretation hala been oppos~d
by one delegat;ion~ VVhat bas happened has supported.
that delegation's point of view, since mine has received,
110 support. I have not even asked for such support,
since we have more important work to do.
104. The representative of France has the floor in
ordel' to explain his vote.
105. Mr. PLAISANT (France) (translated from
French) : At this titne~ when we are about to vote on
the draft resolution. submitted by the Ad H ()c Political
Committee on the initiative of Bolivia, Costa Rica, the
Dom.inican Republic, El Salvador, Hondur.as,· Nicaragua, Peru and the Philippines regarding relations of
States Members and specialized agencies with-Spain,
the French delegation wishes to explain its position.
106. The feeling of the French Government for the
Spanish pe()ple cannot be questioned. They were clearly
expressed during the various debates onrela.tions with
the Spanish Governm.ent which have tak~n J)la~ the
General Assembly.:rhey wer~ teflec~ed 1~ t1ie Varl?~S
measureS taken; WhICh were 111 keepIng wlth the sPlrtt
of resolution 39 (1)0£ 1946 and SOlne of which were
actually taken only by France. It must be recognb;ed,
however, that results have not come up to expectations
and that the sitl.tation in Spain does tl.otappear to have
changed.
107. The French delegation cannot seea.t1Y valid rea..
sons for changing its basic position. It· considers,on the
other hand, that· the decisiollsproposed to the Genel'al
Assembly l1lay prove expedient even if they are not
Justified. My delegation obsel'ves, however, that the
draft resoltttiondoes notill'V'olve the revocation·of the
statc::ments tnade in the preamble totlte resolutiOl'l
adopted Ott 12 December 1946; it takes note of that
circumstance.
.
lOS, At a time when the Assen1bll is ·abouttQ vote, it
is an honour and a pleasure for the French delegation to
show its sympathy for the Spanisb people - 8 sytnpathy
which is in keeping with Ottt' tradition al1.d the intellectual ties which unite the two eotuttries - by recalling
the desire expressed by the United Nations in 1946 to
give Spain a warm welcome when circumstal'iCeS allowed
it to enter the Organizaiiotl. .
109. It is out dutyto recall the hope expt'essed ill the
resolution adopted by the Consultative Assembly of the
Council of EUl'ope on 2.8 August 1950, that the
Spanish people may in thet~earf~tturehold .elections
and establish a constitutional1'eg1me whose representa..
dves l'ilay become members 'of the Consultative
Assembly~ .
110. I should also like to express the hope that Spain
may be in a position, ·as· soon. as possible, to reSUttle' the
~ptendid role conferred upon it ~y its. history and the
nobility of its thought in an it'!ternational community
based on equal rights and freedom.
.
.

m.

11L Mr. MORA OTERO (Uruguay) (tfanslt¥t~d
fram Sp.anish) : Not one s~11sor in this Assembly b..~s
conceded that there is a single new cirtUmstatilCe in the

situation which resolut.ion. 39 (1), adopted.. by th.e.
General Assembly in 1946, was .supposed to remedy.
112. The report of the Ad Hat Political Committee
itself states: Ulndeect, no representative claimed that the
present S~ish. G~verntl1ent had undergone any change
along the !m~s mdlcated tn the Gel'leral Assembly reSO"
lutionof 12 December 1946/' The report adds:
"Further, a number of the sponsoring delegations and
others pointed out that the joint draft resolution, While
revoking the recommendations embodied in the 1946
resolution, left intact the condemnati011 of the Franco
r\1gl.metontained in the 1946 resolution."
113. . 11'1 pursuance of that very report of the /ld Rat
Political Committee, the delegation of Uruguay will
voteapinst the revocation proposed here tqday.
114. I should add tbat my dele.gation has also nresented a proposal [AIAe.S8/L.ll] to the Committee
on the subject. of membership of the United Nations,
the pU~$e of which is to prevent the admission to
membership of any government which has been established with. the help of a foreign government. My
delegation wishes to remain consistent with its principles
in any similar case which may arise.
lIS. The PRESIDENT (translated frot,t French) :
JJefore putting the draft resolution to the vote, I call
th
.
fP1 d
.
f d
lllpOn e representatiVe 0 0 an on a pomt 0 or er.
116. Mr. !<:ATZ..SUCHY (Poland): When I spoke
on t. point of order previously, I wished to refer to
certain words used by the President to which my
" delegation must take exception and against which we
must protest. When commenting on my explanation of
the vote which my delegation would cast on the draft
resolution under distussion, the President stated that
under the pretext of making an explanation! had made
a statement. I believe that my delegation has every right,
under rule 88 of the rules of procedure, to mnke any
~pla.nationJ and that as long as neither the President
not the General Assemblyitsel£ establishes a time limit,
$Ch delegation is free to decide what shall be the
length of its explanation.
117. I do not doubt that the President knows the rules
of procedure better than I, atld I realize that as President he should do so. Nevertheless, 1 wish now to
protest against the use of such words and to endorse
the request made yesterday [303rd meeting J by the
representati.ve of Iraq that the President should show
a little more leniency to representatives, which could
only facilitate smooth workil1tg.
118. The PRESIDENT (trl1#~lated from French):
Broadly speaking I ask only two things of delegations that they should observe order and that they sllould not
attack each other. I have often said and I repp..at it 'the President is willing to submit to all sorts of attacks
against himself without ruling his at1ackers out of oi'fier.
119. With regard to the ren..arks of the representative
of Poland. I am in oomplete agreetnen~ withhinl; I hoad
not set any time limit on speeches. If I had, I shouM
certainly have interrupted the representati1le of Poland.
Instead, I al1o'wed him to speak for haUan bour. I have
told the ASltsembly t'hat it is the business of the President

to limit the time of speeches. So long as he has not done
$0, the representative of Poland is fully entitled to make
a s,peech which he (tan, if he chooses, describe as an
explanation or a vote. In the future, the President will
try to be a little more indulgent. I do all lean to serve
Y'l)U. l am very grateful for your support. I also thank
the representative of Poland "for the courteous way in
which he raised the matter. I hope the incident is now
closed.
120.' The representative of Australia has requested
that the draft resol!ltion' should be voted on in parts,
separate 'Votes being taken ott" the preamble and on
the operative part.
.
.
121. Iptlt the preamble to the vote. "

The .preamble was adopted by 38 votes ta 9, with 11
abstentions.·
.
122. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now put to the vote paragraph 1 of the operative part.
There has been a request for a roll~call vote on this

particular paragraph as well as on the draft resolution
as a whole.
. .

A vote was taken by roll-call.
Indonesia, having been drawn by lot by l~he President,
was called ~tpon to 'i)'ote first.
In favour: Iran, Iraq,Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay,. Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Syria,
Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United States
of America, Venezuela, Yemen, Afghanistan, Argentina, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica,. Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, ~l Salvador, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland.
Against: Israel, Mexico, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
U,;uguaYi Yugoslavia, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Guatemala.
Abstaining: . Indonesia, 'New Zealand, Norway,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, Australia, Burma, CubaJ Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India.
Paragraph 1 of the operative part was adopted by 38
votes to 10, with 12 abstentions.

123. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I now put to the vote paragraph 2 of the operative part.

A vote was take1J. by roll-call.
Afghanistan, having been drawn by lot by the Presidefllt, was ctJ1!ed upon to vote first.
In favour: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgiumt Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Dominican .Republic, Ecuador. Egypt, El
Salvador, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Iran, Iraq,
Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Nicara..
gua, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, . Philippines,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South
Africa, United States of America, Venezuela, Yemen.
Against: Byetorussian Soviet- Socialist Republic,
Czechoslovakia, Guatemala, Israel. Mexicot Poland,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,· Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Uruguay, Yugoslavia.

881

BM'" Meetlng-4 Noventber 1950
Absta~ning: Burma, Cuba, Denmark. Ethiopia,
France, India, Indonesia, New Zealand, Norway,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Brita:.· ',nd Northern Ireland.
Paragraph 2 of the operative part was adopted by 39
votes to 10, with 11 abstentions.
124. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall now ask the Assembly to vote on the draft
resolution as a whole.
A vote Was taketJ by roll-call.
Saudi Arabia, having been drawn by lot by the
President, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand; Turkey,
Union of South Africa, United States of America, Venezuela, Yemen, Afghanistan, Argentina, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa

Rica, Dominic.an Republic, Ecuador, Egyp.t, El Salvadorr, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Iran, Iraq,
Lelbanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Nicara...
gua, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, P~ru, Philippines.
Against: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics; Uruguay, Yugoslavia,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia,
Guatemala, Israel, Mexico, Poland.
Abstaining: Sweden, United Kingdotn of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia, Burma, Cuba,
Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Indonesia, New
Zealand, Norway.
.
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by 38
votes to 10, with 12 abstetttions.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

I

I
j

IJ
j

j
1

I
j

j
1
\

1
1

I

I
J

J,

1

I
1

1

I
\

Printed in tI.S.A.

A-40464--IJecember 195tJ-3,600
