United Nations

A/RES/59/182

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 105 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/503/Add.1)]

59/182. Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling that freedom from torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment is a non-derogable right that must be protected under all
circumstances, including in times of internal or international disturbance or armed
conflict, and that the prohibition of torture is explicitly affirmed in all relevant
international instruments,
Recalling also that a number of international, regional and domestic courts,
including the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, have recognized that the prohibition of torture is
a peremptory norm of international law,
Recalling further the definition of torture contained in article 1 of the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, 1
Recalling the recommendation contained in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on
25 June 1993 2 that high priority be given to providing the necessary resources to
assist victims of torture and effective remedies for their physical, psychological and
social rehabilitation, inter alia, through additional contributions to the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, and noting with satisfaction the
existence of a considerable international network of centres for the rehabilitation of
victims of torture,
Commending the persistent efforts by non-governmental organizations to
combat torture and to alleviate the suffering of victims of torture,
1.
Condemns all forms of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, including through intimidation, which are and shall remain

_______________
1
2

04-48718

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

A/RES/59/182

prohibited at any time and in any place whatsoever and can thus never be justified,
and calls upon all Governments to implement fully the prohibition of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
Condemns in particular any action or attempt by States or public
2.
officials to legalize or authorize torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment under any circumstances, including on grounds of national
security or through judicial decisions, and calls upon Governments to eliminate any
practices of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
Urges Governments to take effective measures to prevent torture and
3.
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including their
gender-based manifestations;
Stresses that all allegations of torture or other cruel, inhuman or
4.
degrading treatment or punishment must be promptly and impartially examined by
the competent national authority, that those who encourage, order, tolerate or
perpetrate acts of torture must be held responsible and severely punished, including
the officials in charge of the place of detention where the prohibited act is found to
have been committed, and takes note in this respect of the Principles on the
Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the Istanbul Principles) 3 as a useful tool in
efforts to combat torture;
5.
Stresses also that all acts of torture must be made offences under
domestic criminal law, and emphasizes that acts of torture are serious violations of
international humanitarian law and can constitute crimes against humanity and war
crimes and that the perpetrators of all acts of torture must be prosecuted and
punished;
Urges States to ensure that any statement that is established to have been
6.
made as a result of torture shall not be invoked as evidence in any proceedings,
except against a person accused of torture as evidence that the statement was made;
Stresses that States must not punish personnel who are involved in the
7.
custody, interrogation or treatment of any individual subjected to any form of arrest,
detention or imprisonment for not obeying orders to commit or conceal acts
amounting to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
Recalls that States shall not expel, return (“refouler”) or extradite a
8.
person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that the
person would be in danger of being subjected to torture;
Stresses that national legal systems must ensure that victims of torture
9.
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment obtain redress, are
awarded fair and adequate compensation and receive appropriate social and medical
rehabilitation, urges Governments to take effective measures to this end, and in this
regard encourages the development of rehabilitation centres;
10. Calls upon all Governments to take appropriate effective legislative,
administrative, judicial and other measures to prevent and prohibit the production,
trade, export and use of equipment that is specifically designed to inflict torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;

_______________
3

2

Resolution 55/89, annex.

A/RES/59/182

11. Notes with appreciation that one hundred and thirty-nine States have
become parties to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment,1 and urges all States that have not yet done so
to become parties to the Convention as a matter of priority;
12. Invites all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to
consider making the declarations provided for in articles 21 and 22 of the
Convention and to consider the possibility of withdrawing their reservations to
article 20, and urges all States parties to notify the Secretary-General of their
acceptance of the amendments to articles 17 and 18 of the Convention as soon as
possible;
13. Urges States parties to comply strictly with their obligations under the
Convention, including, in view of the high number of reports not submitted, their
obligation to submit reports in accordance with article 19 of the Convention, and
invites States parties to incorporate a gender perspective and information concerning
children and juveniles when submitting reports to the Committee against Torture;
14. Calls upon States parties to give early consideration to signing and
ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which was adopted on
18 December 2002 by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/199 and which
provides further measures for use in the fight against and prevention of torture, and
notes in this context that ratifications by twenty States parties are required for the
Optional Protocol to enter into force;
15. Welcomes the work of the Committee against Torture and the report of
the Committee, 4 submitted in accordance with article 24 of the Convention;
16. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
conformity with her mandate established by the General Assembly in its resolution
48/141 of 20 December 1993, to continue to provide, at the request of Governments,
advisory services for the preparation of national reports to the Committee and for
the prevention of torture, as well as technical assistance in the development,
production and distribution of teaching material for this purpose;
17. Urges States parties to take fully into account the conclusions and
recommendations made by the Committee after its consideration of their reports;
18. Notes with appreciation the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment 5 on the overall trends and developments with regard to his
mandate, and encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue to include in his
recommendations proposals on the prevention and investigation of torture, including
its gender-based manifestations;
19. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue to consider including in his
report information on the follow-up by Governments to his recommendations, visits
and communications, including progress made and problems encountered;
20. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in the performance of his task, to supply all necessary information
requested by the Special Rapporteur, to respond appropriately and expeditiously to
_______________
4
5

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/59/44).
See A/59/324.

3

A/RES/59/182

his urgent appeals and to give serious consideration to responding favourably to
requests by the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries, and urges them to enter
into a constructive dialogue with the Special Rapporteur with respect to the
follow-up to his recommendations;
21. Stresses the need for the continued regular exchange of views among the
Committee, the Special Rapporteur and other relevant United Nations mechanisms
and bodies, as well as for the pursuance of cooperation with relevant United Nations
programmes, notably the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme, with a view to enhancing further their effectiveness and cooperation on
issues relating to torture, inter alia, by improving their coordination;
22. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have already contributed to the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture; 6
23. Stresses the importance of the work of the Board of Trustees of the Fund,
and appeals to all Governments and organizations to contribute annually to the
Fund, preferably by 1 March before the annual meeting of the Board, if possible
with a substantial increase in the level of contributions;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to all Governments the
appeals of the General Assembly for contributions to the Fund, to continue to
include the Fund on an annual basis among the programmes for which funds are
pledged at the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities and
to assist the Board of Trustees of the Fund in its appeal for contributions and in its
efforts to make better known the existence of the Fund;
25. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure, within the overall
budgetary framework of the United Nations, the provision of adequate staff and
facilities for the bodies and mechanisms involved in combating torture and assisting
victims of torture, commensurate with the strong support expressed by Member
States for combating torture and assisting victims of torture;
26. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Commission on
Human Rights at its sixty-first session and to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session a report on the status of the Convention and a report on the operations of the
Fund;
27. Calls upon all Governments, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other United Nations bodies and agencies, as
well as relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to
commemorate, on 26 June, the United Nations International Day in Support of
Victims of Torture;
28. Decides to consider at its sixtieth session the reports of the
Secretary-General, including the report on the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Victims of Torture, the report of the Committee against Torture and the interim
report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

_______________
6

4

See A/58/284.
