VDI.

6. Commends the Joint Inspection Unit and the
Secretary-General for their efforts in the area of evaluation and advice both interna! and externa], and urges
them to contin~e their efforts in that direction, with a
view to improving the administrativc and budgetary
efficiency and effectiveness of the United Nations system.

106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/ 165.

223

Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of tbe Fiftb Committee

Report of the Intemational Civil Service
Commission

The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the fifth annual report of the International Civil Service Commission, 31
Reaffirming the central role of the ~ommi~sion in ~~
development of a single unified mternational civil
service,
Endorsing the efforts of the Commission to strengthen
the United Nations common system by adjusting it to
changing circumstances, especially those caused by
currency fluctuations,
Recalling its resolution 3 3/ 119 of 19 December 1978,
in sections I and JI of which it set down important objectives for maintaining and reinforcing the common
system and established guideli,1es for the future work
of the Commission,
Suggesting that the Commission should consider ways
of reducing the length of its annual report while still
making clear in the report or the annexes thereto any
recommendations to the General Assembly and the precise effect, impact and costs of any proposals,
I
1. Expresses its satis/action with the action taken by
the lnternational Civil Service Commission under articles
13 and 14 of its statute and urges the Commission to
continue its work under its long-term function;
2. Requests the Commission to begin urgently a
fundamental and comprehensive review of the purposes
and operation of the post adjustment system with a view
to eliminating distortions and anomalies in the resulting
levels of remuneration at the various duty stations and
grade Ievels and thereby achieving an improved mechanism for adjusting United Nations remuneration to reflect more accurately the differences in the cost of living
at the various duty stations and their evolution over time
as a result of inflation and currency fluctuations, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session;

11
l. Approves the grading equivalency recommended
by the Commission in paragraph t 19 of its report to be
used in comparing United States civil service and United
N ations remuneration;
2. Requests the Commission to examine the possibility of establishing a contributory system of death
grant benefits;
3. Decides that effective 1 January 1980 no staff
member shall be' entitled to any part of the repatriation
grant unless evidence of relocation away from the
country of the last duty station is provided;
34 O/jicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. }O (A/34/30 and Corr.1).

III
Decides that any staff member joining the United
N ations Secretariat on or after 1 January 1980 shall not
be entitled to receive reimbursement from the Tax
Equalization Fund or otherwise for nation3;I income
taxes paid on lump sum pension payments rece1v~d fr~
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund; th1s dec1sion will not affect staff members serving with the United
N ations prior to 1 J anuary 1980.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/166.

Review of the rates of reimbursement to the
Govemments of troop-contrlbuting States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision of 29 November 1974, taken
at its twenty-ninth session, by which it established, as
from 25 October 1973, standard rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries for pay and allowances of their troops serving in the United Nations
Emergency Force and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, 35 and its decision 32/416 of 2
December 1977, by which it revised those rates of reimbursement as from 25 October 1977,
Recalling a/so its decision of 15 December 1975,
taken at its thirtieth session, by which it appr ..wed the
principie of reimbursing the troop-contributing States
for the usage factor for personal clothing, gear and
equipment,3" and the related report of the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session establishing the rates therefor as from 25 October
1973,:3 7
Recalling further its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April
1978, by which it applied the same standard rates _of
reimbursement payable to those Governments contnbuting troops to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lcbanon,
Recognizing that inflation and escalating troop costs
have adversely affected in real terms the existing standard rates of reimbursement,
Requests the Secretary-General to study, in consultation with the States contributing troops to the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the existing standard
rates of reimbursement, with a view to ensuring an
equitable rate of reimbursement to the Governments
of troop-contributing States, and to report on this
matter to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/219.

Personnel questions

The General Assembly

I
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session:
(a) A detailed report outlining the basis on which
the desirable ranges in effect in 1979 (posts subject to
equitable geographical distribution) were established,
3 r, /bid., Twe11ty-ninth Sessio11, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631
and Corr.2), p. 140, item 84.
36
lbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/10034), p.
148, item 107.
37
A/31/288.

224

General Assembly-Tbirty-fourtb Session

including the factors and criteria, with their related percentage distributions, which determined those desirable
ranges;
(b) A series of altemative tables of desirable representation for all Member States on the basis of a redistribution of the percentages used at present for the criteria
of contribution and membership so as to reflect a membership percentage of 50 per cent or a membership
percentage equal to that of contribution while maintaining the existing percentage in respect of the population
factor; these alternative tables, which shall take into
account the new scale of assessment for 1980, 1981 and
1982, shall include:
(i) A range of increases in the lower limit of the
present mínimum desirable. range;
(ii) An increase in the upper limit of the present
mínimum desirable range;
(iii) Suggested formulae for the removal or relaxation of the upper limits of the desirable ranges
of developing Member States;
(iv) Formulae for relating the population criterion
directly to regional populations, with suggestions for its utilization by individual Member
States;
(e) An outline of any possible additional criteria
which, in the Secretary-General's considered view, might
also be utilized in determining a system of desirable
ranges or representation with suggestions for their inclusion under subparagraphs {b) {i) to (iv) above;
(á) A study of the implications of the establishment
of a ceiling on the percentage contribution for calculating
the personnel entitlement of any Member State;
(e) A detailed description of the way the present
weighted desirable ranges have been calculated, with information as to the basis of this calculation, as well as a
study dealing with an indicative evaluation of posts so as
to ensure that Member States will have a balanced
quantitative and qualitative representation;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to present the
reports and submissions outlined above for the consideration of Member States at least six weeks before the opening of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly;

11
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
amendments made to the Staff Rules during the period
from 1 July 1978 to 30 June 1979; 38

111
Requests the Secretary-General to pursue the improvement of the computerized roster of candidates in
accordance with section I, paragraph 1 (e), of General
Assembly resolution 33/143 of 20 December 1978;
IV
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the classification systems for posts
in the Professional and General Service categories39 and
the oral report of the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 40
and requests the Secretary-General to report on progress
in the implementation of those systems to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
111 th plenary meeting
20 December 1979
as A/C.S/34/7.
so A/C.S/34/37.
'º Of/icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Fifth Committee, 84th meeting, paras. 27-29.

34/220.

Participation of United Nations statl in the
consultative bodies within the United Nations
system

The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the requests by members of the
staff set out in the notes by the Secretary-General on
access by staff representatives to the Fifth Committee;"
2. Further takes note of the comments and suggestions of the Secretary-General on the requests by the
staff as set out in his note dated 21 November 1979;' 2
3. Rea[firms the responsibility and authority of the
Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer of
the United Nations under Article 97 of the Charter of
the United Nations;
4. Expresses its readiness to receive and consider
fully the views of the staff as set out by a single recognized representative of the staff of the United Nations
Secretariat in a document to be submitted through the
Secretary-General and issued under the item entitled
"Personnel questions";
5. Expresses its readiness to receive and consider
fully the views of the staff as set out by a designated representative of the Federation of International Civil
Servants' Associations in a document to be submitted
through the Secretary-General and issued under the
item entitled "Report of the Intemational Civil Service
Commission";
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report on
the various forms of participation of staff in the consultative bodies of the United Nations Secretariat and
within the United Nations system which deal with
matters of direct concern to personnel and on the extent
to which those bodies have fulfilled the purpose of
better staff involvement; in preparing the report, due
account should be taken of the views of the United
Nations staff on the subject;
7. Expresses further its disposition to consider, as
appropriate, other forms of communication between the
staff and the Fifth Committee.
111 th plenary meeting
20 December 1979
34/221.

Report of tbe United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly and
to the member organizations of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund for 1979, 43 chapter III of the report
of the International Civil Service Commission" and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 45

I
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE
UNITED NATIONS folNT STAFF PENSION FuND

Decides that the Regulations of the United Nations
J oint Staff Pension Fund shall be amended, without
4 1 A/C.5/34/CRP.5
42 A/C.S/34/29.
43

and 6.

Of/icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/34/9) and A/34/9/Add.1.
44 lbid., Supplement No. 30 (A/34/30 and Corr.1).
45 A/34/721.
