TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 138 1) . . . , , . . , . . , . . . . , , . . , , . , . . . . . . ,
Adoption of the agenda , . . . , , , , . . , . . . . , . . , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . , ,
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8226)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a.....
, a.......

1

S/PV.1381
/

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 20 November 1967, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Mamadou Boucabar KANTE (Mali).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 381)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8226).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/8226)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its 1373rd
meeting on 9 November and at its 1375th meeting on 13
November, I propose with the consent of the Council to
invite the representatives of the United Arab Republic,
Israel, Jordan and Syria to take places at the Council table
and to participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahmoud Riad
(United Arab Republic), Mr. A. Eban {Israel)> Mr. A. M.
RifaP (Jordan) and Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) took places at
the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The
Council will now resume its examination of the item before
it. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Jordan, and I now call upon him,
3. Mr. RIFA’I (Jordan): I have just received a cable from
my Government transmitting to me the following information which I would like to put before the Council:
“This afternoon, 20 November, at 3.15 p.m. Jordanian
Iocal time, Israel armed forces opened an unprovoked
attack against the refugee camp in Karameh on the east

bank of the Jordan by continuously shelling the camp
and the civilian population in it. The indiscriminate
shelling caused the death of three children under the age
of eight years, nine other civilians and a policeman.
Twenty-five civilians were seriously wounded, among
them seven children and three women. Three policemen
were also severely wounded. As a result of the shelling,
one mosque was destroyed and a food distribution centre
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency was
damaged. The refugee camp school was heavily damaged
and so was a police station. Israel large-scale shelling
ceased at 4.30 p.m., local time, but shooting continues on
other Jordanian targets.”
4. Mr. KUZENETSOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation
has already emphasized that the situation in the Middle
East remains extremely dangerous. As long as Israel troops
occupy the Arab territories they have seized, as long as no
stop is put to the colonialist appropriations of these lands
by the aggressor, and as long as he is not forced to leave
them, there will be, and there can be, no peace in the
Middle East. In a situation where the troops of both sides
are facing one another, armed conflict in the Middle East
may break out again at any moment and no one can tell
what dangerous international consequences such a development might have. The information just provided by the
Foreign Minister of Jordan is a further illustration of the
fact.
5. However, it should be noted at ,the same time that
favourable conditions have recently been created for a
political settlement of the problem of eliminating the
consequences of Israel aggression. The Arab States have
clearly demonstrated their interest in a political settlement,,
and their readiness to seek ways and means to establish
lasting peace in the Middle East. It is our understanding
that most States members of the Security Council sincerely
wish to take advantage of this favourable climate to reach a
constructive political settlement, The Soviet Union, for its
part, has a vital interest in the establishment of lasting
peace in the Middle East region.
6. During Security Council debates, the Soviet delegation
has repeatedly drawn attention of all members of the
Security Council to the fact that the key question, the crux
of the problem in the Middle East is the question of the
withdrawal of Israel troops from all the Arab territories
they have occupied, i.e., the question of removing the main
consequence of the Israel aggression against the United
Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan in June 1967. The
statements, of a number of Council members have shown

aspects of the problem on the basis of the following
principles:

that this view is widely shared in the Security Council. It
cannot be denied that only the withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops from the territories he has seized, from all the
territories he has seized, can pave the way for a lasting and
just peace in the Middle East. Any other assertion would be
opposed to the most elementary rules governing relations
among States, rules which must be respected if there is to
be peace in the world, The aggressor has come into foreign
lands; the aggressor must leave those lands. That is just as
incontestable as the fact that someone who has taken
something which does not belong to him must give it back.

‘(a) The use or threat of force in relations between
States is incompatible with the Charter of the United
Nations;
“(b) Every State must respect the political independence and territorial integrity of all other States in the
area;

“(c) There must be a just settlement of the question of
the Palestine refugees;

7. In the situation which has now developed, the Soviet
Government considers it its duty to renew its efforts to find
a just and effective political settlement in the Middle East.
Guided by this belief, the Soviet Government has decided
to take a new initiative and has instructed the Soviet
delegation to submit the following draft resolution for
consideration by the Security Council:

‘(d) Innocent passage through international waterways
in the area in accordance with international agreements;
“4. Considers that, in harmony with the steps to Ibe
taken along the lines indicated above, all States in the
area should put an end to the state of belligerency, take
measures to limit the useless and destructive arms race,
and discharge the obligations assumed by them under the
Charter of the United Nations and international agreements.“’

“The Security Council,
“‘Expressing concerjz at the lack of progress towards a
political settlement in the Middle East and at the
increased tension in the area,

That is the text of the Soviet draft resolution. I understand
that the text is now being translated from Russian and will
shortly be circulated to the members of the Security
Council.

“Noting that there have even been violations of the
cease-fire called for by the Security Council in its
resolutions 233 (1967) of 6 June, 234 (1967) of 7 June,
235 (1967) of 9 June and 236 (1967) of 12 June 1967, a
cease-fire which was regarded as a first step towards the
achievement of a just peace in the area and which wasto
have been strengthened by other appropriate measures,

8. The draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Uniorl
contains all the key elements for a political settlement, The
view that such a settlement must be achieved is shared by
the overwhelming majority of States Members of the
United Nations. It was expressed both at the fifth ernergency special session and at the twenty-second sessionof
the General Assembly, and also during recent debates in the
Security Council.

“Recalling General Assembly resolutions 2252 (ES-V),
2253 (ES-V), 2254 (ES-V) and 2256 (ES-V),
“Emphasizing tile urgent necessity of restoring peace
and establishing normal conditions in the Middle East,

9. Our draft resolution contains a clear clause on the key
question, namely, the withdrawal of Israel troops from al1
occupied territories of the Arab States to the positions that
they held prior to 5 June 1967. We should like to draw
special attention to the fact that in our draft resolution the
clause on the withdrawal of Israel troops is so worded as to
ensure that this measure is carried out without delay. This
is, in our view, the approach best suited to the needsof this
problem,

“1. Declares that peace and final solutions to this
problem can be achieved within the framework of the
Charter of the United Nations;
“2. Urges that the following steps should be taken:
“(a) The parties to the conflict should immediately
withdraw their forces to the positions they held before
5 June 1967 in accordance with the principle that the
seizure of territories as a result of war is inadmissible;

10. Furthermore, the Soviet Government has repeatedly
expressed its support of the recognition of the inalienahlo
right of all Middle East States, including Israel, to an
independent national existence. Support for the independence, freedom and territorial integrity of States, ~hcr~i!t
they may be situated, and the inadmissibility and Containment of aggression, whoever the aggressor may be, are it
basic concept of the Soviet Union’s policy, including its
Middle East policy. This also is reflected in our draft
resolution.

“(b) All States Members of the United Nations in the
area should immediately recognize that each of them has
the right to exist as an independent national State and to
live in peace and security, and should renounce all claims
and desist from all acts inconsistent with the foregoing;

“3. Deems it necessary in this connexion to continue
its consideration of the situation in the Middle East,
collaborating directly with the parties concerned and
making use of the presence of the United Nations, with a
view to achieving an appropriate and just solution of all

11. The Soviet Union is in favour of a peaceful and just
settlement of the problem of the Arab refugees, basedon
1 Subsequently circulated as document S/8253.

2

l--

their lawful rights and interests. The Soviet Government
supports the innocent passage of vessels of all nations
through international waterways with due respect for the
sovereign rights and territorial integrity of the States
through whose territory those waters flow. Provisions to
that effect are contained in our draft resolution.

May. I shall refer to the long processes which brought us
last week to the time for a final decision, I shall emphasize,
if that is necessary, both the dangers of the situation and
the crying need for urgent action. And the kind of report
we have just heard from the representative of Jordan must
surely emphasize in all our minds both the dangers and the
urgency of action. I shall remind the Council of the wide
measure of agreement we have reached.

12. We would, of course, also welcome a curtailment of
the arms race in the Middle East and a settlement of this
problem by the elimination of the consequences of Israel
aggression. This point is dealt with in paragraph 4 of our
draft. However, attention must be drawn to the fact that
renewed deliveries of American arms to Israel, a country
which has committed and continues to commit aggression
against the Arab States, is hardly likely to facilitate a
settlement of the Middle East question or to make Israel
leaders take a realistic view of the situation. It is more
likely merely to give further encouragement to Israel’s
aggressiveaspirations.

19. First, on the policy of my Government in the
questions at issue, I have no hesitation in reaffirming what
has been said by my Foreign Secretary and by myself on
behalf of my Government. Those statements are on the
record. Our policy has been consistent and clear throughout. We have spoken and we have voted in the Assembly
and in this Council on all the issues-on the need for
withdrawal and equally on the necessity for a permanent
peace, and on the refugees and on Jerusalem, We stand by
our votes and we stand by our declarations,

13. We also think it should be noted that the Soviet draft
resolution is based on proposals on which many States at
the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly
were in agreement, including the United States Government, and which were submitted by them. In particular the
subsequent assertions concerning the unchanging attitude
of the United States to the withdrawal of Israel troops from
occupied Arab territory were taken into account. We
should like to express the hope that this will facilitate the
adoption by the Council of the proposals contained in the
Soviet draft resolution.

20. If I had to sum up the policy which has been
repeatedly stated by my Government, I would go back to
the words used by my Foreign Secretary in the General
Assembly less than a month ago. These were his words:
“I should like to repeat what I said when I was here
before: Britain does not accept war as a means of settling
disputes, nor that a State should be allowed to extend its
frontiers as a result of a war, This means that Israel must
withdraw. But equally, Israel’s neighbours must recognize
its right to exist, and it must enjoy security within its
frontiers. What we must work for in this area is a durable
peace, the renunciation of all aggressive designs, and an
end to policies which are inconsistent with peace.” 2

14. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation reaffirms that the
Soviet Government has been prompted to submit this draft
resolution by the need for the immediate elimination of the
consequences of the aggression committed by Israel against
the Arab States, by the need to restore peace and first and
foremost to settle the urgent, fundamental problem,
namely, the withdrawal of Israel troops from the territories
of the Arab States which they have occupied.

21, I now turn to the action we have taken in the United
Nations. On the deliberations in the United Nations, I shall
not go back to the bad days and nights when this Council
failed to act. I shall not go over the negative proceedings in
the summer when the good lead given to us all by the Latin
Americans was opposed. Let me say here that many of us
have admired the clear Iead which the Latin American
Governments have given to all of us throughout. They have
insisted on fairness, on the basic principle of equal
obligation. They have resisted all attempts to destroy the
balance of their proposals. They have been criticized for
their efforts. But they have throughout maintained a record
of courageous consistency and a refusal to be intimidated, a
refusal to abandon the principles which they stated and
which, to their lasting credit, they have not betrayed. So we
have had the advantage of a good lead from the Latin
Americans from the beginning.

15. That is our consistent policy, which is based on the
general principles whereby the Soviet Union supports
peoples fighting to assert their freedom and independence
and to protect their territorial integrity.
16. The Soviet delegation calls on all members of the
Security Council to give due attention to the draft
resolution which it has submitted and to help the Security
Council to take the decision which is expected by the
peoples of the world and which will be in the interests of
peace and international security. Naturally, we real& that
the members of the Security Council will, as usually
happens in such cases, need some time to study the
resolution we have submitted, especially as we are dealing
with such an important and complex question.
17. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I think it may be
well to remind ourselves this afternoon of the stage we had
reached-the final stage we had hoped-last Friday as we
adjourned the l38Otl1 meeting of the Council and we had
reluctantly to endure yet another delay.

22. We also had the advantage of a wide measure of
growing agreement. Let me say very respectfully that every
member of this Council has made a contribution to the
search for common ground on which we could go forward.
Basing ourselves on the principles which the Latin American delegations had declared, we went to both sides-to the
Arabs and to the Israelis. We sought to understand their
needs, their interests, the national requirements which they
put uppermost in their legitimate aims and aspirations.

18. I shall reaffirm the policy of my Government throughout the past six months since we came to this Council last

2 official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, plenary Meetings, 1567th meeting, para. 91.
3

23. Let me pause for a moment to speak on the question
of how closely we should seek to chart a course in advance.

was both fair and clear, and we believe that the wording
used is perfectly plain.

24. There are some who have said: let us take each clause,
each word and endeavour to dictate how it will be
translated into subsequent action. They say that we cannot
advance at all until we have looked forward to consider
how the United Nations special representative and the
parties with him will face and deal with each aspect of the
many complicated problems they have to tackle. They say
that we should consider and pron&nce on every detail in
advance. This, I feel sure, would be a mistake. The
perfectionist can often be the opponent of practical action.

30. Since then I have been strongly pressed by both
sides-1 emphasize, by both sides-to make changes,parti.
cularly in the provisions regarding withdrawal. But I came
to the conclusion that to make variations under pressure
from one side or the other at this stage would destroy the
equal balance which be had endeavoured to achieve, and
would also destroy the confidence which we hoped to build
on our effort to be just and impartial.
31. In our resolution we stated the principle of the
“withdrawal of Israel armed forces from territories cc.
cupied in the recent conflict” and in the preamble we
emphasized “the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of
territory by war”. In our view, the wording of those
Provisions is clear. We believe that it would be a serious
error to attempt at this stage to vary or add to them. Nor
are we prepared to alter the wording of the remainder of
the resolution, including that concerning the necessity of
securing a lasting peace, which, I emphasize again, was
prepared with the greatest care after listening long and
patiently to the views put to us by those directly
concerned.

25. Let qle say this on this attitude, which might be called
the attitude of over-definition in advance.
26. My Government has always attached the greatest
importance to the task of the United Nations special
representative who is to work in the Middle East. I shall not
attempt now to discuss the draft resolution which has been
today read to us and put forward by the Deputy Foreign
Minister of the Soviet Union. I said when I welcomed him
ten days ago that I confidently trusted that he had come to
New York not to spread cliscord but to seek for a lasting
settlement. My trust in his motive remains. I do not
propose now to comment on his speech; the only comment
I would now make on his draft resolution is that I wasvery
surprised to see no reference in it to the appointment of a
United Nations special representative to go to the Middle
East. But this is our chief purpose. This is the one main
matter
on which, so I have understood, we are all fully
agreed without my reservations whatsoever.

32. I understand the intense feelings which are aroused
not only by issues but also by words. Yet again I say that I
am convinced that it would be wrong, under pressure from
either side, to detract from or add to the balanced
formulation which we have endeavoured to make both fair
and clear. If we start trying to pull out a brick here and a
brick there, the whole carefully constructed edifice will
come tumbling down.

2’7. We have long been anxious to see the special representative appointed lo make contact with both sides and to
start working for a durable peace. We have not wished to
restrict him as to the means and methods which he
CIII~~O~S, but we have all thought that he should be guided
by certain principles. Those Principles we have sought to set
out in our draft resolution of 16 November [S/8247/. We
believe that it 3v)uld be a mistake and, indeed, a disservice
to the special representative to endeavour in advance to
specify exactly and in detail how those principles are to be
applied, If we attempted to do so in advance, we would
make his task much more difficuIt-indeed,
worse than that
we might never agree amongst ourselves on the detailed
instructions to be given to him.

33. Bear with me, I beg you, while I repeat what I said last
week.
34. We wanted to work with others to devise a resolution
which would take full account of the essential intereits of
both sides as they have stated them and which would also
give the United Nations special representative the best hope
of successin carrying out his mandate.
35. We went to both sides. We know and respect their
intense feelings, We well realize that the future security and
progress and happiness of their peoples depend on what we
do here. It is entirely understandable, therefore, that to
each point, indeed to each word, they should attach the
utmost importance. Nevertheless, the representatives of
both sides have been ready to consider with the greatest
patience and care the representations which we have Put to
thein. In the long discussions with the representatives of
Arab countries they have made it clear that they seek no
more than justice. The central issue of the recovery and the
restoration of their territories is naturally uppermost in
their minds. The issue of withdrawal is all important to
them, and of course they seek a just settlement to end the
long suffering of the refugees.

28. We have all along had in mind that there should be
two stages, The first stage is the statement of principles and
the appointment of the special representative, The second
stage is the work which he is to undertake in the Middle
East, We are concerned now with the necessity to take the
first vital step in this direction. It would be wrong if in
effect we endeavoured to .do the work of the special
representative before he is even appointed.
29. The second, and equally important,
consideration
which I wish to Put to you is in this. As I said last week, we
have made a genuine attempt to set out a draft resolution
which takes account of the basic interests of both sides. It
is our strong view that these do not conflict. We sought to
set out a conclusion in the form of a draft resolution which

36. The Israelis, on the other hand, tell us that withdrawal
must never be to insecurity and hostility. The action to be
taken must be within the framework of a permanent Peace,
and withdrawal must be to secure boundaries. There must
4

be an end to the use and threat and fear of violence and
hostility.
37. I have said before that those aims do not conflict; they
are equal; they are both essential; they are interdependent,
There must be adequate provision in any resolution to meet
them both, since to attempt to pursue one without the
other would be futile.
38. So we have been guided by all the earlier work which
has been done and by the eloquent statements which have
bee:n made by both sides, and we have endeavoured, with
the help of our brother members of the Council, to set out
in a draft resolution what I believe will be recognized as a
sincere attempt both to meet the just claims of both sides
and also to discharge the high responsibilities of this
Council.
39,. I cannot maintain that the resolution which we have
prepared by these means will be accepted in ii111by either
side. Naturally, they will have their doubts and differences
011 wording, formulation,
presentation and emphasis, but I
trust that both sides, as well as all members of this Council,
will recognize that the resolution which I have presented to
the Council is indeed balanced and is indeed just.

its draft resolution of 7 November (S/8229], will vote in
favour of the United Kingdom draft resolution for two
Principal (andprevailing reasons. First, the United Kingdom
resolution commands, in our opinion, a substantial consensus in the Council and is entirely consistent with the
Policy of my Government as set forth by President Johnson
in his statement of 19 June and as stated by me in the
several interventions I have made in the Council, I reaffirm
that policy without any reservation today. Secondly, the
draft WdUtiOn
is non-prejudicial to and sufficiently
mindful of the legitimate and vital interests of al1 parties to
the recent conflict, so that they should be able to receive
and co-operate with the United Natiqns special represedative aS he starts out on his difficult and historic
Peace-making mission. Co.operation with the special representative under a non-prejudicial ,mandate embracing the
essential elements of a just, dignified and durable
peace-that has been the very cornerstone of United States
policy during the entire consideration of this grave matter
by the United Nations,
44. In my statement last Wednesday I very consciously
stressed that “pride of authorship has no place in the
serious business at hand” [1377th meeting, para. 59/. I
wish to reaffirm that point now in words and in action. The
important consideration in our minds is not, and never has
been, whether any action by this Council is based upon the
precise words of our draft resolution, whether it is of
United States origin or has a United States label. The
important consideration has rather been whether the
proposal would speed the process of peace-making in which
both sides could and would in honour participate.

40,, We do not claim that the resolution which we have put
forward is perfect. We do not even claim that it is our own,
Every delegation in this Council would write a different
resolution if it were a matter only of stating a national
position. Every delegation is entitled, indeed is expected, to
state the separate and distinct policy of the Government it
represents. But this resolution which stands in our name is
the work of us all. It draws on the ideas and formulations
of others. It seeks to bring them all together in a balanced
whole. It represents, above all, an endeavour to be fair, to
be just and to be impartial.

45. In every statement made by the United States since
last June, and even before then, in May, there has been a
sense of urgency, for we have said from the very beginning
that time is not on the side of peace unless we use time to
move towards peace.

41. More important even than that, I am fully convinced
the resolution which we present offers the best and
incleed the only basis on which the practical co-operation of
both sides can be won. Surely that is of supreme importance, Again I say that what we want is not a mere voting
victory; what we want is a success on the ground. That is
the overriding test we apply.

46. The adoption of the United Kingdom draft resolution-and I hope and trust it will be adopted-can only be
the beginning of the peace-making process. Whether or not
it will culminate in what we all fervently hope for, peace in
the area, will depend ultimately upon the parties themselves. With goodwill and a will to peace on both sides, and
with a mutual willingness to extend co-operation to the
United Nations special representative, the action which I
hope we shall take in adopting the United Kingdom draft
resolution could mean a new beginning in relations among
the States in the area, a new beginning that could help to
bring to all the peoples in the area the peace, security and
well-being that have been elusive for so long and which, I
am confident, they all hope for. It is our hope, too, that
with that new beginning will come a new climate in which
neighbours will be able to live with one another, in
co-operativeeffort, to the benefit of the entire Middle East.

that

42. I am assured that the Deputy Foreign Minister does
not wish to delay. None of us does, When I listened to his
draft resolution just now the words I liked best were the
repeated words “without delay”. Those words coming from
the representative of the Soviet Union are music in our ears
indeed. It is on the understanding that the outcome of our
lottg discussion will be no less favourable when the vote
comes than it is now that it is reluctantly agreed that We
should have one more, I pray, short postponement. I
confidently hope that we can go forward with a due sense
of urgency to take a step of the utmost importance. BY so
doing we shall, I trust, place the full weight of the Council
behind a new, united and determined effort to take
effective action to bring peace with justice to the peoples of
the Middle East.

47. All of that can come to pass, and the United Nations
special representative can help it come to pass, but he till
be able to help only if he receives the CO-Operation
of the
parties. We urge now and shall continue to urge that all
parties should be forthcoming in their response. But the
specialrepresentative is not only entitled to co-operation
from the parties. He is entitled to the full support of the

43. Mr. GOLDBERG
(United States of America): The
United States, although adhering to the views expressed in
5

members of this Council, permanent and elected, and of the
entire membership of the United Nations.
48. On behalf of my Government I now pledge to this
Council and to the parties concerned, as I did in submitting
the United States draft resolution, that our diplomatic and
political influence will be exerted, under the United
Kingdom draft, in support of the efforts of the United
Nations special representative to achieve a fair and equitable settlement SO that all in the area may live in peace,
security and tranquillity.
As Lord Caradon has indicated,
the United Kingdom draft resolution now before us is the
product not only of recent discussions but, in fact, of more
than five months of intensive consultations among the
members of the Assembly, this Council and the parties
concerned. It draws inspiration and guidance from all of
those and from the various suggestions and draft resolutions
which have been proposed, but particularly, as its balance
shows, from the ideas and concepts put forward by the
Latin American countries during the fifth emergency
special session of the General Assembly. The result is a
balanced draft resolution, but it is balanced now on a
razor’s edge. We must avoid any move now, we m&t avert
any prospect of delay, which might upset this delicate
balance-a balance which absolutely must be retained if this
Council is to take, as we believe it should and must, the
first essential step toward the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

returned in order to rescue the patrol and to silence the
aggressive assault. We thus have another link in the long
chain of violent assaults from Jordan in recent days on
which my delegation has kept the Security Council constantly informed. Therefore, the report communicated by
the representative of Jordan is false in respect both of the
origins and consequences of the latest Jordanian assault.
53. I should like to reserve the right to comment on the
other new text at a later stage. Now I will only say that the
reasons for which we reject the Soviet Union’s draft
resolution emerge very clearly from the statements I have
made in the Security Council and elsewhere. It is a
backward-looking resolution. It seeks to restore the juridical ambiguity and the territorial vulnerability of the
shattered armistice rCgime. This we shall never do. Our
policy is to ensure that the cease-fire be totally maintained
until and unless it is succeeded by peace treaties between
Israel and the Arab States ending the state of war,
establishing agreed, recognized and secured territorial
boundaries, guaranteeing free navigation for all shipping,
including that of Israel, in international waterways, and
ensuring a stable and mutually guaranteed security. This is
our policy. It has not changed. It will not change. It is in
the light of that policy that we shall comment on any text
that is submitted for our attention, and it is in the light of
that policy that we shall determine our attitude to any
diplomatic action that may be envisaged by the Security
Council.

49. The Soviet draft resolution, I regret to say, is not an
even-handed non-prejudicial draft resolution. It does not
meet the test of exact balance, acquiescence by the parties
and workability, Its belated introduction should not and
must not impede the consensus which has developed in
support of the United Kingdom draft resolution.

54. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): The question now before the Security Council is a

matter of the most importance and one which, as you
know, has caused a stir in foreign ministries throughout the
world, We have certainly waited long enough. For more
than a month there have been consultations and discussions
among the non-permanent members of the Security Council
and within the Council itself. Meanwhile, only a few
moments ago the Soviet Union delegation submitted a new
draft resolution on the Middle East crisis in an attempt to
help to solve the problem now before the Council.

50. I shall not object to a short delay for additional
consultations, but I should like in all candour to say that
the time for consultations is at an end; the time for action
has arrived. Our responsibility before world opinion is very
heavy and we must not let this opportunity pass, as earlier
opportunities have been allowed to pass. There is, through
the efforts of the United Kingdom delegation, assisted by
the parties, by all members of the Council and by many
other Members of the United Nations that have made
constructive contributions, a carefully balanced draft resolution before the Council. We shall vote for it, and we urge
our fellow members of the Council to vote on it favourably.
51, The PRESIDENT (translated
the representative of Israel.

from French):

55. If, you remember, at the conclusion of the consultations among the non-permanent members of the Security
Council, some expressed misgivings, fearing that in view of
the stage reached in the consultations an open debate in the
Security Council might prevent later consultations. In order
to dispel these fears it was emphasized at the time that new
discussions or any proposals which might be submitted
would not be likely to put a stop to the consultations
already started: on the contrary, the new discussions in the
Council and the proposals made there might help in
reaching agreement on the problems.

I call on

52. Mr, EBAN (Israel): I did not intend to seek to address
the Security Council today but since some new material has
been brought to the table I should like to make a few brief
comments, The representative of Jordan opened today’s
Security Council proceedings with a completely tendentious and unconfirmed report about alleged incidents on
the Israel-Jordan cease-fire line. That cease-fire line has
been consistently violated by Jordanian armed forces in
recent weeks, Today at 1330 hours, an attack from Jordan
by land mines against an Israel command car was launched.
The patrol which investigated this incident was then
subjected to heavy and concentrated fire from Jordanian
positions installed in the village of Karameh. Fire was

56. The Council and its members must now make an
effort to define certain points in the agreement we are all
anxious to reach so as to put an end to occurrences suchas
those described by the Foreign Minister of Jordan at the
beginning of this meeting. However, in order to do SO, we
must find and draft sufficiently clear phraseology 011
certain questions, in particular concerning the withdrawal
of troops.
57. The new draft resolution submitted by the Soviet
Union [5’/&?.53], and the explanations given by some
6

delegations today indicating why they will vote for a draft
which is not their own, suggest that we ought to have a
little more time to try to reach agreement or settle the
qulzstion now before us; this would moreover be fully in
keeping with the views expressed by the United States
representative moments ago.
58, At the meeting of 9 November, speaking at the
beginning of the debate, he said:
“Although, very frankly we should have preferred to have
this meeting take place only after the intensive diplomatic
consultations of recent weeks had led to advance agree
ment, we nevertheless will do all in our power to make it
an occasion of progress towards peace.“[1373rd meeting,
para. 183.1

59. In that spirit, and in accordance with article 33 of the
provisional rules of procedure, I therefore propose-and I
believe I am expressing the views of some other delegations
as well-that the meeting be adjourned until Wednesday so
that further consultations may be held and a final decision
caln be &ached then.
601. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): As a matter of
courtesy and respect, and in accordance with the traditions
and customs of this Council, I am sure that we will accept
and respond to the request for some further time. We
would particularly wish to provide that further time when a
new draft resolution has just been presented to us by the
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union. I am sure
that we would join together in accepting that proposal, but
I would say that I am also sure that all of us share a very

great urgency. We are all of us, I believe, prepared to
pronounce after the long debate which we have embarked
upon. As I say, I believe there is a very wide measure of
agreement between us. The need that we should take action
before any new development takes place and in order that
immediately the full force of this Council can be put
behind effective action in the Middle East-these necessities
are in our minds. So while we readily and willingly agree to
the request that has been put to us, I would greatly hope
that we would delay no longer than is absolutely necessary.
61. And if it is necessary to postpone our next meeting
until Wednesday, then I would greatly hope that the
members of the Council would keep themselves, as they do,
in readiness to meet earlier if it is found after consultation
that it is possible to do so and to proceed to the vote.
62. I also wish to suggest, although I do not need to
propose it formally, that when we do reassemble, having
completed our long debate, we should be ready to proceed
to the final vote.
63, The PRESIDENT (translut~d from French): The representative of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria has proposed
that the Council adjourn until Wednesday, 22 November, at
3.30 p.m., so that the consultations may be continued. In
the absence of any objection, 1 shall consider the proposal
adopted.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.5 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Notions

NATIONS

your

or

Consult

COMMENT

SE PROCURER
der
monde
Section

bookstore

Notions
entier.

Unies
sent
Informer-vous

Unies,

KAK

IlOJlYqMTb

MSAAHMFI

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES
de

des venter,

New

York

to:

bookstores

United

and

Notions,

DES NATIONS

distributors
Soles

throughout

Section,

New

York

UNIES

en vcnte
dons
les librairies
ouprkr
de votre libroirie
ou

et ler q gences
adressez-vous
6:

ou Genive.

OPI-AHM3AUMM

06bEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

far N&ones
Unidor
mundo.
Consulte
a w
York o Ginebra.
del

from

write

LES PUBLICATIONS

Nations

Las publicociones
en todor
partes
Ventas,
Nuevo

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained

the world.
or Geneva.

Les publications
dbpositairer
du

Litho in U.N.

UNITED
publications.may

estdn
librero

en venta
o dirijore

HAYMR

UNIDAS
en librerios
y cases dislribuidoros
o: Naciones
Unidos,
Secci6n

Price: $U.S. 0.75 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

35857-February

1970-2,100
