Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to undertake
such amendment of its procedure for the administration of the project as may be necessary to permit applications to be made through the Secretary-General
as well as through the territorial authorities, it being
understood that upon receipt of any such applications
the Secretary-General will transmit them simultaneously
to the Administering Authorities and the offering States
concerned;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to include in
United Nations information material prepared for dissemination in the Trust Territories details of all such
offers and of the procedures to be followed in submitting applications.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

754 (VIII). Dissemination of information on the
United Nations and on the International
Trusteeship System in Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the opinion expressed in its resolution
556 (VI) of 18 January 1952 that it is essential that
the peoples of Trust Territories should receive adequate
information concerning the United Nations,
Observing that the existing arrangements for the
supply of such information are based on Trusteeship
Council resolution 36 (III) of 8 July 1948, which invites the Administering Authorities to furnish the Secretary-General (a) with the names and addresses of
officials in the Trust Territories to whom suitable
material should be sent for information, and ( b) with
suggestions as to the e1.ppropriate channels through
which information concerning the United Nations may
be communicated to the general public,
Noting, however, from the most recent report 21
submitted to the Council by the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the above-mentioned resolution,
that while the Administering Authorities have submitted lists of names and addresses in accordance with
the first part of the resolution, they have in no case
made any specific suggestions concerning the dissemination of information to the inhabitants of the Trust
Territories and to the general public,
Noting from the report that, as th~ Secretary-General had pointed out in his previous reports on the
subject, and as had been emphasized by the observations of the Visiting Missions to \Vest Africa and to
the Pacific, which are summarized in the report, the
dissemination of information on the United Nations
to the peoples of the Trust Territories is still far from
satisfactory,
l. Expresses the opinion that the existing arrangements for the dissemination in the Trust Territories
of information on the United Nations are, in general,
inadequate and of limited effectiveness;
2. Invites the Administering Authorities to furnish
the Secretary-General, in accordance with Trusteeship
Council resolution 36 (III) of 8 July 1948, with
suggestions as to the appropriate channels through
which information on the United Nations and on the
International Trusteeship System may be communicated
to the general public in the Trust Territories ( e.g.,
Press, radio, non-governmental organizations, trade
unions, libraries, cultural, educational and religious institutions, teachers, missionaries, etc.) ;
21 See

document T /1073.

31

3. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate at
the earliest possible date, on the basis of the suggestions furnished by the Administering Authorities or
his own knowledge of appropriate information channels, or by making use of both of these sources together, a direct flow of information material addressed
to the General public in the Trust Territories;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
periodic reports on this matter to the Trusteeship Council lists of the channels of dissemination which he has
established in pursuance of the present resolution.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
755 (VITI). Attainment of independence by the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian
administration by 1960
The General Assembly,
Taking into consideration the fact that, under General Assembly resolution 289 A (IV), adopted on 21
November 1949, the Trust Territory of Somaliland
under Italian administration is to attain complete independence by 1%0,
Mindful that it is necessary for that purpose that
the people of Somaliland shall be prepared for selfgovernment,
Considering that it is the duty of both the United
Nations and the Administering Authority to take the
necessary measures for the implementation of that decision,
1. N ates 'With appreciation the efforts made by the
Administering Authority in Somaliland to fulfil the
obligations laid down in the Charter and in the Trusteeship Agreement;
2. Recommends that the Administering Authority,
in consultation with the Advisory Council, should continue to take the necessary steps to prepare the Somali
people progressively for the attainment of complete
independence, and to that end:
(a) The Territorial Council should be granted the
powers of a legislative organ and its members should
be elected by the people on the basis of universal adult
suffrage;
( b) The administration of Somaliland should be
progressively_ transferred to the indigenous inhabitants
as a necessary preliminary to its assumption of independence;
( c) A general economic plan for the Territory should
be completed without delay, taking into account the
recommendations 22 of the United Nations Technical
Assistance Mission to the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration, particular attention
being paid to methods for developing basic economic
resources such as agriculture and stock-breeding, and
to possibilities for improving and expanding existing
industries;
(d) Efforts should be made to increase the revenue
in order to balance the budget as soon as possible, and
to that effect expenditures for military and police
forces should be reduced to the indispensable minimum;
( e) Use of technical assistance facilities provided by
the United Nations and the specialized agencies to assist in economic development and the improvement of
social and educational conditions in the Territory should
be encouraged ;
22 See

H.2.

United Nations Publication, Sales Number: 1953.II.

32

General AHemhly-Eighth Session

_{f) Efforts sl--ould be intensified to . increase the
number and improve the quality of public elementary
and secondary schools; training for indigenous teachers
should be expedited; a mass education programme
should be instituted; attention should be devoted to
vocational trahing, particularly in agricultural and veterinary science; and facilities for further studies should
be expanded by granting ~n adequate number of s~~olarships to enable Somalis to take advanced trammg
courses abroad ;
( g) Review should be continued of all special leg:islation relating to Somaliland which was enacted pnor
to the trusteeship administration and which is still in
effect, with a view to revising legislation found to be
inconsistent with the letter or the spirit of the Trusteeship Agreement ;
3. Recommends also to the Governments of Jtaly
and Ethiopia that they should intensify their efforts to
achieve a final, just, equitable and friendly settlement
of the question of the frontier between the State of
Ethiopia and the Trust Territory of Somaliland in
order that this problem may be finally settled before
the date appointed for the attainment of independence
by Somaliland ;
4. Requests the Advisory Council, in its annual report, to give precise information on the implementation
of the present resolution, together with its observations, comments or suggestions as to the means of
carrying out the recommendations contained in the
resolution.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

756 (VIII). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly,
l. Takes note of the report 23 of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 4 December 1952 to
.21 July 1953;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council, in its
future deliberations, take into account the comments
and suggestions made in the course of the discussion
of the report of the Council at the eighth session of
the General Assembly.
47.lst plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
757 (VIII). Petitions from the Ngoa-Ekele Com•
munity, Cameroon& under French administra•
tion, concerning adjustment of their land
complaint
The General Assembly,
Having heard the declaration 2 • and answers 25 of
the representative of the Ngoa-Ekele Community,
Cameroons under French administration,
Bearing in mind the observations and explanations 28
given by the Administering Authority,
1. Notes the steps already taken by the Administer~
ing Authority to assist the Ngoa-Ekele Community to
settle on other lands ;
2. Suggests to the Administering Authority to take
all necessary steps which can in a satisfactory manner
23
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth
Session, Supplement No. 4.
u See, docui;aent A/C,.__4/255.
25 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 382nd and 387th meetings.
26 Ibid.

alleviate the difficulties experienced by the N goa-Ekele
Community in the process of their re-establishment;
3. Recommends that assistance be also given by the
Administering Authority to the Ngoa-Ekele Community for it to avail itself of whatever legal recourse
remains open in connexion with the lands on which they
were originally settled and whatever further compensation might be possible;
4. Recommends to the Administering Authority to
further its purpose of allotting to the Ngoa-Ekele
Community an adequate area of lands by delimiting
these lands in accordance with the legal procedures obtaining in the Trust Territory;
5. Invites the Trusteeship Council to examine this
question in the light of the present resolution and to
include in its next report to the General Assembly
the results of its examination.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

758 (VIII). Hearing of petitioners from .the
Trust Territory of the Cameroons under
French administration

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Trusteeship Council has not yet
considered the problems concerning the Trust Territory of the Cameroons under French administration,
which are referred to in resolution 655 (VII) adopted
by the General Assembly on 21 December 1952,
Bearing in mind that the Council has stated in its
report 27 that it will consider this matter at its next
regular session,
Having again heard representatives of the organizations of the Cameroons under French administration, 28
l. Reaffirms resolution 655 (VII) adopted on 21
December 1952 ;
2. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council to give
preferential attention to this matter at its next regular
session;
3. Also recommends to the Council that, in considering this matter, it should also take into consideration the statements of the petitioners and the comments
made by the members of the Fourth Committee at the
current session of the General Assembly; and that it
should include a special study of this matter in its
report to the General Assembly for consideration at
the ninth session.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

* * *

NOTE

ELECTION OF TWO MEMBERS TO THE COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION FROM NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES
In accordance with the terms of resolutions 332 (IV)
and 646 (VII), the Fourth Committee, at its 395th
meeting on 7 December 1953, elected, on behalf of the
General Assembly, two members to the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories to
fill the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms
of office of Cuba and Pakistan.
The States elected were: BURMA and GUATEMALA.
2 7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 4.
28/bid., Fourth Committee, 388th, 393rd and 394th meetings.
