General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

158

2. Calls upon the parties to co-operate fully with
the investigatory body and, to this effect, to appoint
their representatives thereto forthwith;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices through his Special Representative in Cyprus, to support the establishment of the
investigatory body.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/173.

Disappeared persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 93 in particular articles 3, 5, 9,
10 and 11 concerning, inter alia, the right to life, liberty
and security of person, freedom from torture, freedom
from arbitrary arrest and detention, and the right to
a fair and public trial, and the provisions of articles 6,
7, 9 and 10 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 94 which define and establish safeguards for certain of these rights,
Deeply concerned by reports from various parts of
the world relating to enforced or involuntary disappearances of persons as a result of excesses on the part
of law enforcement or security authorities or similar
organizations, often while such persons are subject to
detention or imprisonment, as well as of unlawful actions or widespread violence,
Concerned also at reports of difficulties in obtaining
reliable information from competent authorities as to
the circumstances of such persons, including reports
of the persistent refusal of such authorities or organizations to acknowledge that they hold such persons in
their custody or otherwise to account for them,
Mindful of the danger to the life, liberty and physical
security of such persons arising from the persistent
failure of these authorities or organizations to acknowledge that such persons are held in custody or otherwise to account for them,
Deeply moved by the anguish and sorrow which
such circumstances cause to the relatives of disappeared persons, especially to spouses, children and
parents,
l. Calls upon Governments:
(a) In the event of reports of enforced or involuntary disappearances, to devote appropriate resources to searching for such persons and to undertake
speedy and impartial investigations;
( b) To ensure that law enforcement and security
authorities or organizations are fully accountable, especially in law, in the discharge of their duties, such
accountability to include legal responsibility for unjustifiable excesses which might lead to enforced or
involuntary disappearances and to other violations of
human rights;
(c) To ensure that the human rights of all persons,
including those subjected to any form of detention and
imprisonment, are fully respected;
(d) To co-operate with other Governments, relevant United Nations organs, specialized agencies, intergovernmental organizations and humanitarian bodies
in a common effort to search for, locate or account
for such persons in the event of reports of enforced
or involuntary disappearances;
93 Resolution 217 A (ill).
94 Resolution 2200 A (XXI),

annex.

2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider the question of disappeared persons with a
view to making appropriate recommendations;
3. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to use
his good offices in cases of enforced or involuntary
disappearances of persons, drawing, as appropriate,
upon the relevant experience of the International Committee of the Red Cross and of other humanitarian
organizations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the concerns expressed in the present resolution to the attention of all Governments, regional and interregional
organizations and specialized agencies for the purpose
of conveying on an urgent basis the need for disinterested humanitarian action to respond to the situation
of persons who have disappeared.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33 /17 4.

Establishment of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 / 124 of 16 December 1976 and 32/118 of 16 December 1977 and taking
note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/
15 of 5 May 1978 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 13 (XXXIV) of 6 March 1978, 95
1. Decides to establish a voluntary fund, called the
United Nations Trust Fund for Chile, administered in
accordance with the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations by the Secretary-General with the
advice of a Board of Trustees, composed of a chairman and four members with wide experience of the
situation in Chile, to be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral with due regard to equitable geographical
distribution and in consultation with their Governments, to serve for a three-year term, to receive contributions and distribute, through established channels
of assistance, humanitarian, legal and financial aid to
persons whose human rights have been violated by
detention or imprisonment in Chile, to those forced
to leave the country and to relatives of persons in the
above-mentioned categories;
2. Adopts the arrangements for the management
of the Fund set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Authorizes the Board of Trustees to promote
and solicit contributions and pledges;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to put into immediate effect the provisions of the present resolution
and to give the Board of Trustees all the assistance it
may require;
5. Appeals to Member States to respond favourably
to requests for contributions to the Fund.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
ANNEX
Arrangements for the management of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile
1. The Secretary-General shall apply the arrangements set
forth below for the management of the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile.
95 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cozmcil, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.

VI,

A.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

SOLICITATION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLEDGES AND
COLLECTION OF CONTRIBUTIONS

2. The Controller, in consultation with the Under-SecretaryGenera:l for Political and General Assembly Affairs and the
Direetor of the Division of Human Rights and with the advice
of the Board of Trustees of the Fund, shaJI determine the
procedures for soliciting voluntary contributions to the Fund.
3. Any prospective donor desiring to make a voluntary
contribution to the Fund shall submit a written proposal to
the Secretary-General. The request for acceptance should
contain all relevant information including the amount of the
proposed contribution, the currency and the timing of payments.
4. The proposal, with the comments, inter alia, of the
Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly
Affairs and the Director of the Division of Human Rights,
shall be .forwarded to the Controller, for determination that
the proposal is acceptable under the Financial Regulations and
Rules of the United Nations, including the determination of
whether or not any proposed gift or donation might directly
or indirectly involve additional financial liability for the Organization. Before acceptance of any gift or donation involving
such liability, the Controller shall request and obtain the approval of the General Assembly.

5. The Controller shall acknowledge all pledges and shall
determine the bank account or accounts in which contributions
to the Fund should be deposited. He shaJl be responsible for
collecting contributions and following up on payments of
contributions pledged.

6. The Controller may accept contributions in such currencies as he deems usable by the Fund or readily convertible
into usable currencies.
B.

OPERATION AND CONTROL

7. The Controller shall ensure •that the operation and control of the Fund shall be in accordance with the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. He may delegate
responsibility for the operation and administration of the Fund
to the heads of departments or offices designated by the
Secretary-General to execute ,activities financed by the Fund.
Only officials so designated may authorize the execution of
specific activities to be financed by the Fund.
8. In respect of activities conducted by the United Nations,
requests for allotments of funds shall be submitted to the
Controller by the Director of the Division of Human Rights
accompanied by such supporting information as the Controller
may require. After review, allotments to provide for expenditures of the funds received shall be issued by the Director of
the Budget Division, and certifying officers for the Fund shall
be designated by the Controller in accordance with established
procedures.
9. The Controller shall be responsible for the reporting
of the financial transactions of the Fund and shall issue
quarterly statements of assets, liabilities and unencumbered
Fund balance, income and expenditure.
10. The Fund shall be audited by both the Internal Audit
Service and the Board of Auditors, in accordance with the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.

C.

REPORTING

11. An annual report showing funds available, pledges and
payments received and the e~penditures made from the Fund
shall be prepared by the Controller and submitted to the
Genera,1 Assembly and, as appropriate, to the Commission on
Human Rights.

33/175.

Protection of human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Emphasizing its commitment to foster universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and funda-

IS9

mental freedoms for all in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 96
Recalling that in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 97 everyone has the
right to life, liberty and security of person and the
right not to be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention
or exile, or to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Reaffirming once more its condemnation of all forms
of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling its resolution 32/118 of 16 December 1977, in which it reiterated its profound indignation, as well as its resolutions 3219 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3448 (XXX) of 9 December 1975
and 31/124 of 16 December 1976 concerning the
human rights situation in Chile,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 8 (XXXI) of 27 February 1975,98 in which it
established the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Situation of Human Rights in Chile, and resolutions 3
(XXXII) of 19 February 1976,99 9 (XXXIII) of
9 March 1977 100 and 12 (XXXIV) of 6 March 1978 101
of the Commission, by which it extended the mandate
of the Ad Hoe Working Group,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the Commission on Human Rights and the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities to implement General Assembly resolutions
31/124 and 32/118,
Having considered the study prepared by the Special
Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities on the
consequences for human rights in Chile of the various
forms of aid extended to the Chilean authorities,102
Taking note of the important role that regional human rights organizations can play in situations of
violations of human rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the fact that in
July 1978, for the first time, members of the Ad Hoe
Working Group were enabled to visit Chile in pursuance of their mandate, which represents a valuable
experience for the United Nations when dealing with
constant and flagrant violations of human rights,
Having considered the reports of the Ad Hoe Working Group 103 and of the Secretary-General104 under
96 Resolution 217 A (III).
97 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
98 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5635), chap. XXIII,
sect. A.
9 9 /bid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5768),
chap. XX, sect. A.
100 Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927),
chap. XXI, sect. A.
10 1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
102 E/CN.4/Sub.2/412 (vols. I to IV) and Corr.1.
103 A/33/331.
104 A/33/293.
