S/PV.8525

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8525th meeting

Wednesday, 15 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ntsoane
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14088 (E)
*1914088*

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore
and by Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Permanent
Representative of Peru, in his capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity to brief the Security
Council.
Today I am very pleased to report to the Council
on progress in the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement. Between 11 and 14 May, Ansar Allah
undertook an initial redeployment of forces from the
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa under United
Nations monitoring. My colleague Lieutenant General
Michael Lollesgaard and his team from the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA) were there at each of the three ports to
monitor and verify these redeployments. His Mission
confirmed that Ansar Allah was fully compliant
throughout the withdrawal and that they were very
cooperative. The military forces of Ansar Allah have
now left those three ports.
I would like to congratulate the Lieutenant General
and his team for that achievement and express my
gratitude to them for remaining steadfast in support
2/25

15/05/2019

of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, reached in Sweden
on 13 December. This progress will allow the United
Nations to play “the leading role” in supporting the
Yemen Red Sea Ports Corporation in management and
inspections at the ports, including enhanced monitoring
by the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism, with inspectors ready to be deployed.
The United Nations is also ready to help improve
the productivity and efficiency of Al-Hudaydah port.
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
is sending in teams to the port to install lights to help
ships berth safely, repair facilities, upgrade the berths
and help demine the outer perimeter of the port facility.
In addition, starting this Saturday, UNDP will be
supporting 4,000 people in Al-Hudaydah, who will be
employed on public works schemes. So, there are signs
of a new beginning in Al-Hudaydah. I would like to
suggest that change in Al-Hudaydah is now a reality.
As I have said to the Council many times since
December, when that agreement was made in Sweden,
we never expected the implementation of this agreement
to be easy, and it has not been. But with the continuous
commitment of the parties and the coalition, the swift
and decisive support of the Council and the stewardship
of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard’s Mission, UNMHA,
we have finally seen that first concrete step towards the
implementation of the agreement reached in Sweden
in December.
I am grateful to Abdulmalik al-Houthi for
his commitment and to Ansar Allah for following
through on those promises. It shows their seriousness
and commitment to implement what was agreed in
Stockholm. I commend them for being the first to
redeploy their forces, as originally agreed. This is
most welcome.
I should also add, and I am sure that we will
hear later, that the Government of Yemen has been
consistent in affirming its commitment to redeploying,
as negotiated and agreed in the first phase of
redeployment. This is also most welcome. I had an
opportunity to meet the Permanent Representative
yesterday. We discussed that very commitment,
which is clear and unequivocal. I am very grateful to
President Hadi Mansour for his continued leadership.
I know that he is personally committed to the full
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement and has
often insisted, in particular, on the prime importance of
the redeployments.
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

This moment is significant. It is worth cherishing
such moments, which are not as frequent as we would
hope. But this, of course, is only the beginning. The
redeployments must — and I am sure, will — be
followed by concrete actions by the parties to deliver
on their obligations under the Stockholm Agreement.
I know we will hear more on this later. We would like
the parties to ensure that the momentum that we are
now beginning to see is maintained by implementing
subsequent steps of the mutual redeployments, verified
and monitored by the parties, and ensuring the support
that we need in the United Nations to increase our
role in the ports. If there is no forward movement, the
Al-Hudaydah agreement will remain in the precarious
situation that we have seen this year.
I call on both parties to agree on the operational
plan for the second phase, which Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard is negotiating, so that we can continue to see
movement in Al-Hudaydah. Once an agreement there
has been finalized and the implementation of the rest of
the first and second phases is under way, the parties will
monitor, verify and report to us on all redeployments
as agreed through the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, in which they are represented. My Office
is also pursuing an agreement with the parties on an
approach to the issue of local security forces in parallel
with negotiations on redeployments.
I hope that the progress we are witnessing and
the subsequent steps the parties intend to take will
allow additional areas in Al-Hudaydah, such as Ad
Durayhimi district, to witness the immediate benefit of
increased humanitarian assistance. Of course, we will
hear a lot more on such matters from our colleagues,
Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore. The purpose of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement, what we and the parties had
in mind all along, was to improve the humanitarian
situation both there and in the rest of Yemen. That is
its aim.
I am encouraged by the steps taken by the parties
to address the issues related to the economic aspects
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, specifically looking
at the revenue in the ports. Representatives of the two
parties came together in Amman yesterday, and today
with my Office, to discuss those issues. I must stress
the importance of those discussions, as the objective is
that they will ensure that the revenues from the ports
are used for the benefit of the people of Yemen and the
salaries are paid across the front lines. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the Government of

S/PV. 8525

Jordan for allowing that meeting to take place and for
hosting it.
Despite the significance of the last few days,
Yemen remains at the crossroads between war and
peace. While the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah is generally
holding — those being carefully chosen words — the
intensification of the conflict in other parts of the
country, as I am sure we will hear, continues to be
alarming. That intensification in all of its different
aspects is a reminder that hard-won achievements
of the sort that I have been describing can be easily
wiped away. We cannot ignore how the war affects the
political process and the move towards peace. Finding
our way through to a political solution is always a
delicate exercise, a fragile vessel.
Tangible progress on Al-Hudaydah, however, will
and should allow us to look ahead to the negotiations
to end the conflict and enable the resumption of the
political negotiation and the finding of a political
solution to the conflict. As many Yemenis have made
clear to me, only a comprehensive solution will be able
to provide Yemen with sustainable peace.
It has been three years since the parties discussed
politics, three years since they had the privilege of
meeting in Kuwait in 2016. It is about time we gave
them the opportunity to do so again. I hope that the
parties can start those negotiations on the political
solution as soon as possible. They have laid much of the
groundwork for those discussions, and the key tenets
of that solution are well known, not least because of
those three months in Kuwait, three years ago. Those
discussions will be guided by the relevant resolutions
of the Council, including resolution 2216 (2015).
The negotiations, which is the principal focus of my
mission, will require patience, good faith and — of
course — concessions that go beyond what we have
seen before.
The resolution to this conflict will also be possible
only if we include the voices of a broad range of
Yemenis. The inclusion of women in particular in the
peace process will shape the future of their involvement
during the transition. I recommit my Office to be
dedicated to that proposition. The contribution of the
Yemeni women’s technical advisory group, which has
been with us in the talks and between the talks, was
already valuable during the Stockholm consultations,
and it should provide a basis to reach out much more

19-140883/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

broadly to Yemeni women who remain in their homes,
in the front lines, looking after their families.
Last month, I met with eight representatives of
the technical advisory group in Scotland, where we
generated ideas for the comprehensive implementation
of the peace agreement and on how to maintain stability
in Yemen during the post-peace agreement phase. They
came with great difficulty to the United Kingdom.
Traveling from Yemen is neither a simple nor a safe
matter. I would like to record my gratitude to them for
the risks they take and for the advice they give. Again,
we will depend on that relationship as we move into
reviewing the political options to resolve this conflict.
I would like to emphasize again, if I may, the
importance of enhancing southern participation in the
peace process. I have met with several southern groups
during the past year. We have an office in Aden now
that is led by a very distinguished and experienced
political officer of the United Nations. I am grateful for
the commitment that these groups show us to ensuring
that their concerns about their future should be resolved
in dialogue with all Yemeni groups and within the
context of Yemeni politics and Yemeni rule. That is the
commitment that they give us, but we must maintain a
very close relationship with them to make sure that we
hear them and that we listen to their aspirations.
There are signs of hope. Nothing can or should
remove or reduce our welcome of the redeployments
made in recent days in Al-Hudaydah and of the prospect
of more to come. But there have also been alarming
signs in recent days. War has a habit of trumping
peace — its impact more corrosive than the positive
effect of hard-won gains towards ending war. The ease
with which progress can be reduced or removed is
indeed frightening. I think that is also a lesson of recent
days. Progress can be made; progress can be threatened.
Finally, what I would like to ask Members of the
Council is first to welcome the redeployments we
have seen in Al-Hudaydah in the past few days. We
should also welcome the commitment of both parties
to those redeployments, urge them to work quickly
with Lieutenant General Lollesgaard to implement
the remaining redeployments and, on that basis and
through the Council, to work with us urgently on a
political solution. These beginnings must be protected
from the threat of war. We must not allow war to take
peace off the table.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
4/25

15/05/2019

I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: In complement to but without
repeating what Mr. Griffiths has just said, I will first
update the Security Council on the overall humanitarian
situation. Secondly, I will summarize the current
challenges we face in the response. Thirdly, I will
briefly review what the world’s largest humanitarian
operation — which is what we have in Yemen — has
achieved and is achieving. And fourthly, I will set out
what help we are seeking from the Council at this stage.
First, on the current humanitarian situation, the
spectre of famine still looms. Ten million Yemenis are
still reliant on emergency food assistance to survive.
A resurgent cholera outbreak has already affected
300,000 people this year, compared to 370,000 cases in
the whole of 2018. Fortunately, the number of new cases
seems in recent days to be on a declining trend; but it is
too soon to know if that will continue.
Secondly, with regard to current challenges,
violence rages still, as Mr. Griffiths has just said. In
the first quarter of the year, more than 900 civilian
casualties were reported, and it is a sobering fact
of the war in Yemen that civilians are more likely
to die in their own homes than anywhere else as a
result of the war. The fighting also affects the aid
operation. Because many main routes are not usable,
travellers, humanitarian agencies and traders now rely
on a patchwork of back roads and mountain passes,
often going through insecure areas with numerous
checkpoints. Heavier trucks, including those carrying
food aid, now take more than 60 hours to travel
between Sana’a and Aden — about four times longer
than used to be the case. Recently, one of the major
Aden-Sana’a routes effectively closed, and without it
humanitarian operations will become even slower and
more expensive.
Severe access restrictions imposed by the parties
continue to be a major problem. In February and March,
more than 900,000 people were affected by delays or
interruptions in assistance. Restrictions on movement of
goods or staff are by far the biggest cause of delay. A large
majority of those incidents occurred in areas controlled
by Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities, but there are too
many problems arising from decisions by others as
well. Over the past few weeks, we have had intensive
discussions with Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities on
the steps required to ensure that all assistance in Yemen
is delivered in line with humanitarian principles. Those
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

discussions are progressing, and I hope that previously
agreed measures — including biometric registration of
beneficiaries — will soon be fully implemented.
We are making progress on some issues. On 5 May,
a joint United Nations mission reached the Red Sea
Mills again, for only the second time since September
2018. I want to acknowledge the support we received
for that mission, including security assurances from
all parties. The assessment team travelled from Aden
to Al-Hudaydah through Government-controlled
areas, and the coalition was especially helpful in
facilitating those movements. That is an example of
how deconfliction with the coalition continues to be a
key enabler of the response across Yemen. Technicians
are working now at the Red Sea Mills to assess damage,
repair equipment and process whatever grain can be
salvaged. That will probably take several weeks.
Last month, I flagged our concerns over the FSO
SAFER oil tanker (see S/PV.8512). The tanker, which
the Council will recall is moored off the coast of
Al-Hudaydah, has had no maintenance since 2015 and
is at risk of rupturing or exploding, potentially spilling
1.1 million barrels of oil into the Red Sea. Just to give
a sense of the scale of the problem, that is four times
as much as was spilled in the Exxon Valdez disaster
30 years ago. All parties have now assured us that a
technical assessment can proceed for the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. A United Nations assessment team plans to
deploy to the site very soon so that we can work out the
best way forward to minimize the risks.
Thirdly, I want to address what, despite all the
problems, we are able to deliver in what, as I have said,
remains the world’s largest humanitarian operation. In
January and February, 130 agencies worked together
to provide 9.8 million people with food, water, health
care and other assistance. In March, the World Food
Programme fed 10.6 million people; that is more than
in any previous month. In April, a cholera vaccination
campaign reached 1.1 million people in Sana’a.
We now have additional, independent confirmation
that help is reaching people. With funding from
our largest donors, my Office has commissioned an
independent third-party monitoring exercise covering
the entire response. Data was collected from 108
districts across the country, using a mix of beneficiary
surveys and key informant interviews. Thousands of
people were contacted and asked what humanitarian
assistance they had received. The results tell a clear

S/PV. 8525

story. Some 94 per cent of randomly selected intended
beneficiaries of food aid confirmed that they had
received food baskets, and 96 per cent of them said they
were satisfied with the distribution process. Health
services that humanitarian agencies said they had
delivered were confirmed at 95 per cent of facilities.
Beneficiaries confirmed that water systems supported
by agencies were functional 84 per cent of the time.
One of the questions I am often asked is whether we
are seeing a reduction in suffering and famine risk as a
result of the huge relief operation. Our first goal, to be
clear, has been simply to keep people alive and I hope
it is obvious that we have been reasonably successful
at that. There has been no widespread famine, at least
up to now. But we are also now starting to see the
beginning of more positive, sustained outcomes. A year
ago, agencies estimated that 107 districts were at risk
of famine. Based on the new data available to us today,
the food and nutrition situation has improved in more
than half of those districts and one-fifth of them are, as
of today, no longer at risk of famine Again, one-fifth
of districts that were at risk of famine last year are not
currently at risk. That has been possible only because
last year our operation was relatively well funded.
That brings me to my fourth and final point, which is
the help we seek from the Council. The most immediate
issue is funding. The slight improvements I have just
described will not be sustained unless donors continue
to fund the relief operation. Last month, the Council
will recall that I said that the 2019 United Nations
humanitarian response plan had received only 6 per
cent of the required resources and that major cuts to
core relief activities were imminent. As of today, 20 per
cent of the required resources have now been provided.
I want to thank in particular the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates for their funding
since last month, which, as I understand it, came from
the pledge that they announced last November.
But there is still a long way to go. We again call on
all our donors to fully disburse the pledges they made in
Geneva in February. I am looking forward to travelling
to Riyadh again in the next several days to meet Saudi
and Emirati officials and finalize the arrangements for
the new joint pledge of $1 billion they made in Geneva.
Those two donors’ block grant to the United Nations
last year was absolutely instrumental in scaling up the
aid operation, and I continue to view the approach they
took as a global best practice in humanitarian support
and donorship.

19-140885/25

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8525

The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Fore.
Ms. Fore: May I add my thoughts to those of
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock.
Last month, a group of schoolchildren in Sana’a
were doing what children around the world do every
day — sitting in their classrooms, learning. Most were
under the age of nine. It was almost lunchtime, when a
sudden incident shattered the windows. Shrapnel and
broken glass flew into the classrooms. Imagine the fear
that those children experienced. Imagine the horror
their parents felt for sending them to school that day,
all so they could gain what every child deserves — an
education. And imagine the pain endured by the families
of the 14 children who never made it home at all, or the
desperate worry felt by the families of the 16 others
who were critically injured, left fighting for their lives
in the hospital, or the other students who will live with
the trauma of that day for the rest of their lives.
In any conflict, children suffer first and worst.
Since the fighting in Yemen began four years ago, 7,300
children have been killed or seriously injured. Those
are the verified numbers. The actual numbers are no
doubt higher. The fighting still rages across 30 active
conflict zones — home to nearly 1.2 million children.
Each day, another eight children will be killed, injured
or recruited to the fighting. Every 10 minutes, another
child will die from a preventable cause, like the lack
of food, with 360,000 children suffering from severe
acute malnutrition. In fact, half the children under five
years old in Yemen — 2.5 million — are stunted. And
stunting, as the Council knows, is irreversible. They will
die from the lack of a simple vaccination — 151 children
have died of diphtheria since last August — or from
cholera and severe acute watery diarrhoea. Despite the
best efforts of the humanitarian community, including
the more than 2 million doses of oral cholera vaccines
delivered over the past year, there are 135,000 suspected
cases reported so far this year among children. More
than 3,300 people have died of cholera since 2017,
including 153 children since January alone — a number
that will increase as we head into the rainy season. And
as always, the children die first.
The United Nations has verified the recruitment
and use of more than 3,000 children by all parties to the
conflict since the conflict began. That number is likely
much higher — a flagrant and outrageous violation
6/25

15/05/2019

of international humanitarian law. As children’s lives
are at risk, so too are their minds. More than 2 million
children are out of school, and one in five schools has
been damaged or destroyed in the fighting — a huge
blow to their future potential. The situation has only
gotten worse.
While the ceasefire has largely held in Al-Hudaydah,
other areas are seeing a rise in violence, such as in Abs,
Hajjah, Taiz, Al-Dhale’e and elsewhere. Hospitals,
clinics and water systems are in ruins, with half of the
country’s hospitals and clinics destroyed. In short, the
systems that every child and family needs are failing.
At the same time, Yemen’s economy is in free fall.
A new report commissioned by the United Nations
Development Programme shows that Yemen — already
one of the least-developed countries before the
war — has lost an additional two decades’ worth of
development gains since the war began.
We are at a tipping point. If the war continues
any longer, the country may move past the point of no
return. As a global community, we must ask ourselves:
Can Yemen afford losing a generation of children?
Can the region — and indeed, the world — afford
the instability and crushing poverty that will result?
What will happen if Yemen descends into a full-blown
famine? What happens now that the water table is so
low that the wells are dry and that the small aquifers
are below the required well depth? In some ways, that
can be worse than famine, as the lack of water can
sicken and kill children quickly. Are we prepared to
subject a generation of children — and perhaps their
children — to a bleak future? How long will we continue
allowing Yemen to slide into oblivion?
Our teams are working around the clock to prevent
that from happening. As Mr. Lowcock said, last year
UNICEF and our humanitarian partners treated
345,000 severely malnourished children — children
whose mid-upper arm circumference is less than 11
centimetres or three adult fingers in circumference. We
are delivering safe drinking water to more than 5 million
people every day — including 1.7 million children — in
the 15 main cities through municipal water systems. We
are providing cash incentives to 7,000 health workers
and 135,000 teachers and school staff, as many have
not been paid in more than two years. And with key
donors, we are helping to keep alive almost 9 million
of the most vulnerable Yemeni people with emergency
cash assistance.
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

But that work addresses only the symptoms of the
catastrophe in Yemen. To truly shape a better future
for Yemen and its children, we need the Council’s
engagement and influence to end the war on children
now. Yemen is spiralling perilously close to the
brink — to the tipping point. We call on the Council to
speak with one voice to protect the children of Yemen
and stop the grave violations against them. We urge
all parties to the conflict to open doors to immediate,
long-term humanitarian access and allow for days of
tranquillity in order to vaccinate and help children. If
we cannot reach them, we cannot keep them alive.
We must also redouble our support for the efforts
of the United Nations Special Envoy to reach a
negotiated political solution — one that puts children
first — because the longer that this war continues, the
more children will die on the world’s watch. As we fail
those children, we fail more than their basic rights; we
fail humankind itself.
When I was in Sana’a and Aden, I visited hospitals
and clinics shattered by the conflict. I witnessed
heart-rending struggles to survive — a newborn baby
struggling to breathe in an incubator after all power
was lost in the emergency room, a distraught mother
with a child, thin and malnourished, begging for food,
and a father weeping, with so little money that he was
forced to choose between keeping his wife alive or his
children. Is that how we show our humanity to others?
Yemen is a test of our humanity, and right now,
we are badly failing that test. Time is running out. We
will not get another chance. Fifteen million children in
Yemen are asking the Council to save their lives. Please
help them. They need peace.
The President: I thank Ms. Fore for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Meza-Cuadra.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru): I have the honour
to report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), pursuant to paragraph 19 (e) thereof. The last
such briefing took place on 31 January in informal
consultations of the Council; this briefing will therefore
cover the period from 1 February to date. I would like
to focus my remarks on my visit to Amman, Riyadh,
Muscat and Tehran from 30 March to 5 April, together
with most Committee members. Two members of the
Panel of Experts also accompanied the delegation. It was
the first such visit by a Chair of the 2140 Committee. My

S/PV. 8525

written report on the visit was shared with Committee
members on 25 April, and we had an opportunity to
discuss the report in a Committee meeting on 10 May. I
will therefore present only some highlights of the visit.
Generally, I believe that the visit was an important
exercise in raising awareness of the purpose and scope of
the sanctions measures concerning Yemen and obtaining
first-hand information on their implementation. It was
also helpful to encourage further interaction, dialogue
and cooperation among the 2140 Committee, its Panel
of Experts and countries in the region, and to become
acquainted with the latest political, security and
humanitarian developments in Yemen, as related to the
mandate of the Committee.
We received general briefings in Amman on
the political process and the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement from Mr. Griffiths and
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard, respectively.
We also held a discussion with international
non-governmental organizations on ways to advance
the formal participation of women in the political
process. Concerning the targeted arms embargo, in a
field visit to the Al-Kharj military base, on the outskirts
of Riyadh, we viewed the remnants of arms and related
materials, including unmanned aerial vehicles. As
described by the coalition authorities, those were either
seized in Yemen or used in attacks launched against
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia by the Houthis. The field
visit was followed by an oral and visual presentation
in Riyadh. The Government authorities in Muscat
described the efforts they made to prevent the transfer
of illicit items from their borders into Yemen. The
Government authorities in Tehran stated that they were
implementing resolution 2216 (2015).
Concerning the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
the United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator, Ms. Lise Grande, and representatives of
the United Nations country team in Amman provided
a general overview. Humanitarian access and respect
for international humanitarian law were also key
components of the discussions held in Riyadh with
coalition authorities and President Hadi Mansour.
During discussions in Amman and Riyadh, the issue
of strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism also arose.
In all the meetings with interlocutors and
Government authorities, I emphasized the importance
of continuing the dialogue and engagement with the

19-140887/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

Committee, as well as extending full cooperation to
the Panel of Experts, which was affirmed by all parties
at each meeting. Information-sharing between United
Nations actors and the Panel, as deemed relevant
and in accordance with the respective mandates, was
also encouraged.
In Muscat, Government authorities noted that the
outreach by the Committee to Ansar Allah was very
important. Unfortunately, the Committee was unable to
meet, or otherwise directly communicate, with Ansar
Allah representatives, despite all the efforts made by
the Committee to set up the requested meeting.
My overarching observation is that the engagement
we initiated, as a Committee delegation, with the various
Government interlocutors in the region on sanctions
issues should not be a one-off event, but should continue
through their representatives in New York.
The visit was also useful to convey a strong political
message that the Security Council and its respective
subsidiary organ prioritize the situation in Yemen and
follow closely the events on the ground. I appreciate the
level of engagement of our interlocutors, the depth of
the discussions and the wide support for the political
solution promoted by the United Nations.
Moving on to other Committee activities during
the reporting period, I would like to note that, to date,
the Committee has taken action on three of the six
recommendations addressed to it in the final report (see
S/2019/83) of the Panel of Experts under resolution 2402
(2018). The remaining three recommendations were
agreed to by the Committee, and I will be undertaking
follow-up accordingly.
Finally, following the adoption of resolution 2456
(2019), by which the Security Council extended the
mandate of the Panel of Experts until 28 March 2020,
the Committee met on 10 May to hear a briefing by the
Panel on its programme of work for the present mandate.
The Panel’s midterm update is due to the Committee
no later than 28 July, and I envisage convening a
meeting of the Committee to discuss the update in the
following month.
The President: I thank Ambassador Meza-Cuadra
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
8/25

15/05/2019

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all the briefers, beginning with the Special
Envoy. What we heard today is both uplifting and
frightening. The British Foreign Secretary spoke about
that this morning and asked me to pass on his thanks
to the United Nations and its relevant agencies for all
the heroic efforts, patience and painstaking diplomacy
that have brought us to this point. He was able to see
for himself the work in hand when he visited Aden in
March. I will later address what that means for the dire
humanitarian situation about which Mr. Lowcock and
Ms. Fore told us; but, for the moment, I would like to
concentrate on what we heard from Mr. Griffiths.
I believe that we all have to welcome the initial
redeployments by the Houthis from the three ports. They
are significant steps, but they are part of the broader
redeployments in Al-Hudaydah. It was very good that
Mr. Griffiths was able to pass on the Government of
Yemen’s commitment in that it would be discharging its
commitments on redeployment. That is a very important
part of where we are, and I completely agree that we also
owe Lieutenant General Lollesgaard our deep thanks
for what he has been able to achieve. I believe that
the next stage with regard to that is obviously that the
parties need to engage constructively with the General
to finalize the outstanding negotiations to allow for the
implementation of the first and second phases of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement.
It is very good news that a meeting should take
place on 14 June among the parties in Amman to discuss
the economic aspects of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. I
think that what we heard from Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore
underscores that this is not just about humanitarian
concerns, but that is also about the ability of the Yemeni
economy as a whole to revive and work properly. The
Council has been concerned about that before.
With regard to a political solution to the conflict,
we all want to see these recent developments open
up the path to the broader political solution that
Mr. Griffiths and his team have been working so hard
on, which is necessary in itself, but it is obviously even
more urgent given what we have heard from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and UNICEF today.
I want to move on, if I may, to the drone strike
on oil-pumping stations in Riyadh province in Saudi
Arabia. We condemn that drone strike by the Houthis.
As my Foreign Secretary has also said, the risks
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

remain real in connection with the stability of the
peace agreement and to its ability to succeed and bring
the sort of security and safety to the people and the
children of Yemen that we all want to see. The attack
is not just wrong, it undermines the trust needed to get
to a resolution of the conflict. This is not the time for
provocation, when we are so close to being able to make
significant progress on the ground and unlock some of
the economic, humanitarian and medical things that
we all need to see. I think we need to bear that very
strongly in mind.
I also think that we all were horrified by the
briefings and statistics provided by Mr. Lowcock and
Ms. Fore. I will not repeat those statistics. Some of the
individual human stories are absolutely heart-tugging.
For me, it was the scale of what the people of Yemen are
facing that remains shocking. I therefore believe that
we really owe it to Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore to make
sure that the United Nations presence on the ground
can do its job effectively. Whether it is the monitors
or the humanitarian agencies, all the parties need to
help ensure that the United Nations can do its job. That
includes letting the United Nations in, in the numbers
that Lieutenant General Lollesgaard mentioned. It
includes getting rid of the access constraints. It includes
approving travel permissions and operating agreements
swiftly, including allowing access to the large number
of Yemenis recently displaced in Hajjah and Al-Dhale’e,
and it includes making sure that the onward road access
from Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports and infrastructure
remain protected.
I think that the other shocking statistic was that only
20 per cent of the response plan is funded. I believe that
it is incumbent on all Members of the United Nations to
help OCHA with that and ensure that new pledges are
made and that the pledges that have been are dispersed
as fast as possible. That must be a priority for all of us
as. As Ms. Fore said, we are very close to the point of
no return. There is therefore urgency concerning taking
action, which we should all reflect upon and report back
to our capitals.
The last thing that I wanted to say here concerns the
stability of the Yemeni rial. I mentioned the economy
earlier. We must have economic measures working
properly so that that, in turn, facilitates the commercial
imports of food and fuel, on which Yemen depends
heavily. I thank the Ambassador of Peru in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) for his briefing on

S/PV. 8525

sanctions and what the Committee has achieved. It was
a very interesting visit, but a pity not being able to meet
with Ansar Allah. I hope that that can be corrected
next time.
I will conclude by saying that I think that the Council
is united on Yemen. I hope that we can find some way
of concretely expressing the urgency behind the needed
measures on the humanitarian an economic side, while
giving our full support to Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard to move ahead on first and second
phases of the agreement, as well as the longer-term
political solution, which is now extremely pressing.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank the
briefers for their presentations today and the tireless
effort of their teams. I also thank the Ambassador of
Peru, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), for his work and for leading a very successful
Committee trip to the region.
The Security Council acknowledges the tragedy of
the man-made crisis in Yemen every time we meet. For
the fifth year in a row, that tragedy is being compounded
as the crisis continues into the holy month of Ramadan.
Like other members of the Council, we worry that the
world has grown numb to that suffering. If it has, let
us hope that today’s alarming briefings by Executive
Director Fore and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
rekindle broad attention to the humanitarian crisis in
Yemen. They certainly have done so for the members
of the Council.
We appreciate the first signs of progress on
the Stockholm Agreement since December 2018,
and we commend the parties and thank the United
Nations for doing everything possible to press for the
redeployments. Houthi withdrawals from the ports of
Saleef, Ras Isa and Al-Hudaydah are a significant first
step. Today’s good news must not break our focus on
how much remains to be done. The parties must keep
working in good faith to reach an agreement on local
security forces in order to fully redeploy. They must
exercise restraint so that fighting does not threaten
the ceasefire, and they must enable the United Nations
efforts on the ground. Whatever other actions it takes,
any party failing to allow United Nations monitors
entry into Yemen is failing the Yemeni people.
Obstruction of the United Nations process cannot
be tolerated. For months, apparent breakthroughs have
happened just in time for Security Council briefings;

19-140889/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

then progress stalls once we leave this Chamber. We
have seen enough of that pattern, and we should insist
that it end today. Council members must consider how
to hold parties responsible if they do not implement the
Stockholm Agreement. Fighting around the country,
not just in Al-Hudaydah, needs to stop. The Houthis
must cease unmanned aircraft (UAV) attacks against
their fellow citizens and neighbours. Iran needs to
stop supplying the Houthis with weapons to do so.
Attacks this week against Saudi infrastructure are just
the latest example of how destabilizing that is. Such
attacks threaten to expand the conflict and undermine
the United Nations-led process and the work of Special
Envoy Griffiths.
During its trip last month, the 2140 Committee
reiterated the need for all Member States to adhere to
the arms embargo contained in resolution 2216 (2015).
We cannot ignore the fact that, since the war began and
the Council imposed its arms embargo, the Houthis have
used more sophisticated weapons to threaten Yemen’s
neighbours. The Houthis did not develop long-range
ballistic missiles and UAVs on their own. They did not
develop them, and the Council’s own Panel of Experts
for Yemen has repeatedly said that those weapons have
Iranian design characteristics. When asked about how
its weapons keep ending up in Yemen, Iran has never
presented a credible explanation. Iran’s violations of
the Yemen arms embargo not only flout the Council’s
resolutions, but they are also prolonging the war.
As we heard from Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore,
limited progress on a political and military settlement
has meant even less progress in addressing the dire
humanitarian crisis. Huge amounts of critical grain
supplies at the Red Sea Mills have been lost. As the toll
of hunger and cholera rises, we once again call on all
parties to safeguard humanitarian infrastructure and
allow for unfettered humanitarian access. That includes
access to food and medical care for migrants and
displaced people throughout the country. Our support
for Special Envoy Griffiths and Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard remains steadfast. They, their staffs and
the international humanitarian community are working
to help the parties reach a resolution to the conflict and
save Yemeni lives. The Council must use all means
to help.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock and Executive Director of
10/25

15/05/2019

UNICEF Henrietta Fore for their very enlightening
interventions. I also thank the Peruvian Chair of the
relevant Committee for his briefing. Today I would like
to focus on three points in particular.
First, I would like to strongly reaffirm France’s full
and complete support for the tireless efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths, as well as Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard, with whom we will have a discussion later.
We welcome the announcement by the United
Nations of the commitment to redeploying forces
from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa.
Lieutenant General Lollesgaard was on the ground to
verify that redeployment. Such developments are an
encouraging signal for the full implementation of the
agreements concluded between the Yemeni parties. We
have every confidence in the United Nations teams that
will monitor the redeployment, which is part of the first
phase of the plan agreed by the parties in Stockholm.
We call on both sides to respect their commitments
without seeking to exploit the initial redeployments.
At the same time, we strongly condemn yesterday’s
drone attacks on Saudi oil facilities, claimed by the
Houthis. Such attacks are unacceptable. We call on
all parties to refrain from any escalation that could
jeopardize the implementation of a political solution to
the Yemeni conflict and remain concerned about the
ongoing threat of arms transfers.
While encouraging the efforts under way, we must
remain particularly vigilant and mobilized. Much
remains to be done. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for the United Nations Mission in Support
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, deployed in January.
Its presence on the ground is crucial to monitoring
and facilitating the redeployment, as provided for in
resolution 2452 (2019). That is to say, it is essential to
strengthen the United Nations presence on the ground. In
that context, it is important that the remaining observers
provided for in the Mission’s mandate be able to arrive
quickly. It is up to the parties to ensure the security and
free movement of United Nations personnel.
However, the relative holding of the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah must not allow us to lose sight of the
seriousness of the situation in the rest of the country.
This will be my second point. We remain seriously
concerned about the continuing deterioration of the
humanitarian and security situations. The intensity
of hostilities has increased throughout the rest of the
country. I am thinking in particular of Al-Dhale’e
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

governorate, which is facing a worrisome military
escalation. At the same time, as Mark Lowcock and
Henrietta Fore recalled, the already tragic humanitarian
situation is worsening, in particular with an increased
number of displaced persons.
I would like to reiterate our full support for
humanitarian workers, United Nations personnel and
civil society, who are working tirelessly with exemplary
courage to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
population and who themselves must be protected.
It is crucial and urgent that humanitarian access and
the delivery of commercial goods be guaranteed by
the parties. More than 24 million Yemenis need that
assistance and the risk of famine as well as a resurgence
of the cholera epidemic is increasing. It is essential to
overcome all obstacles to such access, in particular
bureaucratic ones.
The World Food Programme at last has access
to the Red Sea Mills, which is good news and proves
that it is possible for the parties to act responsibly
to meet humanitarian needs. We also hear Mark
Lowcock’s appeal, which is essential: pledges must be
honoured in a timely way in order to respond to the
humanitarian emergency.
I would like to emphasize our particular concern
about the situation of children in Yemen. Children not
only are among the first victims of the conflict but also
continue to be recruited and used on a large scale. We
must therefore step up our efforts to protect children
in the Yemeni conflict. To that end it is imperative
to protect schools and to encourage teachers and
educational staff to continue or to resume their work
under good conditions. In that regard, I would like to
commend the essential work done by UNICEF, under
the leadership of the Executive Director, which has for
example made it possible to rehabilitate six schools
in Lahj and to pay more than 100,000 teachers and
educational staff in 11 governorates in a few months. I
would like to echo the appeal made by Ms. Fore.
Finally, and I will conclude with this point, let us be
well aware that resuming the political process as soon
as possible is inseparable from the ongoing efforts and
remains the priority objective. It is therefore crucial
that the parties maintain their engagement with the
Special Envoy and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard and
play a responsible and constructive role.
The initial results in Al-Hudaydah should make
it possible to recreate a positive momentum towards a

S/PV. 8525

political solution and to establish, or re-establish, bonds
of trust between the parties. In that context, a military
solution is, more than ever, not an option.
The resumption of a dialogue on a comprehensive
and inclusive political agreement that takes into
account the diversity of Yemeni political and civil
society actors is the only real prospect for ending the
conflict and the resulting humanitarian crisis. After
having unanimously adopted resolutions 2451 (2018)
and 2452 (2019), the Council must do its utmost to
promote the momentum initiated in Stockholm. Our
collective mobilization and the genuine unity of the
Council in supporting the efforts of the Special Envoy
are our greatest asset on that path. Let us use that unity
as a driver for peace.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Henrietta Fore for their
valuable and comprehensive briefings. I also thank
the Ambassador of Peru in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). I will focus on two topics: the political and
security developments and the humanitarian situation.
First, on the political and security developments,
resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452 (2019) established
a mechanism for monitoring and verifying the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, namely,
the Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC).
The Committee held a number of meetings that led to a
phased redeployment outside Al-Hudaydah, supervised
and approved by the RCC and its three parties.
We took note of the unilateral withdrawal from
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa seaports last
Saturday. That is part of the first phase of the concept
of operations. I would like to point out that the tripartite
supervisory Committee must play a pivotal role and that
the Yemeni Government should perform its sovereign
role in monitoring the redeployment in Al-Hudaydah.
Over the past five months, the political
developments in the Yemeni crisis have been
characterized by monitoring the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. Despite that, no measures were
taken and the desired outcome was not achieved. Taiz is
still suffering from a blockade. The blockade has been
making civilians, including women and children, suffer
for four years. No tangible action has been taken to
implement the memorandum of understanding on Taiz.

19-1408811/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

In addition to the agreement on exchange of
prisoners and detainees, and despite the meetings of
the supervisory committee on the implementation of
the prisoner-exchange agreement, there have been
a number of challenges in the implementation of the
agreement pertaining to the release of all detainees,
prisoners and abductees. We affirm our full support
to the work of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen and Head of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and the
Redeployment Coordination Committee. We recognize
that there can be no military solution to this crisis. In
that regard, we reiterate how crucial it is for all three
components of the Stockholm Agreement to be fully
implemented, because that is the best path towards a
resumption of the consultations, whose next round will
focus on the overarching aspects of ending the crisis,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
and the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference.
With regard to the developments on the security
front, Kuwait condemns in the strongest terms the attacks
on Saudi Arabia’s oil installations by seven drones. We
support the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in taking action to
maintain its security. The continued aggression by the
Houthis against Saudi territory is a flagrant and direct
threat to regional security and stability and a reason
to impose the arms-embargo provisions in accordance
with Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, concerning the humanitarian situation, we
stress once again the ultimate goal of the humanitarian
dimensions of the Stockholm Agreement in seeking to
alleviate the critical humanitarian consequences that
our brother people of Yemen are facing, by opening safe
corridors for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
meet the growing needs of the people in all the areas
affected. The United Nations and its agencies must be
allowed access to the Red Sea Mills, which contain vast
amounts of grain that could feed 3.7 million people for
30 days. From the start the Government of Yemen has
said that it will facilitate safe access to the Mills and
open routes for humanitarian assistance, despite the
serious security challenges involved. In that regard,
we commend the role of the Government’s Economic
Committee in providing permits at the beginning of
April to 16 tankers to transport 275,000 tons of oil
products to Al-Hudaydah seaport, after the tankers met
the necessary conditions. That should meet the needs
12/25

15/05/2019

for this vital commodity so that it is not subject to
speculation on the black market, which has a negative
impact on the economy and is helping to depreciate the
Yemeni rial.
In conclusion, we once again call on the parties in
Yemen to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
on Al-Hudaydah and its three seaports, the prisonerexchange agreement and the memorandum of
understanding on Taiz in order to complement the
Special Envoy’s efforts to bring about a political
solution underpinned by the three agreed terms of
reference — the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015). That would end the crisis
and ensure Yemen’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as preventing any
interference in its domestic affairs.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank our briefers, Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock.
We are grateful to UNICEF Executive Director
Henrietta Fore for her worrisome assessment and to the
Permanent Representative of Peru for organizing the
important visit by the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014). We welcome the progress
made by the United Nations team under Mr. Griffiths
in inducing the Yemeni parties to implement the
agreements reached in Stockholm. We have also
noted the professionalism of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard’s efforts.
The launch of the first phase of the redeployment
of armed forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa is a crucial step in implementing the
broader plan for disengaging the opposing parties. We
understand that this is only a beginning. The bulk of the
work still lies ahead. However, it is now already clear
that those initial results were made possible only thanks
to the delicate diplomatic efforts of the United Nations
and the help of external actors, based on a respectful
attitude to all the parties and focused on compromise
and a professional understanding of the concerns of
all involved. The strategic goal — launching a fully
fledged political process in order to discuss all the
political parameters of a comprehensive solution — is
unchanged. We believe that a window of opportunity
is opening for implementing other aspects of the
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Stockholm Agreement, including the exchange of
prisoners and de-escalation in Taiz and other regions.
We believe that the further deployment of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
will help to normalize the city and stabilize the situation
in Yemen as a whole, and we urge all the parties to work
together to achieve that. The impartial mediation of the
United Nations is crucial, but it can succeed only if it
is founded on the good faith of the parties and their
desire to stabilize the situation in their own country.
What is absolutely essential is ensuring that everything
possible is done to avoid any provocative steps that
could threaten the prospects for a peaceful settlement
and that certainly would not advance the United
Nations efforts. The task of consolidating the efforts of
the external actors and the parties to the conflict based
on a platform of achieving a lasting solution has never
been as urgent as it is today.
We call on the members of the Security Council
to continue their collective efforts to put the conflict
back on the political track, establish a comprehensive
ceasefire and provide the Yemeni people with the help
they need. It will be crucial to work consistently with
all the parties and influential stakeholders. Russia
will continue to provide support to the United Nations
mediation efforts to resolve the differences in Yemen.
As Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore’s reports
showed — and, by the way, we greatly appreciate the
courageous and selfless work of the United Nations
humanitarian actors in Yemen and other crisis
areas — the humanitarian situation in the country is
still harrowing. We have been sadly forced to conclude
that the country is in the grip of a serious humanitarian
crisis that has brought the civilian population
incalculable suffering. The country’s infrastructure has
been destroyed. It is difficult to grasp the fact that in the
twenty-first century, as a result of this senseless war, the
people of Yemen, including women and children, are
starving, without essential medicines or social services
and in need of one kind of basic assistance or another.
It is only thanks to the selfless efforts of humanitarian
workers that a humanitarian collapse has been averted
in the country. The priority job right now is providing
Yemenis with emergency humanitarian assistance, and
Russia will continue to contribute to helping them.
We do that consistently. We want to emphasize that
humanitarian assistance coming to Yemen from abroad
must be provided to the country’s entire population,

S/PV. 8525

without discrimination and regardless of who controls
which territory. That is crucial not only to solving the
humanitarian problems but also with regard to future
national reconciliation issues. But we can all see clearly
that resolving the humanitarian crisis is no panacea.
The solution lies exclusively in the political arena.
And, needless to say, we place great hopes in the United
Nations mediation and diplomatic efforts and those of
Mr. Griffiths, to whom we will extend active help in
that regard.
We call on the parties to the conflict in Yemen to
show restraint and ensure unhindered humanitarian
access to every area of the country. The main thing is
cooperating actively with the United Nations mediation
efforts and supporting them rather than making them
harder. We urge everyone to immediately refrain from
the indiscriminate use of force and from damaging the
country’s oil infrastructure. But before assigning blame
there must be a professional and objective investigation.
In the circumstances, Russia’s proposal for
launching a process in the Persian Gulf for developing a
package of security and confidence-building measures
has become especially relevant and could help not only
to stabilize that part of the world but also to resolve
various new as well as protracted crisis situations,
including the conflict in Yemen. We believe it is
essential to ensure that all the countries of the region
participate in this, including the Persian Gulf States
and Iran. Positive assistance in advancing this process
and an immediate, urgent de-escalation of the situation
in this part of the world are needed. Only joint efforts
aimed at cooperation rather than confrontation can lead
to the establishment of comprehensive and indivisible
security in the Middle East.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting
and for the comprehensive briefings by Mr. Griffiths,
Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore, in which they described a
complex scenario that requires the Security Council’s
urgent and sustained attention. Peru recognizes the
important work that they are doing in their respective
fields to bring the devastating conflict in Yemen to an
end and alleviate the terrible human suffering there.
We believe it is crucial that we discuss this matter
transparently, taking account of the efforts under way
to prevent escalation and put an end to a conflict for
which there can be no military solution and that has led
to the worst humanitarian crisis in the world today. We

19-1408813/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

first want to welcome the encouraging developments in
the past few days aimed at ensuring the relocation of the
forces present in the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and
Ras Isa, and we thank Lieutenant General Lollesgaard
for his important contribution. We acknowledge the
concrete commitments that Ansar Allah has made to
this critical part of the political process promoted by
the United Nations. We also hope that the other side
will soon redeploy, bearing in mind the positive attitude
that it has maintained throughout the process, that these
developments will translate into new and sustained
progress towards the inclusive political solution
promoted by the United Nations, particularly on such
sensitive issues as the composition of local security
forces in Al-Hudaydah, the administration of revenues
from commercial activity and the implementation of
the second phase of redeployment, and that all of this
will lead to the holding of a new round of consultations
as soon as possible.
We also want to point to the importance of
approaching the recent events with caution, since the
path towards sustainable peace in Yemen is not without
its difficulties. The reality is that violence is worsening
in various parts of the country and mistrust is growing.
It is from that perspective that we encourage the parties
to continue their efforts in critical areas such as the
exchange of detainees and the cessation of violence in
Taiz, and to refrain from confrontational rhetoric and
mutual accusations.
We must underscore the importance of continuing
to address the humanitarian situation on the ground,
which is worsening, as we heard this morning. We are
particularly concerned about the alarming levels of food
insecurity and the deterioration of economic indicators,
which are intensifying the suffering of the people of
Yemen. In the circumstances, we emphasize that
ports, airports and land routes must remain open and
operational, in accordance with the Security Council’s
presidential statement of March 2018 (S/PRST/2018/5).
Furthermore, humanitarian aid and people’s access to
it cannot and must not be conditional on any military
objective. We also consider it essential to continue
mobilizing financial support from the international
community with a view to controlling inflation,
stabilizing the local currency, facilitating imports
of essential goods and reactivating the deteriorating
Yemeni economy. We also point to the urgency of
containing the new and worrying outbreak of cholera
before the onset of the rainy season.
14/25

15/05/2019

Peru hopes that new and greater progress in the
matters that bring us together today will contribute in
the coming weeks and months to promoting the easing
of hostilities required to put an end to the conflict and
achieve reconciliation in Yemen. In that regard, we
support the next steps that Mr. Griffiths has announced.
The Security Council has a fundamental role to play
in requiring the parties’ strict compliance with their
obligations in the areas of international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians, and that they commit
in good faith and without preconditions to the inclusive
political solution being promoted by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on Yemen.
We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock, UNICEF Executive
Director Henrietta Fore and the Ambassador of
Peru, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution (2014), for their
briefings. My delegation would like to address three
points today — the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, the humanitarian situation and the impact
of the conflict in Yemen on women, and especially
on children.
South Africa reiterates the call for all parties to
implement the Hodeidah Agreement in a timely manner
and to resolve the current differences in interpreting the
text of the Agreement, especially with regard to the local
security force in and around the city of Al-Hudaydah.
We welcome the latest redeployment by the parties
from the three ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa. The decision to withdraw from Al-Hudaydah as a
first step in order to allow humanitarian assistance is
a positive one and should be commended. We call for
the finalization of the redeployment process and for a
nationwide cessation of hostilities. We also encourage
the parties to work with the International Committee of
the Red Cross in the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement in order to restore security and stability
in Yemen.
We also note with concern that many Yemeni
people are not receiving the aid that they so desperately
need, as it remains very difficult for aid organizations
and actors to get permission to provide humanitarian
assistance in some areas. South Africa calls for the full
implementation of resolution 2451 (2018), which deals
with the issue of ensuring that humanitarian supplies
and personnel flow unhindered into and across the
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

country, as well as with ensuring that all the parties
to the conflict comply with applicable international
law and fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including respecting and protecting
medical facilities and personnel and allowing and
facilitating humanitarian and medical personnel’s safe,
rapid and unhindered access to all those in need.
South Africa calls on the international community
to pledge adequate funding for the United Nations
Yemen humanitarian response programme. We also
call for the pledges made in Geneva to be disbursed and
for humanitarian assistance to reach all those affected
by the conflict. We note from the reports of the Panel of
Experts that, regrettably, there have been attempts by
some parties to use social media to divert humanitarian
assistance. We strongly condemn this and call on those
engaging in such activities to desist therefrom.
The Panel of Experts also reported continued
violence directed at women, which South Africa strongly
condemns. South Africa calls on those committing such
atrocious violations against women and children to be
held accountable. The conflict is already taking an
enormous toll on women and children, as they continue
to pay the highest price. Furthermore, we call on all
parties to engage with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict in
negotiating, signing and implementing an action plan to
end and prevent violations of children’s rights.
In conclusion, South Africa also urges all countries
and groups involved in the conflict in Yemen to cease
hostilities. The conflict in that country cannot be
solved militarily and will only be further exacerbated
each day of this continued, avoidable war. The current
talks are hampered by the continued fighting, which is
not conducive to trust-building as the first step towards
creating a negotiated settlement. If the status quo
remains, the international community will have failed
the people of Yemen.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock,
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra and UNICEF
Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their briefings.
China commends the tireless efforts of the United
Nations and other humanitarian actors in advancing
the political process in Yemen and alleviating the
country’s humanitarian situation. China welcomes the
recent positive progress made in the redeployment of

S/PV. 8525

troops, commends the Yemeni parties for recommitting
themselves to the Stockholm Agreement and supports
the parties in their bid to agree, through consultations,
on the next steps in the continued implementation of the
redeployment plan.
China supports the continued mediation and good
offices of the United Nations on the Yemeni issue aimed
at facilitating the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and finding a political solution.
In our view, the Yemeni parties should put the
interests of the country and the people first, work
towards the greater good that is regional peace and
stability and push ahead with political dialogue and
negotiation in a sustained and effective manner. The
priority now is to carry on with the consultations
and agree on the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement and other concrete arrangements,
including prisoner exchanges and the memorandum of
understanding on Taiz.
In the longer term, it is imperative to relaunch
political talks in order to find a durable, holistic
solution to the issue of Yemen. The international
community should respect and preserve the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen
and support efforts to achieve a broadly inclusive
political solution on the basis of the relevant Council
resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanisms, and the outcome
of the National Dialogue Conference.
Since the Stockholm Agreement was signed
five months ago, the Council adopted a resolution
endorsing it, decided to deploy to Yemen the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
and issued a number of press statements urging such
implementation. The Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) recently
visited the countries of the region and held a useful
dialogue with the parties concerned.
The Council must remain united, push for the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, respect
the positions of the country concerned and other
countries in the region, and lend political support to
the intra-Yemeni dialogue and play a constructive
role therein.
The escalation of conflict in some parts of
Yemen has led to the displacement of civilians. This
is compounded by outbreaks of cholera, the threat of

19-1408815/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

15/05/2019

famine and the dire economic situation, which have
brought the people of Yemen abysmal suffering. We
are deeply concerned about by the dire situation in
Yemen. The international community must step up its
humanitarian assistance to Yemen, and the aid pledged
must be disbursed so as to provide the support needed
on the ground, both financial and in-kind, including
food and medicine. It must also pay particular attention
to the humanitarian needs of vulnerable groups such as
women and children.

discussions with the protagonists on the ceasefire and
the mutual redeployment of military forces.

China has kept up its food aid to Yemen. Since
mid-March this year, China has shipped 1,200 metric
tons of rice to Yemen. Another shipment of 1,200 tons
of rice will be arriving in Aden by the end of May.

My country wishes to stress the need for the
Council and other stakeholders to undertake further
initiatives so as to ensure that the parties to the
conflict fully implement the other provisions of the
Stockholm Agreement, particularly those concerning
the exchange of 15,000 prisoners and the memorandum
of understanding on the city of Taiz for the opening of
humanitarian corridors.

Last but not least, I would like to reiterate
China’s readiness to maintain, along with the rest of
international community, its support for a political
solution to the Yemeni issue and to continue to help the
Yemeni people to the best of its ability.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director
of UNICEF, on their comprehensive briefings on the
peace process, the humanitarian situation and the fate
of children in Yemen. We also thank Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), for his high-quality briefing on the Panel of
Experts mission he led in March 2019 to Amman,
Riyadh, Tehran and Muscat.
Regarding the peace process, my delegation
believes that resolution 2451 (2018), endorsing the
Stockholm Agreement; resolution 2452 (2019),
establishing the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA); and resolution
2456 (2019), renewing the sanctions regime and
extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts, remain
the principal tools for a lasting exit process from the
crisis in Yemen. Côte d’Ivoire welcomes once again the
adoption of these important resolutions and welcomes
the initial withdrawal of Houthi rebels from the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, in accordance with
the first phase of the ceasefire agreement signed in
Stockholm. The effective implementation of this phase
can be attributed to the work of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, which held constructive
16/25

Against that backdrop, my delegation once again
urges the parties to the conflict to comply with their
commitments and calls on them to refrain from any
unilateral action that could provoke a resumption of
hostilities, which would jeopardize the gains achieved.
We urge them to pursue cooperation in good faith with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the
Head of UNMHA.

Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned by the
humanitarian crisis, which is affecting approximately
22 million people, 14 million of whom are facing
acute food insecurity and are at risk of the resurgence
of endemic disease. My delegation would also like to
express its concern regarding the use of child soldiers
in the Yemeni conflict, which, according to the United
Nations, is facilitated by the fact that 2 million of the
7 million school-age children there are not attending
school. This high level of school absenteeism is,
according to human rights non-governmental
organizations, primarily the result of the destruction of
schools during clashes, in violation of international law,
and also to due to the repeated failure to pay teachers’
salaries.
My country calls compliance with international
law by all parties to the conflict, particularly the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, which, inter
alia, prohibits the use of minors in armed conflict.
My delegation commends UNICEF in that connection
for its significant and ongoing support of education
in Yemen and encourages it to continue its assistance
programme for teaching staff, in particular by paying
their salary arrears. We also welcome the fact that a
World Food Programme mission was finally able to
access the warehouses of the Red Sea Mills, where
approximately 51,000 tons of cereals intended for the
Yemeni population had been stored for several months.
In order to build on that momentum, my country urges
the belligerents to fully observe the ceasefire, which
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

is an essential condition for the safe and unhindered
delivery of food aid and basic necessities to the
populations ravaged by several years of war.
Côte d’Ivoire expresses its appreciation for the
outstanding work recently carried out by the 2140
Committee, in liaison with the Panel of Experts on
Yemen, to assist the parties to the Yemeni conflict
in fulfilling their obligations, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the decisions
of the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the
inclusive National Dialogue Conference. My country
reiterates its full support for the work of the Committee
and urges it to strengthen its cooperation with the
United Nations country team and the countries of the
region in order to promote the exchange of information
and good practices.
My delegation is also pleased that the visit by the
Chair of the 2140 Committee to the Arabian peninsula
made it possible to raise awareness among individuals
and entities of the scope of the sanctions measures
concerning Yemen and to gather first-hand information
on their implementation.
In conclusion, my country reaffirms its support for
Mr. Griffiths in his tireless efforts to find a political
solution to the Yemeni conflict, as well as Mr. Lowcock
for his commitment to mobilizing all the necessary
resources to address the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
My country also takes this opportunity to commend the
observation teams of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and UNMHA, led by Lieutenant General
Michael Lollesgaard, for their determination to give
real impetus to a definitive and lasting resolution of the
crisis in Yemen.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I would like to thank all
the briefers.
We welcome the start of the redeployment of
Houthi troops from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa and call on all parties to fully implement
the agreement on withdrawal and resolve the remaining
points of disagreement. It is now essential that the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
be reinforced with more monitors and that the United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism be able
to set up in the port. We continue to call on all parties
to implement the Stockholm Agreement in its entirety.

S/PV. 8525

We welcome the new discussions under the
auspices of the United Nations that were held earlier
this week between the official Government and the
Houthis on the redistribution of revenues from the
three ports of Al-Hudaydah, in line with the provisions
of the Stockholm Agreement. Although we are only
witnessing the beginning of the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement, Belgium believes that the
Special Envoy should continue to prepare the next steps
in the political process. The Al-Hudaydah agreement is
particularly important for the humanitarian situation,
but the core of the conflict requires a sustainable and
inclusive political solution.
Violence in the rest of the country continues and
aggravates the lack of trust between the parties. In
addition, such violence adversely affects access to
humanitarian assistance. We therefore call on all parties
to exercise restraint.
Efforts to improve the ongoing catastrophic
humanitarian situation remain essential, as we heard
this morning from Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore. I would
like to congratulate the humanitarian agencies for
the outstanding work they are carrying out despite
the difficulties.
It is essential that all parties facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance and respect international
humanitarian law. UNICEF Executive Director Fore’s
briefing shows that children are the primary victims
of the conflict. As Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we
eagerly await the report on Yemen and will facilitate
the negotiation of the conclusions on the basis of the
report. We call on Special Envoy Griffiths to ensure
that measures to protect children are at the heart of any
peace process.
Similarly, we would like to urge all parties to
the armed conflict to respect their obligations and
commitments under international human rights law and
to provide the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen,
established by the Human Rights Council, with their
full cooperation and all the necessary access to enable
an effective and independent investigation.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank all the briefers — Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock,
UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore and
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant

19-1408817/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

to resolution 2140 (2014) — for their informative
interventions. I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths, Lieutenant General Lollesgaard and
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and to express our
appreciation for the tireless work of all United Nations
personnel in Yemen.
I would first like to address the situation in
Al-Hudaydah. We welcome the initial redeployment
from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa,
which is the first step towards the implementation
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We encourage the
parties to seize this opportunity to build trust and
ensure the swift implementation of all agreed phases
of the redeployment. The parties must deliver on their
obligations under the Stockholm Agreement without
further delay, in full cooperation with the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement.
We expect them to enable the Mission to perform its
tasks, as mandated by resolution 2452 (2019), without
impediments, and to guarantee its freedom of movement
in Al-Hudaydah. We also welcome the opening of the
road leading to the Red Sea Mills, which is critical for
humanitarian efforts.
We commend the fact that, since the signing of
the Stockholm Agreement, the levels of violence in
Al-Hudaydah governorate have decreased. However, we
are greatly alarmed about the surge of violence across
other Yemeni governorates, causing mass displacement,
a high number of casualties among civilians and severe
impediments to humanitarian access. All parties must
first and foremost ensure the protection of civilians,
including the most vulnerable groups, such as children
and persons with disabilities, and must fully comply
with international humanitarian and human rights
law. All violations should be investigated and those
responsible must be held accountable. We also strongly
condemn the attacks carried out by the Houthis against
Saudi Arabia.
Poland is also greatly concerned about the deepening
humanitarian crisis that has just been described to us,
which recently has been exacerbated by the resurgence
of the cholera epidemic and the outbreak of diphtheria.
We are particularly disturbed that children under the
age of 15 account for nearly half of all the new cases of
cholera and that about a quarter of the reported cases
involve children under the age of five.
18/25

15/05/2019

That is why the humanitarian response in Yemen is
so vital to the survival of millions of Yemeni citizens.
The parties must immediately allow and facilitate the
flow of humanitarian and commercial imports, including
in-country shipments of fuel. We urge them to lift all
bureaucratic restrictions, ensure the timely issuance of
visas, speed up customs clearances and enable the swift
and unhindered movement of humanitarian convoys.
Any form of denial of humanitarian access, diversion
of resources or interference in humanitarian operations
is unacceptable. We would also like to emphasize the
need for humanitarian assistance to be gender- and
age-sensitive and to ensure that the particular needs
of persons with disabilities are addressed in the
humanitarian response.
The developments on the ground show how pressing
it is to find a comprehensive political solution to the
conflict in Yemen and to restore stability throughout all
its governorates. The resumption of consultations with
the participation of all segments of Yemeni society,
including women and youth, is the only way to bring
about an end to the crisis and alleviate the suffering of
the Yemeni people.
We reiterate the importance of the swift and full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, which
was designed to build confidence and to prepare the
road for a comprehensive political process. The progress
of the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement
must now be followed by the parties’ engagement in
political dialogue. We strongly support the Special
Envoy’s tireless efforts to find an inclusive political
solution, and we call on the parties to participate in
future talks in good faith and without preconditions.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
our briefers for the very insightful picture that they have
painted for us. I extend my gratitude to Martin Griffiths,
Mark Lowcock, Henrietta Fore and, of course, the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014). Let me also express our deep appreciation
to Martin Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard
for their tireless efforts on the political front, and to all
the many humanitarian actors. We know how difficult
but also how important their job is, and we give them
thanks for that.
I would like to focus on three important issues.
First of all, I would like to express our support for the
steps taken to implement the Stockholm Agreement
and to once again underline our support for the Special
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Envoy and for the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA). The start of the
unilateral redeployment of Houthi forces from the
three ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, as
verified by UNMHA, is a first positive step on the
road to making progress on the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. We feel it is necessary to seize
that opportunity and that the parties continue with
broader redeployments in Al-Hudaydah in a transparent
and sustained manner.
Al-Hudaydah is only one part of the larger puzzle
that we are facing, but it is a particularly important
part. We continue to hope, of course, that success in
Al-Hudaydah could serve as a confidence-building
measure that would then serve as a blueprint for the
many other conflict zones in Yemen. For that reason,
all parties should refrain from any action that could
endanger the resumption of a political process. We
are therefore deeply worried about the deplorable and
unacceptable drone attacks in Saudi Arabia.
We also find it essential to finalize the pending
negotiations, including on economic provisions of
the Hodeidah agreement, and to allow for a full
implementation of the first and second phases of the
agreement. The Special Envoy and Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard have our full support in that regard as well.
As the monitoring has started, it has become more
important than ever that UNMHA have the means, the
personnel and the access to fulfil its task. Germany
is supporting UNMHA with personnel and strongly
encourages others to also consider providing concrete
support to that important Mission. We call on the
parties to give the Mission full access and support, in
particular by issuing visas in a timely manner. As soon
as redeployment is complete, it is of critical importance
to upgrade port facilities, as the port of Al-Hudaydah
is the lifeline for the north of Yemen. Germany stands
ready to offer the United Nations any support needed
in that regard.
My second point — and here I can be brief — is
to stress the need to return to the political process in
Yemen, as the Special Envoy and others have said
very strongly. We are very ready to support that.
The implementation of the Stockholm Agreement is
obviously of utmost priority, but we must not lose sight
of the overall situation in the region and in Yemen.
The Special Envoy talked about that in his briefing
today, and we are very concerned about other current

S/PV. 8525

developments. With the exception of Al-Hudaydah,
violence has flared up throughout the country, and we
have heard about the 30 or so active conflicts that he
referred to. Despite being a long and difficult road, the
political process must resume in order to pave the way
for a comprehensive and inclusive political solution.
Germany is prepared to support that. We reiterate our
readiness to host a next round of talks, if they happen.
Thirdly and lastly, I have a word to say concerning
the humanitarian situation. A very bleak picture has
been painted, and it is very alarming. Unfortunately, it
is not the first time. We have taken note of some of the
positive developments referred to, but of course those
developments need to be seen in the broader context
of a still very frightening and alarming situation. The
humanitarian situation remains catastrophic and for
that reason has to continue to be on the priority list
of the Council. I think it is very important to remind
the parties of their obligations — as was mentioned
in the briefings — under international humanitarian
law and human rights law to protect civilians, in
particular the most vulnerable groups, namely, women
and children, and to respect civilian infrastructure, in
particular hospitals.
We also call on parties to disburse pledges made in
Geneva without further delay in order to avert so-called
pipeline breaks of major United Nations programmes.
We strongly encourage the disbursement of those
pledges through the humanitarian response plan of the
United Nations.
The people in Yemen need a strong and coordinated
response that is in accordance with humanitarian
principles. In that regard, we call on all parties to
refrain from politicizing humanitarian aid or diverting
aid for other purposes. Moreover, the Security Council,
its members and the international community should
step up action to support humanitarian access and
the unrestricted delivery of humanitarian aid. I think
we have to think even more creatively about concrete
steps to achieve that and about how to achieve real and
lasting improvements in that vein.
In conclusion, I also want to emphasize the
worrisome increase in cholera cases since the
beginning of this year, which Ms. Fore also pointed out.
Priority must be given to providing funding for cholera
preparedness interventions.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to

19-1408819/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

express its gratitude for the valuable briefings just
provided by Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Henrietta
Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF; and Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). Their complementary input provides us with
a general overview of the current circumstances of
the conflict.
Like other Council members, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is closely following events in
Yemen. My country has always been very concerned
about the ceaseless suffering inflicted on millions as
a result of the war that has been raging in the country
since March 2015.
When Mr. Griffiths informed us last month (see
S/PV.8512) that both the Government and Houthi
opposition forces had finally accepted the first phase
of the Stockholm Agreement — pertaining to the
withdrawal of forces from the city of Al-Hudaydah and
its port, as well as those of Saleef and Ras Isa — it was
difficult to believe that the withdrawal would have been
possible so soon. However, it made us all the more keen
to see it come to pass. Indeed, as Mr. Griffiths said
previously and reiterated today, United Nations teams
were able to conduct monitoring patrols on the first day
of the withdrawal of Houthi troops from those areas,
whose security then became the responsibility of the
coast guard.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the implementation of the first phase as regards the
concept of broader redeployment in Al-Hudaydah, in
line with the Stockholm Agreement. We encourage
the Government of Yemen to respond accordingly
to such action by the Houthis by upholding its
commitment under the first phase, when requested by
the United Nations. Similarly, we implore the parties
to continue their collaboration in the next steps in
order to make progress on the remaining aspects of the
Stockholm Agreement.
With regard to the humanitarian issue, we are
concerned about the challenging situation faced by
millions of people who lack food, access to drinking
water and the necessary medical care, and by
children exposed to the threat of cholera and other
diseases. Similarly, we regret the difficulties faced by
20/25

15/05/2019

humanitarian agencies, which cannot gain access to all
in need. We hope that the Government of Yemen and
the Houthi leaders will provide the necessary coverage
for such personnel and their humanitarian services.
A discouraging statistic we received at the
beginning of the month can be found in the report
commissioned by the United Nations from a professor
at the University of Denver, who is an expert at its
Josef Korbel School of International Studies. The
report states that by the end of the year approximately
233,000 people will have lost their lives in the conflict
in Yemen — 140,000 of them will be children under
the age of 5. From our perspective, it illustrates the
high level of crime to which Yemen’s civilians are
being or have been subjected. Ms. Fore’s briefing today
highlights the catastrophic situation on the ground. My
delegation condemns and denounces any action that
could prolong that calamitous situation.
Before concluding, my delegation commends
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) for organizing and conducting
the important visit to the countries of the region in
order to obtain first-hand information on the status
of implementation of the sanctions. We believe that it
demonstrates the commitment and desire to use accurate
information in order to avoid taking decisions that do
not reflect the reality of the conflicts we deal with.
Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends and acknowledges the efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths, Lieutenant General Lollesgaard,
Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
humanitarian agencies and international contributors.
We encourage everyone to continue to support the
people of Yemen at this difficult time.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank today’s briefers for
their briefings. First of all, we thank Mr. Griffiths
for his leadership in this very delicate stage in the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement; and,
through Mr. Lowcock, all members of his agency and
humanitarian partners in the field, who make every
effort to meet the needs of the most vulnerable in
Yemen. We also thank the Ambassador of Peru for his
excellent briefing.
We welcome the redeployment by Ansar Allah
over the weekend from the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa, which was verified by the United
Nations yesterday. We understand that to be a positive
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

development in the implementation of the first phase
of the Agreement. In that regard, the meeting held in
Amman laid the groundwork for future management
of the port. We are therefore convinced that, with
the assistance of the relevant agencies of the United
Nations, the effective and efficient functioning of the
port of Al-Hudaydah, which is a lifeline for the north of
Yemen, will be restored.
We call on the parties to the conflict to participate
constructively and in good faith to agree on the modalities
of the implementation of the agreements for the benefit
of the people of Yemen in general and so that it can lay
the foundation for a new political dialogue that would
lead to a definitive cessation of hostilities. In line with
the spirit of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, the parties
must facilitate the free movement of civilians and goods
to and from the city of Al-Hudaydah and its port, as
well as the ports of Saleef and Ras Isa, and the delivery
of humanitarian aid through those ports. In addition, in
his briefing Mr. Lowcock alluded to the most worrisome
part of the conflict: the terrible humanitarian situation
that affects millions of people after so many years of
war and economic and institutional decline. That must
be the point of reference that guides all our actions.
Given the many humanitarian needs, ranging
from protection to food security, we are concerned in
particular about the increase in the number of cholera
cases in the country, which have claimed the lives of
hundreds of children. We commend the work of the
relevant organizations on the ground and hope they
manage to control the current outbreak. For those
reasons, the international community must continue
to put pressure on all parties to the conflict to allow
timely, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
Hand in hand with such efforts, the financial resources
pledged to ensure compliance with the United Nations
Yemen humanitarian response plan should be made
available in an accelerated, predictable and timely
manner and be flexible to ensure that a comprehensive
response aimed at saving the lives of millions of people
can be guaranteed without any further delay.
The ultimate goal of all diplomatic efforts in the
context of the conflict is to achieve a solution to the
problem and promote a lasting ceasefire throughout the
country. While we understand that all attention has been
focused on the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement, it is important that we do not lose sight of
other parts of the country, where those affected have
not been granted respite from the war.

S/PV. 8525

In that context, we would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the plight of those who have been internally
displaced by the war — many of them women and
children who long to return to their homes — and to
the extraordinary work being done by United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations to
provide assistance to all Yemenis in need. As we
have said on previous occasions, protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure are basic principles of
international humanitarian law. That is why we are
concerned about the attacks around the country. We see
that civilians continue to be denied the protection to
which they are entitled. They are once again paying the
highest price for the conflict in Yemen. We urge the
parties and the States that support them to do more to
protect civilians during the planning and execution of
military actions.
We would like to thank UNICEF for its work in
Yemen and for informing us about the situation of
children in the country. As the Executive Director
pointed out, the impact of the conflict on children in
Yemen has been devastating. Yemeni children continue
to pay the highest price of conflict and are subject
to constant abuse. Children make up 40 per cent of
the direct victims of attacks, but they also die from
preventable diseases, cholera or famine. Millions of
children are reported to be struggling to stay alive.
An undermining element is the 2 million children who
remain out of school, and the more than 2,000 schools
left without the conditions to function due to the attacks.
That paints a very worrisome picture that should
compel the parties to take the necessary measures to
ensure the protection of children in Yemen, while also
not forgetting about the need to ensure the release of
children associated with parties to the conflict and
those deprived of liberty because they are part of those
groups. We hope that the memorandum of understanding
signed last month between the Special Representative
and the coalition, along with the endorsement of the
road map by the Government of Yemen to revitalize the
2014 action plan and the Safe Schools Declaration, will
provide more than just hope for the children in Yemen
and their families.
Lastly, after the signing of the agreement, the
Council stands united in the face of the situation that
is afflicting the people of Yemen, knowing that only
through the express political will of the parties will
we be able to put an end to this scourge. We must do
everything in our power, including leveraging the

19-1408821/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

fragile progress made in Stockholm, put an end to
the conflict and help lift up a people who have been
severely battered.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
I would like to thank all the briefers for their
comprehensive briefings and the work that they have
done thus far, despite difficult circumstances. The
briefings reported both positive developments, some
of which the Security Council ought to have heard and
expected several months ago, and news on the persistent
gloomy humanitarian situation.
We would like to underscore three points. Before
that, I would like to pay tribute to the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) for his work, as well as his visit.
First, regarding the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement, Indonesia takes note of the
redeployment of troops by the Houthis from the three
ports, as well as the report from the Special Envoy
on the meeting in Amman to discuss the revenue
from those ports. That exercise should continue with
the demining operations in the ports and the removal
of heavy weaponry, under the monitoring of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Al-Hudaydah
agreement, with a view to ensuring a valid, verifiable,
genuine and faithful implementation of the agreement.
It is hoped that this long-delayed step could soon
be followed by the other steps that are necessary to
remove any military manifestations from the city, as
stipulated in the Stockholm Agreement. In addition to
that, and as set out in the Al-Hudaydah agreement, we
also expect that the revenues from the three ports will
be settled and channelled to the Central Bank of Yemen
through its branch in Al-Hudaydah. We need to revive
the economy in support of humanitarian efforts. It is
our expectation that the humanitarian corridors will
be established.
Secondly, Indonesia supports the continuation of
consultations between the Government of Yemen and
the Houthis to pursue the bigger goal of a political
settlement and resolve the conflict. We support the work
of the Special Envoy, as well as Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard. Constant engagement among the parties, in
our opinion, is an investment in the peaceful resolution
of the long-standing conflict in Yemen. We also share
22/25

15/05/2019

Mr. Griffiths’ view on the involvement of women in the
peace process and on a comprehensive solution.
The Stockholm Agreement calls for all parties to
be fully committed to continuing the consultations
unconditionally; that is an important point. Indonesia
would like to once again reiterate its call for the parties
to release or exchange all detainees. There should also
be some progress related to the city of Taiz, as the
situation there is not improving. Indonesia also calls on
all sides to exercise restraint from provocative actions,
such as drone attacks, that could further escalate
tensions and derail the fragile efforts that are currently
being undertaken by the United Nations. Military
action is not the solution.
Thirdly, Indonesia remains concerned about the
constantly bleak humanitarian picture in Yemen. Not
only is starvation lingering, but the people are also
facing a cholera outbreak, as Ms. Fore described. I
believe that the picture that she painted in the Council
is a very bleak one; the Council must do something in
that regard. There are many cholera cases, as Mr. Fore
reported: 153 children have died since January, and,
just in one week, there were 13 associated deaths, from
29 April to 5 May. It is a dire warning to us all that
the humanitarian situation in Yemen is reaching its
lowest point. That should be addressed immediately.
We should all heed the call of the Executive Director
of UNICEF to be united to help the children of Yemen.
Indonesia supports the work of UNICEF, the
World Health Organization and other actors to cure
and stop the cholera outbreak. All parties in Yemen
should cooperate to facilitate their efforts. We also
support the work of the World Food Programme in
delivering assistance.
We have also noted the point Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock made that humanitarian support has
started to reach people in need, but the situation remains
dire. We should continue to preserve the momentum
gained and ensure more robust humanitarian delivery
on the ground. Moreover, we heard Under-SecretaryGeneral stress the need for funding, which is
very important.
Once again, Indonesia would like to reiterate the
importance of unity within the Security Council to take
measures to ease the suffering of the Yemeni people
and support any action that could advance the peace
process. We must never forget that our job is to save the
people of Yemen.
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over the Security Council this month.
I wish you and your delegation every success. I also
thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs;
Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF;
and the representative of Peru, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), for their briefings.
Five months have gone by since the Stockholm
Agreement was reached between the Yemeni
Government and the Houthi militias. Our patient people
yearned for that Agreement to mark the beginning of the
end of the tragedy, which has hit that great people hard,
as the Houthi militias led a coup d’état and destroyed
the economic, social and cultural foundations of the
country. Unfortunately, the Houthi militias used those
agreements and other initiatives aimed at achieving
peace and a political solution to gain some time to
reinforce their military positions so as to commit
crimes against the Yemeni people and violations of their
rights in the areas under the control of those militias,
in flagrant breach of all humanitarian rules and values,
including international law and human rights law.
Those militias have opened up new war fronts and
pushed their followers into their barbaric war against
the Yemeni people, without realizing that the illusions
which they are trying to create will vanish and explode
in the faces of those who believe that they, with Iran’s
assistance, can make our people yield and break their
determination. The Yemeni people continue to reject
foreign agendas that do not belong to their culture and
genuine Arab identity.
The Yemeni Government welcomes the efforts of
the Secretary-General and recalls that the Stockholm
Agreement is an initiative designed to build trust in
moving towards a comprehensive solution to the Yemen
crisis. The failure of the Houthis to work with the
international community and the Yemeni Government
in order to establish the necessary trust will make them
untrustworthy and puppets in the hands of terrorist Iran.

S/PV. 8525

With respect to resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452
(2019), under which the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism ensures the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, represented by the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, the Yemeni
Government emphasizes its right to verify any step
taken as part of Stockholm Agreement and to check
reports issued by coastguard forces that will assume
responsibility for security in the ports that the Houthis
have withdrawn from.
Before beginning any discussion on any upcoming
steps, the Government also reaffirms its right to
monitor withdrawals, pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions and through the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. It is not enough for the Chair
of the Committee to provide a summary report of what
is happening. We underscore the fact that any attempt
by the Houthi militias to withdraw from the ports
without any supervision, monitoring and approval by
the Committee and its three parties would be a violation
of agreements reached in recent months and would
undermine the efforts of the international community.
This would be a free service offered to the militias,
which will not hesitate to repeat their masquerade of
unilateral withdrawal, as happened on 30 December
2018 in the port of Al-Hudaydah.
The Yemeni Government reaffirms its clear
position of adhering to resolutions 2216 (2015), 2451
(2018) and 2452 (2019), as well as to the spirit and letter
of the Stockholm Agreement. In that regard, we reject
any measure that is not subject to the criteria provided
for in the relevant Security Council resolutions and
that does not abide by the concept of operations. We
reaffirm our full willingness to work seriously for the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and all
its provisions concerning Al-Hudaydah, as well as the
Taiz understandings and the freeing of all prisoners,
detainees, abductees, disappeared persons and those
under house arrest.
The Houthi militias have tried to avoid
implementing first phase of the concept of operations
presented by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, the
Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
which was approved by the Yemeni Government
and the Houthi militias. It defines the redeployment
mechanisms, distances, zones and maps, as well as
the roles of the joint control monitoring committees
and the verification mechanisms, along with every
logistical and technical detail. The Houthi militias try

19-1408823/25

S/PV.8525

The situation in the Middle East

to implement the Agreement in a way that deviates
from the concept of operations and through unilateral
action that departs from all previous agreements in
an attempt to implement the Agreement according to
their own vision, which is not based on any terms of
reference and understandings. The United Nations has
to implement agreements and to refute such fallacious
arguments. The Yemeni Government calls for a return
to the process provided for in the Agreement, in
accordance with the agreed concepts.
The Houthi militias reject peace opportunities
and want to prolong the war and increase the suffering
of the Yemeni people. That would confirm what the
Yemeni Government has said many times — that the
militias are not serious in their acceptance of peace
and the efforts of the United Nations and the Security
Council. The decisions they take are no longer their
own. Those militias have become puppets in the hands
of the Iranian mullahs and regime, which are trying to
promote their own sectarian interests in Yemen and the
region while blackmailing the international community
in order to evade the sanctions imposed on them.
The Yemeni Government has tried to end the
war by various means. We have shown the greatest
flexibility in implementing Stockholm Agreement by
following the directives of President of the Republic
Mansour Hadi. We have fully supported the efforts
of the Special Envoy and accepted all proposals and
plans put forward by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard
to achieve peace and bring an end to the humanitarian
suffering of our people. However, this desire on the part
of our Government has been met with stubbornness and
prevarication. The militias have pursued their escalation
and refuse to join the peace process. They continue to
ignore the Security Council resolutions and signed
agreements so as to gain more time to continue their
own war and to increase the suffering of the Yemeni
people. The preferred environment of those militias is
that of war and instability.
Two oil-pumping stations in the |Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia were the targets of terrorist attacks
yesterday carried out by drones associated with the
Houthi militias, supported and encouraged directly by
Iran. The Republic of Yemen strongly condemns such
terrorist attacks, which threaten regional security and
stability as well as international peace and security.
They are part of a terrorist act to destabilize and sow
chaos in the region.
24/25

15/05/2019

The Yemeni Government is making every effort to
alleviate the economic and humanitarian suffering of
our people. In that regard, we are paying the salaries of
all civil servants in all governorates of the Republic. In
order to save the education sector and those who seek
to expand their knowledge even while they remain in
the destructive grasp of the militias, the Government
recently paid 50 per cent of the salaries of university
teachers in the zones controlled by the Houthis.
The Houthi militias are spreading extremism and
sectarianism while the fighting financial institutions
that are cooperating with the Central Bank in Aden
to make it seem as if the legitimate Government is
responsible for the crumbling of the economic and
humanitarian situation in Yemen. They also continue
to politicize humanitarian action so as to expand the
financing of their own war and build their economic
networks by collapsing the value of the national
currency, obstructing trade movement, transferring
goods and money, and carrying out terrorist acts and
arrests. The militias also monitor the private sector and
use it to serve their narrow interests and fund their war
efforts. Those militias have also fomented an oil crisis
in the areas under their control in order to promote
black market activities and increase oil prices, despite
the fact that nine tankers transporting such products
have transited through Al-Hudaydah port since the
second half of April.
We call upon the Council to exert pressure on the
Houthi coup militias in order to implement the agreement
to exchange prisoners, detainees, the disappeared
and those under house arrest, in accordance with the
principle of all-for-all that we agreed upon before
Stockholm discussions. This is a humanitarian issue
that should not be subject to any kind of political gains
and calculations. It is an issue that has a great impact
on alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people,
particularly during the sacred month of Ramadan. It
will also provide relief to thousands of Yemeni families
in which the parents have been separated from their
children, as asserted by the President of the Republic in
his recent letter to the Secretary-General.
The Yemeni Government calls on the United
Nations and the international community to exert
serious and great pressure on the Houthi militias to
lift the restrictions and obstacles they have put in the
way of food and medical assistance so that such aid
can reach those in need in zones under the control
of the militias. The Houthi militias must also stop
19-14088

15/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

confiscating and looting humanitarian aid, targeting
humanitarian workers and forcing international
organizations to pay customs duties on products that
are exempt from such duties by law. Since the signing
of the Stockholm agreements, the Ministry of Human
Rights has documented the confiscation and looting
of 415 trucks containing humanitarian aid, medicines
and oil products. In addition, those militias carry
out attacks against World Food Programme supplies
and the Red Sea Mills, shelling them on 9 May, at a
time when millions of Yemenis are suffering from
severe malnutrition.
The World Health Organization report of 7 May
mentions the cholera epidemic, particularly in Houthicontrolled areas. The Yemeni Government has warned
the militias over continuing their abhorrent policies,
which prevent targeted people from having access to
medicines and medical convoys. The Human Rights
Watch report of 9 May also states that the Houthi
militias were responsible for horrible explosions in the
residential areas of Sawan in Sana’a governorate on
7 April, taking the lives of 15 pupils in neighbourhood
schools and injuring more than 100 people, including
45 children.
The Yemeni Government is extremely keen to
ensure lasting peace based on the agreed terms of
reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the

S/PV. 8525

outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). However, it will
not be possible to make progress towards peace or to
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people without a
decisive position of the Security Council and exerting
maximum genuine and serious pressure while sending
a clear message to the Houthi militias that they must
implement the Stockholm Agreement and prevent the
possibility of failure. All necessary measures must
be taken against those who obstruct the Agreement,
which, if it is implemented, will be a glimmer of hope
and a confidence-building step towards achieving a
comprehensive political solution.
I would like to note that the Yemeni Government
has appealed to the Secretary-General regarding the
bad situation of the floating oil tanker FSO SAFER
in Ras Isa port, which contains 1.14 million barrels
of crude oil and could cause a terrible environmental
disaster in the Red Sea. The Yemeni Government asked
the United Nations to help it in assessing the situation
of that oil tanker and to do the necessary maintenance
work on it in order to prevent any oil leak.
The President: I now invite Council Members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

19-1408825/25
