S/PV.8872

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8872

nd meeting
Monday, 4 October 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ben Lagha
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 September 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2021/842)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-27287 (E)
*2127287*

S/PV.8872

The situation in the Middle East

its mandated activities related to the elimination
of the Syrian chemical weapons programme and
its engagement with the Syrian Arab Republic in
that regard.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 September 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/842)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/842, which contains the text of a letter
dated 30 September 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Security Council
members for this opportunity to brief them again on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical-weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the previous Security Council meeting
on resolution 2118 (2013), held on 2 September (see
S/PV.8849), the Office for Disarmament Affairs has
been in regular contact with its counterparts at the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) regarding its activities related to that matter.
Per established practice, I held a monthly call with the
OPCW Director-General on 1 October to receive an
update and ascertain his views.
As I previously informed the Security Council, the
ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has impacted the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s ability
to deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic. Nevertheless,
the Technical Secretariat maintains its readiness for
deployments. Despite the continued travel restrictions,
the OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to undertake
2/16

04/10/2021

Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT) are still ongoing to clarify all the outstanding
issues related to the initial declaration by the Syrian
Arab Republic to the OPCW. In that context, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat remains of the position that the
Syrian Arab Republic must declare all chemical warfare
agents produced and/or weaponized at the former
chemical-weapons production facility that was declared
by the Syrian Arab Republic as never having been used
to produce and/or weaponize chemical weapons.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has not yet received a response from the
Syrian National Authority to the request for information
and documentation regarding the damage caused to the
declared former chemical-weapons production facility
during the attack on 8 June, reported by the Syrian
National Authority. I urge the Syrian Arab Republic to
respond to the OPCW Technical Secretariat as soon as
possible given that the damage caused to that facility is
related to an outstanding issue recently opened by the
Declaration Assessment Team.
As I previously informed the Security Council,
the Syrian National Authority also reported the
destruction, in the attack on the chemical-weapons
production facility, of two chlorine cylinders that
were related to the chemical weapons incident that
took place in Douma on 7 April 2018. In addition.
the OPCW Technical Secretariat requested the Syrian
Arab Republic to provide information regarding the
unauthorized movement of the two cylinders and any
remains of their destruction. The Technical Secretariat
is still awaiting a response from the Syrian Arab
Republic on that matter.
I note that, on 16 August, the Syrian National
Authority responded to the OPCW Technical
Secretariat’s request to schedule the twenty-fifth
round of consultations between the DAT and the
Syrian National Authority. I understand that the Syrian
National Authority has confirmed its readiness to hold
the consultations from 11 to 27 October. The OPCW
Secretariat informed the Syrian National Authority,
on 25 August, that the DAT was prepared to deploy in
October. It also expressed concern about how delays in
the conduct of the consultations could impact Syria’s
21-27287

04/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

compliance with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention, as well as the implementation of
the Technical Secretariat’s mandate.
Unfortunately, on 23 September, the Syrian
Arab Republic reconfirmed to the OPCW Technical
Secretariat its refusal to issue an entry visa to one
member of the DAT for the upcoming deployment. In
its response, the OPCW Technical Secretariat recalled
that the DAT expert had deployed to Syria on multiple
occasions over the past seven years and further referred
to the applicable legal framework, which does not entitle
the Syrian Arab Republic to select experts on behalf
of the Technical Secretariat. Given the regrettable
situation, the Technical Secretariat confirmed that it
would not deploy the DAT to the Syrian Arab Republic
at this time.
I have been informed that, with the aim of advancing
the implementation of the Syrian Arab Republic’s
obligations and the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s
mandate, the Technical Secretariat has invited Syria to
send a delegation for a meeting in the second half of
this month with the DAT at the OPCW’s headquarters
in The Hague. The OPCW Technical Secretariat has
underscored that such a meeting cannot replace fullfledged deployments to the Syrian Arab Republic.
As a result of the identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies that remain unresolved, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat continues to assess that, at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab
Republic cannot be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
I urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to facilitate arrangements for the deployment of the
DAT as soon as possible. As has been stressed on
numerous occasions, it is only through complete
cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat that all outstanding issues
related to the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial declaration
can be closed. As noted at many prior Council meetings,
the confidence of the international community in the
complete elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons
programme depends upon those issues being finalized.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to plan
to conduct two rounds of inspections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre (SSRC) in 2021. The inspections of
those facilities remain subject to the evolution of the
COVID-19 pandemic. I have been advised that the

S/PV. 8872

Syrian Arab Republic has yet to provide sufficient
technical information or explanations that would
enable the OPCW Technical Secretariat to close the
issue related to the detection of a Schedule 2 chemical
at the Barzah facilities of the SSRC in 2018.
With regard to the in-person meeting between the
OPCW Director-General and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic, I
note that the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian
Arab Republic have appointed officials in charge of
preparations. I hope that the proposed meeting will be
an opportunity to strengthen dialogue and cooperation
between both parties.
The OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) remains
in the process of studying all available information
related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic and continues to engage
with the Syrian Arab Republic and other States parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention with regard to “a
variety of incidents”. As previously reported, further
FFM deployments will be subject to the evolution of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
I understand that, following the issuance of its second
report in April, the Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT) continues with its investigations into incidents in
which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course, subject
to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic. I take this
opportunity to once again state my full support for the
integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity and
independence of the work of the OPCW.
On 21 April, at its twenty-fifth session, the
Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention adopted decision C-25/Dec.9,
entitled “Addressing the possession and use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic”, suspending
the rights and privileges of the Syrian Arab Republic
under the Convention. According to paragraph 8 of
the decision, the rights and privileges of the Syrian
Arab Republic will be reinstated by the Conference
of the States Parties once the OPCW Director-General
has reported to the Executive Council that the Syrian
Arab Republic has completed all of the measures
contained in paragraph 5 of Executive Council
decision EC-94/Dec.2. I have been advised that the
Syrian Arab Republic has yet to complete all of those
measures. I therefore reiterate once again my call on

21-272873/16

S/PV.8872

The situation in the Middle East

04/10/2021

the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate fully with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat in that regard.

the States Parties in April, in violation of CWC norms,
to strip Syria of its rights in the OPCW.

It cannot be repeated often enough: there is no
justification for the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere or under any circumstances. There are no
excuses for an inexcusable act. We must remain united
and determined in preventing their use or the threat of
their use. Those who have used chemical weapons must
be identified and held to account. It is an obligation
for all of us. It is my sincere hope that members of the
Council will unite on this issue.

I am sure that, even today, my Western colleagues,
as is their tradition and despite the facts and common
sense, will rush to praise the decision and commend
its alleged broad support of OPCW member countries.
Well, if fewer than half of votes in favour and only six
of 15 votes in favour from among the members of the
Security Council indicates broad support for them, then
I will not argue. It is clear that we were taught to do
arithmetic in different ways. Regrettably, it is not just
arithmetic, but also physics.

Before concluding, I wish to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s remarks to the General Assembly in
presenting Our Common Agenda on 10 September:
“When we work together, there is no limit to what we
can achieve”.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today Mrs. Nakamitsu presented the ninetysixth monthly — the most recent — report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013) (S/2021/842, annex). Those
documents have long since been based on the same
template and honed to achieve a single goal — giving
the impression that Syria is allegedly attempting to hide
something and mislead the international community
with regard to its chemical dossier. The methodology
of those documents has not changed. The Technical
Secretariat, headed by the Director-General, is
attempting to bury in the text, as deeply as possible, the
obvious fact that Damascus, in spite of it all, continues
in good faith to fulfil its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) and does not refuse to
cooperate with the OPCW.
Despite the machinations of the Technical
Secretariat, Syria demonstrates the political will and
readiness to continue dialogue with it. Frankly, we
admire the restraint and composure of our Syrian
colleagues. We can only imagine how challenging it
was for them not to be driven by emotions or yield to
provocation following the decision that the delegations
of the Western States pushed for at the Conference of
4/16

In our textbooks, for example, we learned about
the force of gravity. When objects fall from a height,
they become deformed. That is to say that chlorine
cylinders, allegedly dropped from the air in Douma in
April 2018, would have exhibited similar damage, just
as the bed on which one of them allegedly fell — not
to mention the fact that, when smashing through the
rafters, the cylinders’ valves would have been damaged.
Another example is the crater from the alleged bomb
drop at Khan Shaykhun, which from all appearances
looks like the result of the detonation of a shell on
the ground. Other examples would be the fantastical
conclusions of the Fact-Finding Mission, according
to which munitions fall into ventilation shafts that are
exactly the same diameter, or unguided bombs, instead
of free-falling, fly horizontally for five kilometres until
they hit their target. Neither you nor OPCW inspectors
seems bothered by this. At this rate, the OPCW can
claim another Nobel Prize — this time in alternative
physics for the discovery of new laws.
Perhaps our understanding of the laws of chemistry
is also different. For example, as we understand it, it is
impossible for a cylinder to become half-corroded fewer
than 12 hours after hitting the ground, although the
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) states this
happened in its report on Saraqib, to be half-rusted in
fewer than 12 hours after hitting the ground. That again
is a fantastical speed for a chemical reaction. Similarly,
attempts to present as a chemical warfare agent the
minuscule particles of chlorine found in Douma are not
scientifically valid — the chlorine that was discovered
in Douma could have had a multitude of applications,
including household use. Not to mention the fact that we
have long since given up attempting to find any logic in
your assertions. If there were any logic to them, there
would be no denial that the use of chemical weapons
by Syrian forces would be unbeneficial for them even
21-27287

04/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

if they possessed them, because at that time they had a
clear military advantage.
Why look for any reason-based arguments at all
if a shroud of fake information can simply be created
around those events, designed to blame Syria and its
leadership and promote cut-throats from among the
Syrian opposition, whom you patronize as fighters
for freedom and democracy? This fits well into your
narrative, but has virtually nothing to do with reality.
The height of hypocrisy is the illegitimate IIT,
whose armchair experts rubber-stamp, on the basis on
pseudo-evidence and contrary to the laws of physics,
chemistry, mathematics, new reports on the alleged
use of chemical weapons by the Syrian leadership.
We have repeatedly stated that we reject in advance
the findings of any new IIT masterpieces, which are
compiled using the same methodology that violates the
principles and methodology of information-handling
at the OPCW. Incidentally, much of the blame for the
destruction of the good name and reputation of the
OPCW lies with current Director-General Fernando
Arias, who, instead of investigating the blatant case of
machinations that occurred when the report on Douma
was being compiled, attempts to silence OPCW experts
and inspectors who dare to break the vicious circle and
to sweep under the rug facts that are unflattering to the
organization and to him personally.
Such hypocrisy is evident even in today’s report.
Delays in conducting the twenty-fifth round of
inspections of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
are again being blamed on the Syrians. The Technical
Secretariat is extremely concerned about that issue. Yet
there is no mention of the fact that it was at the behest
of the Director-General of the OPCW that inspections
were not conducted during the summer months. As we
all recall, Mr. Arias said that the summer months in
Syria were allegedly too uncomfortable for the members
of the DAT to be deployed in the field. It appears that
for him considerations of “comfort” outweighed the
importance of holding these consultations.
A similar attempt to shift blame can be found in the
report on the 8 June air strike on a declared chemical
facility on Syrian territory. Where is there even one
word in condemnation of the aggression against the
territory of a sovereign State? Apparently, this act of
aggression seems irrelevant to the OPCW Director
General.

S/PV. 8872

Once again, concern is expressed about the
relocation by the Syrians of the cylinders related to
the Douma incident. However, does that justify the use
of armed force against a sovereign State? It is obvious
that, for the Director-General of the OPCW, active
aggression of that kind is irrelevant.
How can we not recall the hasty air strikes by the
Western coalition on the Shayrat airbase in 2017 and
the fact that it blocked all attempts to launch a swift
investigation by the OPCW into events in Ltamenah
and Khan Shaykhun. Overall, the approach adopted
by the leadership of the Technical Secretariat looks
rather unflattering and has already affected several
other situations involving the Director-General and his
staff, which have nothing but politics behind them. It is
regrettable that because it buries its head in the sand,
the OPCW is becoming a politicized tool to punish
regimes that have found disfavour with the collective
West.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
because of the trends to which I have referred, the
focus of the Syrian chemical file has long ceased being
the non-proliferation of chemical weapons. Current
developments should not be considered in the context
of the dialogue between Syria and the Technical
Secretariat which is under way, no matter how hard
one might try to prove the opposite. They should rather
be considered merely as an attempt to punish a State
that has found disfavour with the tools of the CWC. It
is extremely dangerous and can affect any State that
stands in the way of the geopolitical aspirations of
the West. All illusions in that regard have long since
dissipated.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): We thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. We
appreciate her efforts and commend the work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on this gravely important issue. Let me also
say that the Director-General has the full confidence of
the United States Government, and his professionalism
and patience in dealing with this file are commendable.
Despite the Al-Assad regime’s frequent denials, it
is clear that the regime has repeatedly used chemical
weapons. The OPCW’s Investigation and Identification
Team has now attributed four separate chemical-weapon
attacks in Syria to the Al-Assad regime. Those
incidents are in addition to the four chemical-weapons

21-272875/16

S/PV.8872

The situation in the Middle East

attack attributed to the Al-Assad regime by the former
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Although the evidence of the regime’s culpability
is clear and its Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
declaration remains incomplete, Syria has subsequently
sought to avoid accountability by obstructing
independent investigations and failing to cooperate
with the OPCW, in a brazen attempt to undermine the
organization’s work as the implementing body of the
CWC. As we heard, we are seeing that obstruction again
this month, with the regime’s failure to grant visas to all
members of the OPCW’s Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT), which as we heard, was scheduled to deploy to
Syria after several months of non-response from the
Al-Assad regime.
The Al-Assad regime has even singled out an
experienced member of the DAT and refused to issue
that person a visa, despite the fact that that expert
had deployed to Syria for that function multiple times
over the past seven years. The delays to schedule that
consultation and the refusal of that visa has hampered
the ability of the DAT to do its job. It is clearly a
deliberate attempt to delay and obstruct the work of
that important team. We call on the Al-Assad regime
to fully cooperate with the OPCW in accordance with
its international obligations and to adhere to resolution
2118 (2013), including through the granting of visas to
OPCW personnel.
A representative of the Al-Assad regime claimed,
in a statement delivered to the General Assembly on
27 September, that the regime’s accession to the CWC
served as evidence that it had not used and would not
use chemical weapons. However, it is incontrovertible,
given the overwhelming evidence collected by the
OPCW with the support of brave Syrian documentation
groups, that the regime has utterly failed to comply
with its obligations under the CWC.
It is evident that the regime continues to ignore
calls from the international community to fully
disclose and verifiably eliminate its chemical weapons
programme. We concur with the OPCW’s assessment
that the disclosures submitted by the Al-Assad regime
concerning its chemical weapons cannot be considered
accurate and complete in accordance with the CWC.
We urge the regime to work closely with the OPCW on
that pressing issue.
Repeated and continued failures by the Al-Assad
regime to comply with its obligations under international
6/16

04/10/2021

law must not be tolerated. We welcomed the decision
made at the Conference of the States Parties on 21 April
to condemn Syria’s use of chemical weapons and to
suspend Syria’s rights and privileges under the CWC.
Let me be clear. That decision was a legitimate
exercise of the authority of the Conference of the States
Parties under the Convention. Although my mathematics
may be different to my Russian colleague’s, facts are
not. That decision was adopted overwhelmingly by
nearly 90 nations around the world and opposed by
15 — far exceeding the required two thirds majority of
those present and voting under the OPCW’s own rules.
The Al-Assad regime’s allies, including Russia,
have also actively sought to block all efforts to promote
accountability. Russia continues to defend the Al-Assad
regime failures to adhere to its obligations, including
by spreading disinformation, attacking the integrity
and the professional work of the OPCW and otherwise
seeking to impede ongoing efforts by responsible
nations to hold the Al-Assad regime accountable for
its use of chemical weapons and for numerous other
atrocities. That pattern of enablement is irresponsible
and dangerous.
It is long past time for the Al-Assad regime to
uphold its obligations under the CWC and resolution
2118 (2013). The Security Council should impose
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations in response to Syria’s non-compliance
with resolution 2118 (2013).
At this point, there can be no doubt that the Syrian
Government has repeatedly violated its international
obligations, including through its failure to cooperate
with the OPCW through the denial of visas. It is time
for the Council to take resolute action and respond to
Syria’s non-compliance.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing on
the progress towards the full elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme.
It is regrettable that the Security Council meets once
again this month with no new positive developments
on the Syrian dossier. This trend is unsustainable. The
international norm against the use of chemical weapons
must remain a top priority. The lack of accountability
and the deterioration of trust reminds us of the urgency
of the issue. The Council cannot be silent amid such
prolonged stasis.
21-27287

04/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We reiterate our strong condemnation of all uses
of chemical weapons at any time or by anyone. We
call on Syria to fulfil its obligations in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
2118 (2013). Immediate attention must be given to full
cooperation with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the resolution of the 20
outstanding issues. We urge Syria to provide sufficient
technical information or explanations to reconcile the
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies.
Similarly, it is critical that Syria complete the necessary
measures to lift the suspension of its rights and privileges
as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) was
last deployed to Syria in February. We are growing
increasingly concerned by the delays in their regular
deployment and consultations. Every month that those
consultations are postponed undermines the priority
of ensuring consistent cooperation, exchanges of
information and technical assistance to Syria. Should a
meeting take place in The Hague between the Technical
Secretariat and Syrian authorities in October, we urge
that the utmost attention be given to building trust and
finding agreement on consistent modalities to prevent
any further delays in DAT deployments to Syria.

S/PV. 8872

for consultation and cooperation among States on
relevant issues.
My country believes that there is a dire need to
restore positive engagement and confidence as well as
mutual understanding, coordination and cooperation
between the Syrian Government and the Technical
Secretariat of the OPCW in order to make progress on
the Syrian chemical weapons dossier.
We look forward to the upcoming meeting between
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of
Syria and the Director-General of the OPCW in order to
re-establish a constructive, transparent and structured
dialogue between the two parties. That will also lead
to the resumption of the activities carried out regularly
by the Technical Secretariat teams in the Syrian Arab
Republic in accordance with its mandate and in a way
that maintains the sovereignty and unity of Syria.
We call also for making progress on the
pending issues so that Syria can fully honour its
commitments. We stress the importance of all
allegations of the use of chemical weapons by anybody
in Syria being independently, transparently and
comprehensively investigated.

Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing. I also welcome the
participation of the representatives of Syria and Turkey
at this meeting.

In conclusion, Tunisia emphasizes once again that
the efforts of the OPCW and the effectiveness of the
chemical weapons regime in general will be strongly
supported by the collective and coordinated work
and by the constructive cooperation and consensual
solutions of the Security Council and the international
community at large. That will happen when they
shoulder their responsibilities for implementing
resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention, thereby contributing to the closure of the
Syrian chemical dossier and to ending the crisis.

At the outset, Tunisia reiterates its steadfast
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons, under
any circumstance, wherever it may be and by whomever,
regardless of the motives and justification. The use of
chemical weapons is a threat to international peace and
security. It is a gross violation of international law that
calls for those responsible for such heinous crimes to be
held responsible.

Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Since the
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), the United Nations
has continued to make great efforts to establish
responsibility for the multiple cases of chemical-weapons
use in Syria. Regrettably, for whatever reason, those
efforts have not yet made it possible to attribute,
in a manner acceptable to all, responsibility for the
commission of those unacceptable acts.

Tunisia supports the vital mandate of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to independently and impartially fulfil its
responsibilities for verification, including in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The OPCW is also a forum

The Niger unreservedly condemns any use of
chemical weapons, whether in the Syrian crisis or
anywhere else. The use of such weapons is not justified
under any pretext or circumstance. In that regard, my
delegation commends the work of the Organization

Let me conclude by again underlining the need for
urgent progress on the Syrian dossier. We owe it to the
victims of those heinous attacks to ensure accountability
and bring resolution to all outstanding issues.

21-272877/16

S/PV.8872

The situation in the Middle East

for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to
eliminate such weapons. The OPCW must retain its
technical nature in order to preserve its integrity and
ensure that its authority is respected by all.

04/10/2021

Council and its willingness to continue working with
the Technical Secretariat.

I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her
briefing, and welcome the representatives of Syria and
Turkey, who have joined us this afternoon.

We encourage it to continue in the same vein
with the OPCW teams with regard to the request for
additional information on the outstanding points of the
initial declaration and in the granting of visas to the
experts so as to close this controversial chapter of the
finalization of the initial report.

Just as in recent meetings on this issue, we heard
again today that gaps and inconsistencies remain
in the Syrian Government’s initial declaration. The
Syrian representative will no doubt tell us later that
his Government is cooperating in good faith with the
OPCW team and has done its utmost to provide the
team with all the information requested, thus reflecting
the divergent interpretations of the two sides.

Thirdly, my delegation reiterates its call to the
United Nations and the OPCW Technical Secretariat to
pay particular attention to the allegations of possession
of chemical materials by non-State entities, which, if
proven true, would be very dangerous — not only for
the region but also for the world as a whole, as these
weapons could be transferred to other non-State entities
or even to terrorist groups operating in other regions.

As has also often been the case, some will support
the Syrian representative, while others will continue
their condemnation. It is therefore crucial and urgent
to put an end to this cycle of blame and denial. It is
time for both sides to work hard to bring their positions
closer together with the unanimous support of the
Security Council, even if that unanimity does not yet
seem possible today. Otherwise the status quo will
persist.

In conclusion, while reiterating our full support for
the OPCW, my delegation hopes to see progress on this
aspect of the Syrian crisis, as it cannot be dissociated
from the political and humanitarian aspects, in order
to enable Syria to regain its full sovereignty and act
in the interests of its people, with the support of the
international community.

I would therefore like to make several points.
First, my delegation reiterates that any course of
action that does not lead the Council to ensure the
full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) must be
avoided, as the text could serve as a basis for establishing
responsibility and, consequently, could pave the way
for the possible prosecution of those responsible before
the competent courts.
Secondly, cooperation between Syria and the
OPCW Technical Secretariat must continue in good
faith to resolve outstanding issues, in accordance with
resolution 2118 (2013). In that context, the upcoming
meeting between the Syrian Minister for Foreign
Affairs and the OPCW Director-General is a step in
the right direction. It is also important that all incidents
of chemical-weapons use in Syria receive the same
attention and be treated with the same diligence in
order to reach an overall conclusion.
To that end, my delegation notes the ongoing
efforts of the Syrian Government to shed light on
the use of these weapons on its territory through its
communications through the OPCW and the Security
8/16

Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I also thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. I very much
appreciate her persistent calls for Security Council
unity to uphold the norm against chemical weapons.
Estonia reiterates that the identification of, and in
particular accountability for, those responsible for the
use of chemical weapons is imperative. Impunity is not
an option. It must be ensured that those individuals
who ordered, enabled or carried out chemical weapons
attacks in Syria since 2013 will face a reckoning,
and their victims will see justice done. Without
accountability, there is no credible prospect for lasting
peace in Syria.
Upon reading the OPCW Director-General’s latest
monthly report (S/2021/842, annex), we regret to see
that Syrian cooperation with the OPCW continues
to deteriorate. Paragraph 7 of resolution 2118 (2013)
stipulates that, in order to fulfil its mandate, the Syrian
Arab Republic shall cooperate fully with the OPCW,
including by accepting personnel designated by the
OPCW and providing the respective personnel access
to and the right to inspect sites.
It is clear that the Syrian regime is not complying
with that resolution and its international obligations
21-27287

04/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

by refusing to issue the entry visa for a member of the
Declaration Assessment Team. As a result, the twentyfifth round of consultations are still on hold, and there
has been no progress in clarifying the outstanding
issues on the Syrian declaration. That lack of progress
continues to pose a threat to the Syrian people and to
international peace and security.
In addition to the consultations, we are also eager
to see developments with regard to the planned meeting
between Director-General Arias and Mr. Mekdad.
Estonia further notes with concern that several
OPCW requests for information with regard to the
former chemical-weapons facility, the moving of two
chlorine cylinders and the detection of a Schedule
2 chemical at the Barzah facility remain persistently
unanswered by the Syrian authorities. Again, resolution
2118 (2013) and Syrian responsibilities under the
Chemical Weapons Convention are not being respected.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our full trust
in the independent, impartial and professional work of
the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its investigative
bodies, as well as in the credibility of their reports.
We call on the Syrian regime to cooperate fully with
the OPCW and to comply with all relevant Security
Council resolutions and international law.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
informative briefing, as usual.
Our goal to prevent the development, stockpiling,
transfer and use of chemical weapons in order to
better protect the future of humankind requires both
the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2015) and a
committed partnership with the implementing body of
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Sustained international cooperation is imperative, and
parties have an obligation to engage efficiently and
constructively on all issues in order to make muchneeded progress on this dossier.
However, we recognize that cooperation becomes
severely strained where trust deficits exist. As such,
the OPCW must continuously strive to ensure that its
internal structure and all activities are characterized
by integrity, transparency and non-politicization.
Furthermore, States parties to the Convention should
endeavour to pursue consensus-based decisions to
thwart polarization and divisiveness.

S/PV. 8872

We continue to encourage and appeal for dialogue
between the OPCW and the Syrian Government to
facilitate the timely provision of pertinent technical
information and documentation and for the approval
of required visas. Those are not only necessary to
enable the OPCW’s deployments to Syria, but also to
assist in finally resolving the gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies contained in the initial declaration. In the
interim, the proposed meeting between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian delegation at OPCW
headquarters can serve as steppingstone to advance
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and
fulfil the obligations encapsulated in the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
On the point of dialogue, we are pleased to note
the preparations being made for the in-person meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab
Republic to discuss relevant developments and the
way forward. There are indeed many diverging views
on that file, and it is our hope that the meeting will
go a long way in finding common ground and making
meaningful progress.
In conclusion, I reiterate Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines’ well-established principled position that
the use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and
under any circumstance constitutes a reprehensible
violation of international law. Allegations of the use
chemical weapons ought to be given immediate attention,
and investigations should always be comprehensive and
in keeping with international best practices to ensure
that the perpetrators of chemical weapons atrocities are
not allowed to operate with impunity.
We therefore continue to support the mandate of
the OPCW to implement the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention and ensure that chemistry is used
only for peace, progress and prosperity. Furthermore,
we support all efforts to strengthen the organization’s
capacity to ensure that the quality of its work remains
of the highest standard.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Clearly, the Syrian regime does not want to
cooperate. What I read in the Director-General’s
monthly report (S/2021/842, annex) is a deliberate
attempt to obstruct the deployment of the teams of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). Syria is not issuing the requested visas, and

21-272879/16

S/PV.8872

The situation in the Middle East

when it does, they are late and piecemeal. The delay
in issuing the visa for the liaison officer has had an
impact on the preparation of the missions planned for
this autumn. That is not acceptable. Syria continues
to act in contradiction to its obligations to the OPCW
Technical Secretariat, which are enshrined in both the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013).
Without the ability to deploy the Declaration
Assessment Team to the field, the Director-General
invited Syria to go to The Hague in October for the
twenty-fifth round of consultations. Syria has not
yet responded.
We call on Syria to provide access to all members
of the Declaration Assessment Team as soon as
possible. We also call on Syria to provide all the
elements and documents requested by the Technical
Secretariat, in accordance with its obligations. We
once again commend the tenacity, professionalism and
independence with which the Technical Secretariat is
carrying out its mission.
The unauthorized movement and destruction of
two chlorine cylinders related to the attacks on Douma
is of great concern. No explanation on that matter
has been provided by the Syrian regime. We again
call on Syria to respond to the questions posed by the
Technical Secretariat.
I would like to recall that the decision taken in
April by the OPCW Conference of the States Parties is
not irreversible. It is up to the Syrian regime to act if
it wants to recover its rights and privileges. Without its
cooperation, the measures taken will remain in force.
In the first place, Syria must finally clarify the 20
outstanding issues related to its initial declaration.
Lastly, the use of these shocking weapons
cannot go unpunished. Evidence continues to be
collected — and it will be used. That is the message
that we are pushing with our partners, including in the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
During the general debate of the General Assembly
in September, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Fayssal
Mekdad, said that his country firmly opposed the use of
10/16

04/10/2021

chemical weapons under any circumstance, by anyone,
anywhere and anytime and that Syria was always
ready to maintain cooperation with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to
resolve outstanding issues. China appreciates Syria’s
reaffirmation of its commitment.
China’s consistent position is that dialogue and
cooperation is the right approach to the issue of Syrian
chemical weapons and that excessive pressure can only
be counterproductive. The Syrian Government and the
Technical Secretariat have different interpretations
for multiple outstanding issues. The two sides should
respect scientific facts, adhere to objectivity and
impartiality, continue discussions, move towards
each other and together strive for an early resolution
of outstanding issues. A successful renewal of the
tripartite agreement among the Syrian Government,
the Technical Secretariat and the United Nations Office
for Project Services has created good conditions for
resolving outstanding issues.
The Syrian Government remains engaged with the
Technical Secretariat on the Declaration Assessment
Team’s twenty-fifth round of consultations, which has
run into difficulties owing to a visa issue. We hope
that the two sides will resolve their differences in a
constructive manner.
I would like to underscore that the establishment
of an Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) goes
beyond the scope of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and runs counter to the OPCW’s tradition of consensus.
Many countries, including China, have expressed
concerns that the working methods and procedures of
the IIT have also failed to meet the requirements of the
Convention and its annex on verification, thereby giving
rise to multiple questions. We hope and the Technical
Secretariat will adhere to its technical nature, uphold
the spirit of impartiality, objectivity and independence
in performing its duty and facilitate a return to the
provisions of the framework of the Convention.
In conclusion, I reiterate that China stands firm in
opposing the use of chemical weapons by any country,
organization or individual under any circumstance or
for any purpose and hopes that our world will soon be
free of all chemical weapons. We urge the countries in
possession of chemical weapons to destroy all chemical
weapons as soon as possible.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I want to thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs for her
21-27287

04/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

detailed and informative briefing today. I would like to
make three points.
First, the Security Council should be united and
firm in upholding the international prohibition against
chemical weapons, while making it clear that the use
of those weapons by anyone, anywhere, at any time
is abhorrent and unacceptable. The Council should
be equally clear and united in its support for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and in rejecting efforts to undermine the
OPCW’s essential role.
Secondly, we remain deeply concerned by Syria’s
lack of progress in addressing the serious and growing
list of issues under its initial declaration. The OPCW
reports make clear a disturbing pattern of visa delays
and denials used to hold up its work on the ground. That
contrasts with the approach of the Technical Secretariat,
which has actively sought to assist Syria, with flexibility
and professionalism, to resolve outstanding issues. We
regret that the Syrian Government has not responded in
a positive way to that constructive approach.
We deeply regret Syria’s decision to refuse a visa
to a member of the Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT), leading to the further postponement of the DAT
deployment, originally planned for May. As the report
makes clear, Syria cannot select experts for missions
on behalf of the Technical Secretariat. The Technical
Secretariat’s invitation to Syria to send a delegation for
a meeting with the DAT later this month in The Hague
is a practical interim step but it cannot replace the
planned deployment on the ground.
That follows substantial visa delays for the command
post officer in Damascus, with implications for DAT
and Fact-Finding Mission deployments. Syria’s actions
regarding visas are contrary to its obligations under
resolution 2118 (2013), paragraph 7, to accept “personnel
designated by the OPCW or the United Nations” and
to provide “immediate and unfettered access”. We call
upon Syria to urgently address that matter.
Thirdly, the list of areas where the Syrian
authorities have yet to provide credible information
requested by the OPCW continues to grow. Those
include mis-declared chemical-weapon production
facilities; Schedule 2 chemicals from Barzah; samples
of a “neat chemical warfare agent” from large-volume
storage containers; and chlorine canisters, forming part
of the evidence from the 2018 Douma chemical-weapon
attack, moved without informing the OPCW.

S/PV. 8872

Syria must engage seriously with the OPCW. We
hope that the arrangements for the bilateral meeting
between Director-General Arias and Minister
Mekdad can be finalized soon. We encourage Syria to
engage with Director-General Arias in order to break
the impasse.
It is only through Syria’s real and meaningful
cooperation with the OPCW that we can resolve the
outstanding issues, gain assurance that its entire
stocks of chemical weapons are declared and verifiably
destroyed, in line with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013), and
close this file. That is surely in the interest of Syria, as
much as in that of the international community.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by joining
other speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her update. We also welcome
the presence of the representatives of Syria and Turkey
at today’s meeting.
We have taken note of the contents of the most
recent, ninety-sixth, monthly report (S/2021/842,
annex) of the Director-General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We
also note the submission by the Syrian Arab Republic
on 16 September of its ninety-fourth monthly report,
detailing the activities undertaken to implement its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC).
It is important that the visit of the Declaration
Assessment Team to Syria take place soon. We have
taken note of the upcoming visit of a Syrian delegation to
The Hague to engage with the Declaration Assessment
Team. We hope that both the OPCW and Syria will
resolve the relevant issues expeditiously.
The Chemical Weapons Convention is a unique,
non-discriminatory disarmament instrument for the
elimination of an entire category of weapons of mass
destruction. We attach high importance to the CWC
and stand for its full, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation. We support the collective efforts by
all to ensure that the credibility and integrity of the
Convention is maintained to the fullest.
India is against the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under any
circumstance. India has consistently maintained that
any investigation into the use of chemical weapons must

21-2728711/16

S/PV.8872

The situation in the Middle East

be impartial, credible and objective, while scrupulously
following the provisions and procedure embedded in the
Convention and in conformity with the delicate balance
of power and responsibility enshrined in it to establish
the facts and reach evidence-based conclusions.
As a member of the Security Council, India
has repeatedly cautioned against the possibility of
terrorist entities and individuals gaining access to
chemical weapons, including in the region. The most
recent report of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (see
S/2021/419) also referred to the repeated deployments
of chemical weapons by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant against civilian populations between 2014
and 2016. That is a cause for serious concern and needs
to be acted upon.
Lastly, we believe that technical issues such as
Syria’s chemical weapons file need to be dealt with in
an objective manner. Progress on those matters could
potentially help the political track positively.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative Nakamitsu for her
briefing. I would also like to welcome the participation
of the representatives of Syria and Turkey at
today’s meeting.
We take note of the ninety-sixth monthly report
(S/2021/842, annex) of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). Recognizing that there was little progress
during the reporting period, we note the continued
engagement between the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and Syria, especially between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority, in
addressing the remaining outstanding issues relating to
the initial declaration.
In that regard, my delegation calls for close dialogue
and cooperation in order to strengthen communication
and address all outstanding issues in order to facilitate
the OPCW’s work and Syria’s implementation of the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), including, inter
alia, to agree on all substantial and logistical issues
for the holding of the long-delayed twenty-fifth round
of consultations and the newly proposed in-person
meeting between the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates of Syria and the Director-General of
the OPCW.
12/16

04/10/2021

Constructive
and
non-politicized
technical
consultations between the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and the Syrian authorities are the only way forward
towards resolving all reported “identified gaps,
inconsistencies and discrepancies” and subsequently
putting an end to that protracted issue.
Viet Nam shares the deep concern over the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria. My delegation would
like to reiterate Viet Nam’s unequivocal condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time,
by anyone and under any circumstance. Chemical
weapons are indiscriminate and inhumane and can have
long-term effects on human life and the environment.
We support the cooperation between the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and the States parties to the CWC
in efforts to champion the full implementation of the
Convention. To achieve the goal of ridding the world
of chemical weapons, the work of the OPCW should be
carried out in the most comprehensive, objective and
impartial manner. Those high standards, particularly
in terms of investigations of alleged CWC violations,
would help to establish irrefutable facts and evidence
with a view to ensuring justice and deterring violations.
We are also concerned about the long-standing
divergence in the international community over the
issue of chemical weapons in Syria. We are of the
view that the full implementation of the CWC and
resolution 2118 (2013) can be achieved only when
it is supported by constructive and non-politicized
international cooperation.
To conclude, Viet Nam would like to stress the need
for a comprehensive political settlement of the crisis in
Syria. That is the only path towards peace, stability and
development for the Syrian people.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
May I also start by thanking High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We are disappointed that, despite Security
Council members making clear, month after month,
the importance of resolving the outstanding issues in
Syria’s chemical weapons declaration, the most recent
monthly report (S/2021/842, annex) from the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) again sets out a lack of
substantive progress by Syria.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat has been
attempting to reach agreement on deploying the
21-27287

04/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) to Syria since
April this year. It received no response to its requests
to deploy from May to June and had to postpone the
visit until after the summer. Syria eventually agreed to
the deployment of the DAT this month, but now we are
told that Syria has refused a visa for one of the DAT
members, contrary to its obligations under resolution
2118 (2013) — yet again resulting in the DAT being
unable to deploy. While we welcome the Technical
Secretariat’s efforts nevertheless to advance discussions
on Syria’s declaration by inviting Syria to The Hague,
we regret that the twenty-fifth round of consultations
has been unable to go ahead in full in Syria.
Sadly, this lack of cooperation on the part of Syria
is not an exception. For example, the OPCW continues
to wait for answers with regard to the Schedule 2
chemical found at the Barzah facilities of the Scientific
Studies and Research Centre in November 2018. It
continues to wait for answers to questions regarding
the unauthorized movement and destruction of
cylinders relating to the high-profile 2018 Douma
chlorine attack. And the OPCW Executive Council and
the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention continue to wait for compliance
with the measures in the Executive Council’s decision
of 9 July 2020, imposed following the findings of the
Investigation and Identification Team that chemical
weapons were used by Syria in Ltamenah in 2017.
It is often alleged by Syria that we and other
countries are using the chemical weapons file to
punish them, but let me assure you, Mr President, that
the United Kingdom would like nothing more than to
receive a monthly report from the Director-General
confirming that all declaration issues have been
resolved and that Syria’s chemical weapons programme
has been verifiably destroyed. We therefore call on Syria
to take the process seriously and take expeditious steps
towards meeting in full its obligations under resolution
2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I am grateful for the briefing
by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, and I welcome the presence of
the delegations of Syria and Turkey at this meeting.
We begin by reiterating our unequivocal
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons by
anyone, at any time and under any circumstance.

S/PV. 8872

We are concerned by the lack of progress in the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). With regard
to the twenty-fifth round of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), we call
for the expeditious and unconditional granting of visas
for all — I repeat, all — members of the Declaration
Assessment Team. Any delay will affect both Syria’s
compliance with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention as well as on carrying out the work
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. We hope that those discussions, when they
take place, will be constructive, and we urge the Syrian
delegation to engage in a constructive and committed
manner to clarify any discrepancies.
While a visit by a Syrian delegation to OPCW
headquarters in The Hague will be a step in the right
direction, it must be underscored that such discussions
cannot take the place of the on-site inspections that
OPCW teams are required to conduct on Syrian
territory. With regard to the pending visits to the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies
and Research Centre, we urge the country’s authorities
to allow for the deployment and facilitate the tasks of
the OPCW experts.
Concerning the attack that led to the destruction
of the cylinders related to the Douma incident, my
country condemns violations of Syrian airspace, but it
also demands clarification vis-à -vis the unauthorized
movement of the cylinders and their remnants, as well
as the chain of custody of the evidence.
In conclusion, I reiterate that, while Mexico values
these meetings, which continue to be an exercise in
transparency, we also believe that it is important to
explore new forms of direct interaction between the
Security Council and OPCW experts, with a view to
delving deeper into the data needed to assess the matter
before us.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.
I thank Mrs.Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I welcome the representatives of the Syrian Arab
Republic and Turkey to this meeting.
Kenya takes note of the ninety-sixth monthly report
of the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2021/842,

21-2728713/16

S/PV.8872

The situation in the Middle East

annex) and the submission by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic of its report.
As a State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, Kenya has made its position clear. The use
of chemical weapons anywhere by anyone constitutes
a grave violation of international law and cannot
be justified under any circumstance. We repeat our
support for the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons as the technically
competent international authority in its area of work.
We continue to encourage cooperation and engagement
in better faith between the Syrian Arab Republic
and the OPCW Technical Secretariat regarding the
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved.
Kenya remains convinced that there can be no
military solution to the Syrian conflict. We support
an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process as the only avenue to a sustainable peace. I add
my words to those of Ambassador Abarry in calling
for stronger efforts to close the damaging divisions
on this file. They do not serve the people of Syria and
contribute to sustaining the crisis.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
to thank your predecessor for her efforts last month.
In speaking to the General Assembly on
27 September (see A/76/PV.16), our Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates, Mr. Fayssal Mekdad,
said that the Syrian Arab Republic reiterated once
again that it categorically condemned and rejected any
use of chemical weapons under any circumstance, by
whomever, whenever and wherever. It is for that reason
that Syria voluntarily joined the Chemical Weapons
Convention and met all its obligations in record time.
Syria continues to cooperate with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to close
this dossier as soon as possible.
The statements made by the representatives of
some States today clearly demonstrated that they
continue to turn a deaf ear to the truth. They continue to
politicize this dossier by insisting on levelling baseless
14/16

04/10/2021

accusations and focusing on procedural details, which
should not concern the Security Council. They also
deliberately disregard the serious measures that Syria
has taken and our genuine cooperation with the OPCW.
With regard to the briefing by the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, my delegation
regrets the continued lack of balance and impartiality in
her briefings while ignoring over the past years Syria’s
concerns and the information that it has provided.
On 16 September, Syria submitted its 95th monthly
report on the activities related to the destruction of
chemical weapons and their production facilities. We
also welcomed the meeting to be held between the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates and the
OPCW Director-General in Damascus. The focal points
on both sides are preparing for that meeting.
My country also welcomed the visit of the
Declaration Assessment Team to Damascus to hold the
twenty-fifth round of consultations pursuant to the date
agreed upon by both parties. We granted the necessary
visas to all the members of the Team, with the exception
of one person, after we asked for his replacement. In
that regard, we note that entry visas are granted based
on national and sovereign procedures and instructions
applicable by the Syrian State to all employees of
the United Nations, its agencies and international
organizations, including the OPCW. That measure was
therefore not an exception. Not granting an entry visa
to a member of the Declaration Assessment Team must
not negatively affect the performance of the Team as a
whole. Moreover, the OPCW has several experts and
specialized personnel to replace someone who proved
to be non-objective.
Just for clarification, the Declaration Assessment
Team is not an investigative team. I noticed during
the statements by some colleagues that there is some
confusion. The Declaration Assessment Team is not
an investigative team. It is a Team that should help
the Syrian National Committee in presenting its
declaration. Despite that fact, the Syrian National
Committee accepted a proposal, later submitted by the
Technical Secretariat, to hold the round of consultations
at its headquarters in The Hague. It appears that the
information of my colleague from France needs to
be updated.
The report of the Director-General addressed the
visit of the Declaration Assessment Team. It held Syria
responsible for the Technical Secretariat’s inability
21-27287

04/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

to plan for the missions of its various teams. That is
inaccurate, non-objective and we categorically reject it.
All members recall when the Director-General spoke in
this Chamber in June (see S/PV.8785) about postponing
the Team’s visit until after summer, at a time when
Syria had a genuine interest in accelerating discussions
with the Team and closing the dossier.
Some States continue to raise the issue of the two
cylinders related to the alleged incident in Douma. My
delegation previously clarified to the Security Council
the importance of those two cylinders for Syria as legal
and material evidence to reject the claims related to that
incident and as a proof that terrorist groups possessed
toxic chemicals. My delegation rejects the attempts by
some States to distract attention from condemning the
Israeli aggression against Syria’s sovereignty, which
led to the destruction of the two cylinders. Instead, they
focus only on technical and procedural matters.
Syria and other countries have called for a review
of the report on the alleged incident in Douma. It is
fabricated and full of lies. In that regard, I would
like to refer to the article featured in The Daily Mail
on 5 September in which the British Broadcasting
Corporation admitted that a Radio 4 documentary on
the alleged incident in Douma contained errors and
false allegations. That proves once again that opensource information can be manipulated easily; it
lacks credibility.
The flawed methods of work adopted by the FactFinding Mission when investigating the alleged incident
in Douma were also adopted in its investigation into
other incidents. The Fact-Finding Mission lacked
commitment to the rules outlined in the Chemical
Weapons Convention, including collection of evidence
and samples while preserving the chain of custody.
It relied on open sources and information provided
by terrorist groups and their affiliates, such as the
White Helmets.
My delegation expresses grave concerns about the
delay by the Fact-Finding Mission in announcing the
outcome of its investigation into incidents reported
by the Syrian Government since 2017 on the use of
chemical weapons by terrorist groups. We also express
concern about the fabrication of evidence years after
other alleged incidents took place. Moreover, the FactFinding Mission continues to disregard the information
we provide on terrorist groups that possess chemical

S/PV. 8872

weapons and on preparing to use them and fabricate
incidents and accusations against the Syrian Arab Army.
Some members of the Security Council insist on
politicizing this dossier by doubting Syria’s cooperation.
That has become clear. They attempt to conceal
the practices of terrorist groups that used chemical
weapons against Syrian citizens and the Syrian Arab
Army. That has also become very clear. They are
misinterpreting the text of the Convention’s to establish
illegitimate mechanisms and adopt a resolution against
Syria. That sets a dangerous precedent in the work of
the organization.
In that regard, I would like to remind the
representative of the United States, who demonstrated
his excellent mathematical skills, that 167 States
participated in the Conference of the Parties in April.
Therefore, the 87 countries that supported the resolution
represent almost half the number of countries that took
part in the Conference. The United States colleague
disregarded the fact that 34 countries abstained in the
voting and that 31 countries were not present, while 15
countries voted against the resolution. Hence the other
half of the countries that took part in the Conference
did not vote in favour of the resolution. That is just an
example of how the United States distorts information.
I would like to underscore that the Syrian Arab
Republic is not trying to jeopardize the work of the
OPCW. Rather, we are defending its professionalism
and objectivity. We reject the attempts by some States
to use the organization as a tool to achieve their
objectives against Syria. If those States do not change
their destructive behaviour and disruptive agendas
against my country, we will be unable to have objective
discussions on this dossier and bring it to an objective
and professional conclusion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Kenya’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for October.
I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
The non-compliance of the Syrian regime vis-à-vis
its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
has continued unabated. We reviewed with great
concern the ninety-sixth monthly report (S/2021/842,
annex) of the Director-General of the Organization

21-2728715/16

S/PV.8872

The situation in the Middle East

for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
The identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
in the Syrian regime’s chemical weapons declaration
persist. Therefore, the OPCW still cannot confirm
that the declaration is accurate and complete. The
regime consistently fails to respond to the information
requests made by the OPCW Technical Secretariat
regarding a number of outstanding issues in relation to
its declaration. The recent discovery of an undeclared
chemical-weapons production facility continues to be
a matter of grave concern. Yet again, the regime fails
to declare the chemical warfare agents produced and/or
weaponized at that site, in violation of its obligations.
The previous monthly report (S/2021/764, annex)
of the OPCW revealed that the Al-Assad regime had
moved two chlorine cylinders related to the Douma
chemical attack without prior notification or approval
by the Technical Secretariat. Moreover, the regime
refuses to grant visas to OPCW officials, deliberately
hindering the discharge of their mandated activities.
In accordance with resolution 2118 (2013), the
Syrian regime has the obligation to provide immediate
and unfettered access to personnel designated by
the OPCW. Let me be clear: that is not a simple
procedural issue, but rather part of a broader pattern of
non-compliance by the regime. It is high time that the
members of the Security Council put their differences
aside and enforced the Council’s own resolution 2118
(2013).
Turkey supports the efforts within the OPCW
to bring the regime to compliance. We co-sponsored
the Executive Council decision of July 2020 and the

16/16

04/10/2021

decision adopted during the second part of the twentyfifth Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, held in April. It is important
that those decisions, which are supported by the
overwhelming majority of States parties, are worth
more than the paper they are printed on.
The Council, as the organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
must uphold the authority of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. That is not a choice; it is a responsibility.
Turkey strongly condemns the repeated use of
chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime against its
own people. To date, the regime’s responsibility in at
least eight heinous chemical-weapon attacks has been
established in the reports of the investigative bodies
mandated by the United Nations and the OPCW.
The regime must be compelled to cooperate with the
Declaration Assessment Team, the Investigation and
Identification Team and the Fact-Finding Mission. In
that context, we reiterate our support for the objective,
impartial and professional work of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and its investigative bodies.
There is an urgent need to ensure full accountability
for the Al-Assad regime’s war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The onus is upon all of us to take immediate
and decisive steps to end impunity in Syria. That legal,
historical and ethical responsibility belongs to us all,
but especially to those emboldening the regime on its
current course.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

21-27287
