UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR

_45_7th_ME_BT_ING_:_17D_EC_EM_BE_R_1949
457eme SEANCE: 17 DECEMBRE 1949

CONSEIL DE. SECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OfFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCC:B3S, NEW YORK .

No. 53

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Four hundred and fifty-seventh meeting

Quatre cent cinquante-sepneme seance

1. Provisional agenda
2. AdQption of the agenda ............•.
3. The Iridia-Pakistan question

PagB

Pag'$

1
1
-1

1. Ordre du jour provisoire .••...••...•.
1
2. Adoption de IJordre du jour....
I
3. La question lnde-Pakistan ............• I

Reievant· documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings of the
Security Council are .published in monthly supplements to the Ofjicial Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
combined with figures. M entionof such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso clans le texte
des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements mensuels aux
Proces-verbaux ofjiciels.
Les documents des Nations Unies portent tous une cote, qui se compose de
lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie
qu'il s'agit d'un document lies Nations Unies.

I

J

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OD'IaELS
No.53
>

FOURTHYEAR

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 53

FOUR HUNDRED' AND FIFTYSEVENTH MEETING

QUATRE CENT CINQUANTESEPTIEME SEANCE

Held a.t Lake Su,ccess) New York,
on Satttrday, 17 December 1949, at 11a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le sgmedi 17 decemb1'e 1949, a 11 heures.

President: General McNAUGHTON (Canada).

President: le general McNAUGHTON (Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande
du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (SjAgenda 457)

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
(SjAgenda 457)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The India-Pakistan Question:
(a:) Letter dated 5 December 1949 from the
Chairman of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan addressed
to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations transmitting the Commission's
third interim report (S/1430, Sj1430j
Add.l, and Sj1430jAdd:2).

1. Adoption de I'ordre du jour.
2. Question Inde-Pakistan:
a) Lettre, en date du 5 decembre 1949, adressee au Secretaire general des Nations
Unies par le President de la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le
Pakistan pour lui presenter le troisieme
rapport, provisoire de la Commission
(Sj1430, S/1430jAdd.l et Sj1430j
Add.2).

2. Adoption of the agenda

2. Adoption de l'o~dre .Iu jour

The PRESIDENT: At the suggestion of the
Secretariat, I should like to make one small
alteration in the provisional agenda: to delete the
word "and" in the last line of paragraph 2 (a)
and to add, at the end of that line, the words
"and S j1430jAdd.3".

Le PRESIDENT (traduit, de l'a1zglais): Sur le
conseil du Secretariat, je pro~,ose d'apporter une
lI~gere modification a I'ordre du jour provisoire,
i savoir, de supprimer le mot "et" clans la derniere ligne du para'; :lphe 2 a et d'ajouter a la
suite decette ligne ics mots "et Sj1430jAdd.3".

The agenda was adopted as amended.

L'ordre dtt jo,ur ainsi amende est adopte.

3. The India-Pakistan question

3. I"a question Inde-Pakistan

• On the invitation of the President, Sir Benegal
N. Rau, representative of India) and Sir Mohammad Zafrullah Khan) representative of Pakistan, took their places at the Security C01tncil
table.

Sur l'invitation dtt Pr~sident, Sir BenegCll
N. Rau) representant de l'Inde,et Sir M ohammad
Z«frulla Khan, representant dzt Pakistan, pren~
nent place a la table du Conseil de secttrite.

The PRESIDEN1:: On behalf of the Security
Council, I should like to welcome the members
of the United Nations Commission for India and
Pakistan.

Le PRESIDENT (trad'uit de l'anglcds) : Au noni
du Conseil de securite, je tiens. a souhaiter la
bienvenue aux membres de la Commission des
N ~tions Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan.

-'1 a

Ill! b Cm

T

,~~

'_'

.•_.•• ,

On the invitatiarn of the President, .Mr. Samper,
Chait'man of the U1zited Nati011s Commission for
Ind·ia and Pakistan, took his place at the &curity
COl~ndl table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Samper,
President d~ la. Conl1nlssion des Nations Unies
pour l'brde et le Pakistan, prend place a la table
du Consail de sCcf~rit~.

The PRESIDENT: As agreed on 13 December

Le PRESIDENT (tradttit de Z'anglais): Comme
il a ete convenu iors de notre seance precedente
[456eme SI-lance], le 13 decembre dernier, nous
aurons recours a l'interpretation simultanee pour
toutes les declarations emanant de membres du
COIlseil' ou d'autres. representants, et nous ne
ferons appel
l'interpretation consecutive que
lorsqu'il s'agira de questions de procedure ou
d'un vote sur tout projet de resolution qui viendrait a etre prolY'se au Conseil.

[456th meeting], we shall employ simult\fueous
interpretation for all statements made either by
members of the Council or by other representatives, and shall use consecutive interpretation
only for procedural matters and when we come
to a vote on any draft resolution which may be
submitted to the Council.

a

M. SAMPER (President de la Commission des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et ie Pakistan)
(tt'aduit de l'anglais): Je sui5 tres honore de
representer au Conseil de securite la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan, et
je tiens a remercier le Conseil, au nom de la
Commission, de l'accueil qu'il nous a reserve.
Le CO!:lseil de securite n'a pas oublie que,
lorsqu'n a accueilli la Commission a Paris, en
novembre 1948 [382eme seance], les Gouvernements de nnde et du Pakistan avaient entrepris
des pourparlers pour essayer d'aboutir a un
accord sur les principes qui devaient regir un
pll~biscite libre et impartial dans l'Etat de J ammu
et Cachemire; it se rappelle aussi que, par la
su~te. les resultats de ces pourparlers ont ete
consignes dans la resolution de la Commission
en date du 5 janvier 1949 [S/1196, paragrctphe
15].
Le Conseil n'ignore pas que les Gouvernements
The Security Cotmcil is aware that the Governments of India and Pakistan, on their own initia- de l'Inde et du Pakistan ont, de leur propre
tive and before the Commission had reached the . initiative, et avant mfune le retour de la CommisSub-Continent again, made the cease-fire order siDn sur ·les lieux, execute, des le 1er janvier
effective as of 1 January 1949. The Commission 1949, l'ordi"e de cesser le feu. La Commission est
is pleased to report that the high· commands of hel1reuse de signaler que les ha' Lts commandethe Indian and Pakistan Armies made every ments des armees de I'Inde et du Pakistan n'ont
effort to avoid ;ncidents and violations of the rien neglige pour eviter les incidents et les violacease-fire during th~ very diffi~:ult time when no tions de la suspension d'armes pendant la periode
line as such existed, and that it was due largely ;:res difficile ou il n'existait pas encore de ligne
t.o their attitude of conciliation and understand- de demarcation; eUe a egalement plaisir a souliing that the military conference in Karachi in gner que c'est surtout grace a l'attitude conciliante
July of this year .led to the agreement on a line. et comprehensive de ces hauts commandements
The task of demar~ating the line was achieved que la conference militaire qui s'est tenue a
thtough the assh;tance of United Nations military Karachi au mois de juillet de cette annee a pu
observers under the Commission's military ad- aboutir a un accord sur le trace d'c.me ligne de
vis(~r. The immediate and vital objective of the demarcation. Le travail de demarcation propreSet~l1rity Council-,-namely, the cessation of hos- ment dit a ete effectue, sur le terrain, avec l'aide
tilities in the State of Jammu and Kashmir-has des observateurs militaires des Nations Untes et
tnlllS not only peen achieved, but ensured, through sous la haute direction du conseiller militaire de
the co-operation and the good will Of the two la Commission. Ainsi, non seulemerit l'objectif
Governments.
immediat et essentiel du Conseil de securite - it
savoir, la ces~ation des hostiliteR dans I'Etat de
Jammu et Cachemire - a ete atteint, mais encore
la stabilite de l'etat de choses actuel est garantie
par la comprehension et la bonne volonte des
deux gouvernements interesses.
. The Commission, unfortunately, cannot ~!lform
La Commission n'est malheureusement pas a
the Security Council that substantial progress has J~.;f'!:; d'annoncer au Conseil de securite que des
heen made in the implementation of t!;te succeed- ul."O",res l' ~ables aient ete realises dans la mise en
Jug parts of the Commission's resolutions of 11 ;.: ·1.V"'.' des autres parties des resolutions de la
August 1948 [S/1100,[Jc.ra;graph75]and 5 Jan- (.smmissicl11dti 13 a6itt 1948 [S/1100, para[jrapJie- . uary 1949. After eight months of negotiations, 7.:7] et du 5 j~nvier 1949, Apres huitmois. de
. the Commission has deemed it advisable, having fJ.(~gociations, 'la Commission, consciente qa'il
in mind the import~nce of continuing an active importe de ne pas cesser de faire d'actifs efforts
1riOV~l1~t. towards a solution of the· problem, to pour resoudre le probleme, croit ,devoir renvoyer
, refer the matter back to the Security-Council. la question au Conseil Qe securite. Elle estime,
WebeHeve, thut the pa.entbody will 1110rl.l easily en effet, que cet organe superieur trouvera·. plus

Mr. SAMPER (Chairman of the United Nations
Commission for India and Pakistan): I am
honoured to represent the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan before the
Security Council and, on behalf of the Commi&sion, I wish to express our appreciation for the
Council's reception.
The members of the Security Council will
recall that, when the Council received the Commission in Paris in November 1948 [38200 meet••ing], conversations were underway looking
towards an a "eement between the Governments
of India and .t:'akistan on the principles relating
to a free and impartial plebiscite in the State of
Jammu and Kashmir, and that the result of these
conversations was subsequently embodied in the
Commissi9-tJ.'s resolution of 5 Ja11ua1"Y 1949
[S/1196, 'paragraph 15].

,~

.....
find means for making the adjustments and
modifications which today have become necessary
for the execution of the commitments and agreements entered into by the two Governments.

facilement qu'elle-meme le moyen de proceder aux
mises au point et aux modifications qui s'averent
necessaires aujoUl:'u'hui pour permettre aux deux
gouvernements interesses d'observt:r les engagements qu'ils ont pris et les accords qu'Hs ont
conc1us.

The Commission's thir' interim report [S/1430

Voila plusieurs jOllrs que les membres d!l
Conseil de securite ont en mains le troisieme
members of the Security Council for several rapport provisoire de la Commission [S/1430.
days now, and I do not believe it will be necessary' S/1430jAdd.l et S/1430/Add.2] et je crois qu'il
to take up the time of the Council by going into est inutile d'abuser du temps du Conseil en me
a lengthy expose of its contents. Membfors of lan~ant dans un expose detaille du contenu de ce
the Council are aware that, throughout eight rapport. Le Conseil sait que, pendant huit mois,
months, the Commission endeavoured to mediate la Commission s'est efforcee d'ecarter les obstacles
the differences which existed in the way of imple- qm s'oPP'osaient a la mise en ceuvre de la partie II
menting part II of the first resolution dealing de la premiere resolution relative a la treve, qui
with the truce and principally concerned with the traitait principalement du retrait des troupes
withdrawal of troops [S/1100, paragraph 75]. ISjll0q, paragraphe 75]. La Commission est
The Commission maintained direct contact with demeuree en contact direct avec chacun des deux
the two Governments individually in New Delhi gouvernements, ce1ui de New-Delhi et celui de
and in Karachi. It instituted sub-committees. It Karachi. Elle a cree des sous-commissions. Elle
drafted truce terms of its own, which were pre- a elabore elle-meme des couditiovs de treve qU'elle
sented to the two Governments and which, in a soumises aux deux gouvernements et qu'elle a
the light of the response of the two Governments, ensuite modifiees, en tenant compte des reponses
were modified in so far as this was possible, keep- de ces deux gouvernements, dans la mesure ou
ing in mind the fram~work and' the principles c~la etait possible sans perdre de vue les idees
which were our guides. The Commission also dlrectrices et les principes dont elle devaits'inssuggested a joint political meeting with the two pirer. La Commission a egalement propose aux
Governments for the purpose of reachingagl'~e- deux gouvernements de se reunir avec elle en
ment on the truce i this meeting was subsequently conference politique commune, en vue d'es!;ayer
cancelled by the Commission.· Finally, in a last d'aboutir a U.~l accord sur la treve; la Commission
endeavour, the Commission asked the two Gov- a dti cependant, par la suite, renoncer a cette
ernments if they would be willing to submit to reunion. Enfin, dans un derniet effort, la Comarbitration the differences arising behveen them mission a demande att.-..:deux gouvemements s'ils
.as regards the implementation of part II of the accepteraient de soumettre a l'arbitrage les divergences de vues qui les separent quant a la mise
resolution of 13 AUgi.tst 1948.
en ceuvre de la name II de la resolution du
13 aotit 1948.
~
atld S /1430 j Add.1 and Add.2] has been before

The third interim report endeavours to set
Dans son troisieme rapport provisoire, la
forth objectively, impartially and comprehensivel}" Commission s'efforce d'exposer avec objectivite
the reasons for the unsuccessful outcome of the et impartialite, et de fa<;on tres detaillee, les
negotiations, which cover the period from Feb- raisons pour lesquelles les negociations qui se
rua.ry to September 1949. It has been the· Com- sont poursuivies de fevrier a septembre 1949
mission's intention to show how the strict letter n'ont pas abouti. La Commission a entendu
of previous commitments has become more and montrel", d'une part, comment l'observation stricte
more rigid in a changing and dynamic situation,· et a la lettre d'engagements anterieurs fait de
and. how questions which, in the light oiwe plus en plus obstacle a un accord, alol's Que la
over-all problem and of the objective pursued situation est en evolution constante; d'au~re part,
by the two Governments and by the United comment des questions qui - si 1'6n considere
Nations in the dispute, might be considered as of l'ensemble du probleme et le but auquel aspirent,
lesser importance have, in fact, impeded positive dans ce differend, les deux gouvernements et
action on the part of the two Governments, in -l'Organisation des Nations Unies - sont d'imporspite of their desire to proceed to a settlement. tance secondaire, ont, en fait, contrarie toute
action positive de la part des deux gouvernements,
malgre le desir de ceux-ci d'aboutir a un
reglement.
The facts of the ca.s~e are clear. The main
Les faits sont nettement 61:ablis. Les questions
issues stand well defined. The Commission be- essentielles sont bien definies. La Commission
lieves that three of these issues are the most estime que les trois questions lesplus importantes
import~nt:first, the withdrawal of troops from sont les suivantes.:.premierement, leretrait des
~he State, which is essential for the creation of ~roupes de l'Etat.condition indisnensable
conditions for a free and impartial plebiscite; l'org~isation d'uu",plebiscite libre ef impartial;
secondly, and closely linked, the disposal of deuxlemement, la question du .sort des forces
the. Azad Kashmir forces in the western part of Cachemire Az,;J qui se trouventdans la zone
the State of Jammu and Kashmir; and thirdly, occidel?"ale de l'Etat de Jammuet Cachemire
the administration and. defence of the northern question etroitement liee la .precedente ;. enfin:
areas of the State.
t~oisiemement, ·l'administration et la de£ense des
regions septentrionales· de l'Etat.
With this information at hand, gathered from
Nous esperonsque les observati0nsqui ont ete
the past experience of the Commission it is our inspirees a la COn'Unission pat l'~xPerienc~per­
hOJ:e that fu.tpre action under the auspices of the mettront des mesuresttltei'ieures, SOl1S les auspic~s
Untted Natmne and with the co-operation of de l'Organisatiou des Nations Unies et avec ·ia

a

a

•

In9,ia and Pakistan may be facilitated. Should
this prove to be the case, the Commission will
then have served an important and useful purp,ose in furthering the solution of this dispute.
In .the condusions of the report, the Commission has described the spirit which animated it
in drafting that report. It also has expressed the
belief that the present pattern, as it stands, is outmoded and unsuited in respect of questions of
timing and method, and that this pattern should
be made freer and more all1ple for mediation to
'be effective. The Commission is of the opinion
that a single individual can i"10W more expeditiously undertake what might be termed the
third phase of the Kashmir dispute. It has so
recommended to the Security Council and hopes
that consultations with the representatives of
India and Pakistan will take place to this end.
I have the privilege formally to present for
consideration of members of the Security
Council the third interim report of the United
Nations Cpmmission for India and Pakistan. The
report was prepared in Geneva and was signed
there by four of the ·five members: the repre, sentatives of Argentina, Belgium, Colombia and
• the United States of .l\l11erica. The representative
of Czechoslovakia reserved his position at the
time of discussion of the report until a later date.
At a meeting of the Commission held yesterday
afternoon at Lake Success, the representative' of
Czechoslovakia presented his delegation's minority
views [S/1430jAdd.3].
Before concluding these brief remarks, may I
express the Commission's gratitude to the Governments of India and Pakistan for the courtesy, consideration and warm hospitality which they have
extended to the Commission during its stay on
the Sub-Continent. We are convinced that both
Governments wish to find a peaceful and a final
solution of this dispute and that it is the intention
of the Governments of India and Pakistan to continue to co-operate with the United Natiol1s for
this purpose.
th~

The Commission and its Rapporteur, the Belgian representative, of course remain' at the dis.posal of the Security Council and its President.
Mr. SUNDE (Norway) : First of all, I should
like to compliment Mr. Samper on his lucid exposition of the work of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan. His statement
well supplements the Commission's excellent report
of 5 December. I believe that I repres~Ilt the
general feeling of the Security Council when I
praise the COlIllPission f01'it5 repor.:. It is succinct,
yet complete and comprehensive, and testifies
clearly to the unwavering effort of the Commission
to· carry out its difficult and pressing task in a
spirit: of fairness and impartiality which does
credit not only to the Commission itself but also
to the United Nations.

Nevertheless, the nlost important part of the
Kashmir problem stml'emains unsolved. Let us
not, however" forget the very i"ea! progress that
has be.en achieved by· tb~ COttID:;i;ssion. There is
, no more fighting., -A· !:eas(~-tlje line has been
drawn\andagreed to 1.y the {:'P~Oll-ing partie~.

collaboration de l'Inde et du Pakistan. S'il en
est ainsi, la Commission aura un role important
et utile dans la sohldon de ce differend.
Dans ses conclusions, la Commission a e..",pose
dans quel esprit elle a redige son rapport. Elle a
egalement ex.prime la conviction que son mandat,
tel qtt'il se presente actucllement, est perime et
trop etroit en ce qui concerne la question des
delais impartis et celle des methodes, et qu'il
conviellt de l'elargir si 1'0n veut que la mediation
soit couronnee de succes. La Commission estime
qll'une personnalite isolee serait mieux a. meme
qu'elle de s'attaquer a. ce que 1'0n pourrait appeler
la troisieme phase du differend relatif au
Cachemire. Elle a fait des. recommandRtions dans
ce sens au Conseil de securite et espere que
celui-ci procedera a cet effet a. des consultations
avec les representants de l'Inde et du Pakistan.
J'ai I'honneur de soumettre officiellement a
l'ex.amen du Conseil de securite le troisieme
rapport provisoire de la Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan. Ce rapport a ete
prepare a Geneve et y a ete signe par quatre
des cinq membres de la Commission, a savoir
les representcl.tlts de I'Argentine, de la Belgique,
de la Colombie et des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Lors de la discussion du rapport, le representant
d~ la Tchecoslovaquie a provisoirement reserve
son attitude. A la reunion que la Commission a
tenue hier apres-midi a Lake Success, ce representant a expose le point- de vue minoritaire de
sa delegation [Sj1430jAdd.3].
Avant de terminer ce bref expose.. je me
permets d'assurer les Gouvernements de l'Inde et
du Pakistan de la reconnaissance de la Commission pour la courtoisie dont ces gouvernements
ont faitpreuve envers dIe durant son sejour dans
la sous-continent, ainsi que pour les egards dont
elle y a ete 1'0bjet et I'hospitalite qu'elle y a re~ue.
N ous sommes persuades que ces gouvernements
tiennent tous deux. it aboutir a une solution
pacifique et definitive du diffcrend aetuel et qu'ils
ont l'intention de continueI' it collaborer, it cette
fin, avec I'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Bien entendu, I.aCommission et son Rapporteur,
le representant de la Belgique, se tiennent a
I'entiere disposition du Con::;cil de securite et de
son President.
M. SUNDE (Norvege) (traduit de l'anglais):
Tout d'abord, je tiens a feliciter M. Samper de
l'expose lucide qu'il vient de faire de l'activite
de la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde
et le Pakistan. Sa declaration complete de la
maniere la plus heureuse l'excellent r~pport de la
Commission en date du 5 decembre 1949. Je
crois tradurre les sentiments du Conseil de securite en faisant l"eloge du rapport. de la Commission. I1 est succinct et cependant complet et
temoigne clairement de l'effort incessant qu'a
deploye la Commission en vue des'acquitter de
sa tache ardue et urgente clans un esprit d'equite
et d'impartialite qui fait honneur, non s~ulement
it la Commission elle-meme, mais· aussi a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Neanmoins, l'essentiel. de ia question du
Cachemire reste sans. solution. N'oubIions pas,
cependant, les progres tangibles .realises •par la
C'>mmission. Lescombats ont cesse. U lle ligne de
demarcation a ete traceeet acceptee par les deux
parties en presence. -Cela, ensoi, n'est deja pas

.....

--~--------------------

This is no small achievement in itself, and it is
all the more encouraging because it strengthens
our confidence that the parties which are facing
each other across this pre.,·'lrious line want peace,
as do all the rest of us, and that they are ready
to explore together all avenues by which that peace
can be attained.

negligeable, et ce resultat est d'autant plus encourageant qu'il vient fortifier notre conviction que
les parties qui s'~ffrontent de part et d'autre de
cette ligne pr(-l .re desirent la paix -comme nous
la desirons tous, et Qu'elles sont pretes a. rechercher conjointement tous les moyens qui pourraient
permettre d'aboutir a cette paix.

It serves no purpose.. however, to close our eyes
to the fact that an impasse has been reached on
the main avenue along which the mediation effort
of the United Nations has so fal progressed.
It seems to me that the time has come to stop
and take new bearings, and I am wondering
whether some new te~hnique or approach might
110t be. found by which the need and earnest desire
of the parties for a solution could be translated
into the final agreement for ,vhich we are all
hoping. I frankly doubt the utility of threshing
out again in the Security Council the manifold
and complex issues which are at stake in this
case. Tentative suggestions swiftly become unalterable opinions when they are expressed in
this Council, and arguments advanced in the heat
of discussion have a tendency to become vested
\vith the habiliments of national prestige. Such
a discussion might yet become necessary. But
would it not be better first to explore another
approach, another avenue, or-let me Sfty frankly
-a short cut?

Il ne servirait a rien, toutefois, de pretendre
ignorer que la route dans laquelle I'Organisation
des Nations Unies s'etait engagee, avec l'espoir
de voir aboutir son effort de mediation, s'est
reveIee sans issue. Il me semble Que n~eure est
venue de notlS arreter pour faire -le point de la
situation; je me demande s'il ne serait pas possible
de trouver quelque nouvelle technique, d'aborcler
le probleme sous un angle nouveau qui permettrait
de repondre a. la necessite d'une solution et aux
vceux- ardents des parties en presence, e!1 les
concretisant dans l'accord definitif espere de taus.
Je doute sincerement Qu'il soit utile de ressasser
a. nouveau au ConseiC de securite les questions
multiples et complcpces qui sont en jeu en l'occurrence. De simples suggestions, lorsqu'elles sont
presentees au Conseil de securite, deviennent
rapidement des opinions fermement ancrees, et
les arguments exposes dans la chaleur de la
discussion ont tendance a. se parer trop vite de
tous les attributs du prestige national. Peut-etre,
neanmoins, une discussion de ce genre se revelerat-elle ulterieurement necessaire. Mais ne vaudraitil pas mieux commencer par exolorer d'autres
possibilites, d'autres voies, ou, s'11 m'est permis
de m'exprimer franchement, un raccourci?

Vie have this 1110nth as our President the repreNous avons ce mois-ci pour President le repre.sentative of a country which is closely related .sentant d'un pays etroitement lie aux deux parties
to both the parti<::s by ihe ties of friendship and par les sentiments d;amitie et l'interet commun
common interest which prevail in the Common- qui unissent les pays du Commonwealth. Notre
wealth of Nations. Our President possesses also President possede egalement, a. un haut degre,
to an eminent degre.e the authority, as well as the i'autorite, l'impartialite et la largeur d'esprit si
broad-minded impartiality so necessary for the necessaires pour condlier des points de vue
reconciliation of opposing points of view. It is opposes. J e propose done Que le President ait
my suggestion, therefore, that the President des entretiens officieux avec les representants des
should meet informally with the two parties and deux parties et examine avec eux la possibilite de
e..'Camine with them the possibility of finding a rechercher, dans cette question du Cachemire, une
ffiutuaUy satisfactory basis for dealing with the base de discussion qui soit acceptable pour les
Kashmir problem. This procedure was adopted deu~ parties.. Cette procedure a ete adoptee a.
at various times during the first four months of plusleurs reprIses, au cours des quatre premiers
1948 and led to the Council's resolution of 21 mois de 1948, et a determine la resolution du
Conseil du 21 avril de la meme annee [S/726] .
April of the same year [S/726].
By adopting this suggestion we should also, in
A mOn avis, en adoptant cette proposition, nous
my opinion, take full advantage of the fact that .mettrons pleinement a. profit le fait que le
Pakistan and India are represented at the head- Pakistan et l'Inde sont representes au siege des
quarters of the United Nations by such eminent Nations Unies par des bommes d'Etat et des
statesmen and diplomats as Sir Mohammad Za- diplomates aussi eminents que. Sir MOhall1111a-d'
frulla Khan and Sir Girja Shankar Bajpai, who Zafrulla Khan et Sir Girja ShankarBajpai, qui
have no. superiors and few equals in the art of n'ont point de maitres et peu d'egaux clans l'art
negotiation and conciliation.
de la negoci,ation et de la conciliation. .
. In conclusion, may I say that if my suggestion
adopted we should request ~he President to
r~port .bact.<: to the Security Council for its consld~ratlOn any proposal which might develop
durmg his meetings with the parties.

1S

Pour concIure, permettez-moi d'ajouter que si
ma proposition est adoptee, nous demanderons' au
President de soumettre au Conseil de securite
toute proposition qui pourrait resulter de ses
entretiens avec les deux parties.

Sir A1exander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
Sir Aler ~o.r CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
In the first place I should like to endorse warmly (tmduit de '·;<flais): Je voudraistoutd'abord
what has. been said by the speaker who pre- m'associer chaleureusement a. l'hommage. que
ceded me 111 tribute to the Commission and to its l'orateur qui m'a precede a rendu a la Commissibn
report. It seems to me that the members of the et a son rapport. Il semble que lesmemhres de
<;ommission have done. a very excellent,conscien- la Commission aient accompli un travail excellent,
tlOUS and useful work, of :which we may take consciencieux et extremement utile, .dont nolL,<;
.advantage.
.
I pouvons tirer profit~

~~~~-"~~

6
In the second place, on the matter of procedut'e
which has been raised~ I should like to support
very strongly the suggestion made by the representative of Norway; namely, that the President
:mould forthwith endeavour, in consultation with
the parties, to find a way of achieving the agreement whlch we all seek. It seems to me that that
is a practical and efficient way of working. Both
the parties and everyone seated at the Council
table have complete confidence in the ability and
integrity of the President, and I should hope
that, if he agrees to take that course, and if the
parties, as I am confident they will, also agree to
it, it might lead to excellent results.
As the representative of Norway has pointed
out, that does not derogate in any way from the
powers of the Security Council. It does not
remove the matter in any way from its purview;
it merely prepares the work for it in the most
efficient manner possible. Naturally, every proposal will come back to the Council for submission and final decision. The Council remains
master of the proceedings. But I do think that
the procedure that has been proposed by the representative of Norway would conduce best to a
•' satisfactory and, I should hope, a rapid agreement, and if it is agreed that that procedure
should be tried it will have, I am sure, our
very best wishes for its success.
Mr. CHAUVE~ (France) (translated from
French) : I wish to support whole-heartedly both
the Norwegian and the United Kingdom representative's feelings in regard to the Commission,
its report and its Rapporteur. I also wish to
support-quite as whole-heartedly-the suggestion that the President should himself undertake
to hold conversations with the parties in an endeavour to find means of settling the question. I
am convinced that this would be the procedure
most likely to result in finding and preparing a
settlement, and I am equally, convinced that no
one is better qualified than the President to carry
it out and make the most of the fortunate presence here of the. most highly qualified repl"esen. tatives of the two countries concerned. I therefore support very strongly the suggestion of the
Nox:wegian representative, and hope that the
President will accept it.

En second lieu, en ce qui concerne la question
de procedure qui a ete sou!evee, j'appuie chaleureusement la proposition du representant de la
Norvege tendant a ce que le President s'eftorce
maintenant, e.l procedant a des consultations avec
les parties interessees, de parvenir a l'accord que
nous souhaitons tous. Cette fac;on de proceder
m'apparait pratique et efficace. Les deux parties
au differend, comme tous les membres de: ce
Conseil, ont pleine confiance dans l'habilete et
dans l'integrite du President, et j'espere que, s'i1
accept~ la mission qu'on lui propose, et si les
parties, comme j'en suis convaincu, acceptent
egalement la proposition faite, eUe est susceptibk~
de donner d'exceUents resultats..
Ainsi que le representant de la Norvege l'... fait
observer, cette procedure ne porte aucunement
atteinte aux prerogatives du ConseH. Elle ne
soustrait nuUement la question a. sa juridiction;
e1le ne fait que preparer, de la maniere la plus
efficace possible, la tache du Conseil. Bien
entendu, toute proposition eventueUe devra etre
soumise au Conseil, a qui appartiendra la decision
finale. Le Conseil reste maitre de la conduite de
l'affaire. Mais je reste persuade que la procedure
proposee par le representant de la Norvege est
la meilleure a suivre pour abol,ltir a un accord
satisfaisant et - on peut l'esperer - rapide, et,
si le Conseil decide d'adopter cette procedure,
nous ferons les meilleurs vreux pour son succes.

I . M. CHAUVEL (France): Je tiens a m'associer

tres chaudement aux eloges qui ont ete adresses
a la Commission, a son rapport et a son Rapporteur, tant par le representant de la Norvege que
par le representant du Royaume-Uni. Je tiens
egalement a m'associer - et tres chauden'lent
aussi - a la suggestion qui a ete faite suivant
laqueUe le President se chargerait lui-meme de
mener des conversations avec les parties pour
essayer de degager les elements d'un reglement
de cette affaire. Je suis convaincu que cette procedure est natureUement la plus propre a faciliter
la recherche et l'elaboration d'un reglement et je
suis convaincu egalement que nd n'est plus qualifi6 que le President pour la conduire et pour
tirer le meilleur parti de l'occasion favorable
qu'offre la presence id des representants les pIns
qualifies des deux pays interesses. C'est par
consequent avec beaucoup d'insistance que je
m'associe a la suggestion du repliesentant de la
Norvege. ]'espere que le President voudra bien
l'accepter.

Le PRESIDENT (tradttit de l'anglais): Pour
The PRESIDENT: In response to the suggestion
made by the representative of Norway and sup- repondre a la suggestion dl.! representant de la
ported so graciously by the representatives of the N orvege, appuyee si favorablement par les repreUnited Kingdom and France, I wish to say that sentants du Royaurne-Uni et de la France, jeI am more than happy to place my services at tiens a declarer que je serai heureux de me
the dispo,sal of the Council for the purpose they mettre a la disposition .du Conseil aux fins qui
have indicated,. namely, that with the consent of ont ete definies, a savoir que, avec l'assentiment
the Council I should seek to traverse the ground du ConseH. je m'efforcerai par des contacts perand the information which is available personally I ':J:1 ileh avec les representants de l'Inde et dtt
¥.dth the representatives of India and Pakistan, ~ Pt;;;:;'t:::r2 l:l'explorer le terrain et d'etudier la
.and then to. endeavour to present to this Council I,'. ~.'_.:(.l1.'il'X; cation dont on dispose afin de pouvoir
~ome propos~. which is mutually satisfactory to ,r'o'csp,te" au Conseil une proposition qui soit
thetw? pa~es concerned and which might com- sati:;io.~::>ante pour les deux parties interessees et
qui-puisse, en temps utile, etre recommandee att
mend Itself In due course to the Council.
,
Consei!.
Needless. to say, I feel greatly honoured by
Je n'ai pas besoin d'ajouter que je me sense
the suggestion which has been made and I am tres honore pat la proposition qui a ete faite et
most happy to have this opportunity to serve, que je suis heureux, d'une part, de saisir l'occa~
as I hope I may, the two members of the Common.,. sion qui m'est· offerte de me rendre utile, comme
wealth, India and Pakistan, and also' to be of .je l'espere, a deux metnbres du Commonwealth"

7
service in saving the time of the Security Council
and assisting it in this very important matter
which is before it,
I take it then, that the suggestion of the representative of Norway has been adopted. It merely
remains for me to say that I shall call the
Council t')gether as soon as possible.
Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from R1~$sian): I think
the Secl.<rity Council ought to give a hearing to
the parti<:s. The it7m on our agenda is the
India-PakIstan questton. We have heard today
only a three-minute statement by the Chairman of
the Commission. We should heal' the parties,
acquaint ourselves with the situation at first hand
and only then make a decision on this question
of .procedure, the purpose of which is, in effect,
to find ways and means of settling the dispute.

l'Inde et le Pakistan, et, d'autre part, de pouvoir
faire gagner du temps au Conseil de securite
en l'aidant a parvenir a une solution du probleme
tres important dont il est saisi.
Je considere, par consequent, que la proposition
du representant de la Norvege est adoptee.
J'ajoute seulement que je convoquerai le Conseil
des que possible.
.
M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (trad1tit du russe) : I1 me
semble que le Conseil de securite devrait tout
de meme entendre les representants des parties
interessees. C'est la ouestion Inde-Pakistan qui
figure a l'ordre du jour. Le Conseil n'a entendu
que le President de la Commission qui a fait une
declaration de trois minutes. 11 faudrait donc
entendre les parties elles-memes exposer la situation. C'est alors seulement que le Conseil pourrait
se pronOllcer sur cette question de procedure qui
consiste a trouver des methodes permettant de
regler le differend.
.

Mai:;, a ~'ant de parvenir a cette phase, avant
Befor~ we reach the stage of trying to find
means of settling the dispute between India and de rechercher les methodes propres a regler le
Pakistan. all members of the Council should differend qui a surgi entre I'Inde et le Pakistan,
hear the' parties represented here,' so as to have tous les membfes du Conseil devraient entendre
the necessary grasp of the substance of the ques- les representants des parties, qui assistent aux
tion and not base themselves only on the Com- debats; ensuite, its pourraient examiner cette
mission's report. Only then, I think, shall we question quant au fond, et non pas seulement
be able to consider tll(" question raised here in sur la foi du rapport de la Commission. Cela
connexion with the Norwegian relJresentative's permettrait au Conseil d'ex...miner e:ette question
qui a surgi a la suite de la proposition qu'a falte
proposal.
le representant de la Norvege.
Bien entendu, nous aimerions tous gagner du
Naturally we are all anxious to save time, but
the Security Council should not reduce the time temps; toutefois it ne faut pas que le COllseil
of discussion to nothing at all. I would therefore de securite reduise a neant le temps np.<:essaire a
consider it more appropriate if we heard the la discussion. Je croisdollc qu'il conviend~it
parties before doing anything else. Afterwards d'entendre tout d'abord les representantsdes
we might resume consideration of this procedural parties. Ensuite, le Conseil pourra revenir a.
question. Actually, it is not even a procedural l'e.'<:amen de cette proposition de procedure.
proposal so much as a proposal regarding the D'ailleurs, it ne s'agit pas tant d'une proposition
form which the Council's work should take or the de procedure que d'une proposition pllrtant sur
way in which the Council should approach the' les methodes de travail du Conseil de securite,
problem.
sur la fa~on dont il doit aborder la solution de
ce probleme.
Tels sont les doutes qui me sont venus a l'idee.
Those are the doubts which I have on this
matter.
The .PRESIDENT: I have listened most attenLe PRESIDENT (traduit de l'angla.is): .J'ai
tively to the remarks of the representative of ecoute attentivement les observations du reprethe Soviet Union. I &11ould like to caIl his atten- sentant de l'Union sovietique. Je voudrais tout
tinn, in the first instance. to the fact that the . d'abord attirer son attention sur le fait que j'ai
Chair had already declared the proposal adopted. deja declare la proposition adoptee. Je voudrais
Secondly, I should also like to remind the repre- egalement rappeler au r:epresentant de l'Union
sentative of the Soviet Union that the repre- sovietique que les representants de I'Inde et du
sentatives of India and Pakistan are seated at Pakistan siegent a ce Conseil et qu'ils ont eu
this table and that they had every opportunity toute 0PP0r1:unite de prendre la parole s'ils le
speak if they had so wished. In consequence, T desiraient. En consequence, je considere la
consider the matter is closed, and I now propose question regIee, et je propose maintenant d'ajourto adjourn the meeting.
ner la seance.

,

Mr..TSARAPIUN (Union of Soviet Socialist
RepublIcs) (translated from R1tssimt) : When I
asked to speak, the President had not yet made
any ruling on this question. Thll,!: is my first
pOInt.
Secondly, the point at issue is not only whether
the representatives of the parties wish to speak,
but also whether the members of·the Council wish
to hear thezp.
.
Some members of the Council such as the
representatives of Norway~ France ~nd the United

M. TSARAPKINE (Unian des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Je
tiens a preciser tout d'abord que, lorsque j'ai
demande la parole, le President l" 'avait pas encore
pris de decision.
.
En second Iieu, i1 s'agit, lion seulement .de
savoir si les representants des parties venlent
prendre la parol,;;" :.uais aussisi les' membres du
Conseil desirent les entendre.
Certains membres clu Conseil, notamment les
representants de laNorv~geJ de la France et clu
0

~: stated the~ o~ini:n .:"",:..._R...o...y_::~:~~:!i, ee sont de!~~r~no.~ces aC:!~:ltj~.·,

8

..

the matter. They have expressed the view that
the President himself should negotiate with the
representatives of the parties. However, it would
be desirable for us to hear the parties first and
then decide whether we should adopt such a
method of work as is being proposed by the representative of Norway. On the other hand, that
might prove unnecessary; we Call..l1ot judge that
at this stage.

lIs desireraient aue le President entre lui-meme
en pourparlers avec les representants des parties.
Toutefois, a notre avis, le Conseil devrait en'cendre les parties avant de determiner s'il convient
d'employer les methodes de travail que pteconise
le representant de la Norvege. D'autre part, i1
se peut que cela sait inuti,le; mais cela, nous ne
le saVOl1S pas encore.

I do not know why we have to adopt this
particular method of examining the question, i.e.)
entrust the matter to the President without discussing it in full Council.

Je ne '. ;:;;" pas pourquoi le Conseil adopterait
cette fa<;on particuliere d'examiner la question qui
consistea renvoyer cette derniere, inopinement,
au President, sans que l'ensemhle du Conseil l'ait
etudiee.
-

So far, I have no views on whether the President should be instructed to consult with the
parties and acquaint us with his views later on.
I have formed no opinion on this matter. I cannot form an opinion until \\ -: have discussed the
matter-'---in other words, antil we have heard
the parties. We really cannot adopt such a
decision all at once without hearing the parties.
I feel such a procedure would be most unusual
and perhaps even improper.

Pour l'instant, je n'ai aucune idee precom;ue
quant a la .question de savoir s'ii faut ou non
soumettre ce -orobleme at! President en lui demandant d'entrer en consultations avee les parties
et d'exposer ensuite 1es vues sur la question. Pour
le moment, je n'ai aueun avis a cet egard. C'est
seulement lorsque la discussion aura eu lieu et
que le Conseil aura entendu les parties que je
pourrai me former une opinion. Le Conseil ne
saurait prendre une telle decision a la hate,. sans
avoir entendu les parties. Ce serait, me semble-t-il,
fort insolite et peut-etre meme contraire a la
procedure normale.

The PRESIDENT: I would again remind the
representative of the Soviet Union that the
representatives of the two parties are sitting at
this Council table, and that they have every right
to ask to be permitted to speak at any time they
may wish. I also would remind him t.hat, according to the custom of the Security Council, thE
representatives of the parties will also be present
at our future meetings so that there will be full'
opportunity for them to take part in the debate
on any occasion and to any extent they may wish.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'a.nglais): Je
voudrais rappeler a nouveau au representant de
l'Union sovietique que les representants des deux
parties siegent a ce Conseil et qu'ils ont le droit
de demander it prendre la parole lorsqu'ils le
desirent. Je voudrais egalement lui rappeler que,
conformement aux usages du Conseil de securite,
les representants des parties assisteront egalement
aux seances ulterieures du Conseil et qu'ils auront,
en tot.lte occasion, et dans la mesure ou ils le
desireront, toute latitude pour prendre part aux
debats.
J'interprete les observations du representant de
l'Union sovietique comme une opposition aux
conclusions auxquelles nous avons abouti, et je
crois, par consequent, que la premiere chose a
faire, au lieu d'adopter d'un commun accord la
suggestion du representant de la N orvege, est de
mettre celle-ci aux voix. Nous alIons donc voter
,sur la proposition du representant de la Norvege.

I take it that the remarks of the representative
of the Soviet Union are tantamount to challenging the conclusions which we have reached, and
I think, therefore, that the first step we should
properly take, instead of having the suggestion
which was made to us by the repr:esentative of
Norway adopted hy consent, is to put it to the
vote. Accordingly, we shall now vote on the
suggestion which has been made by the representative of Norway.

A vote was taken by show of ha.nds, as follows:

Il est jl1"ocCd6 at·' vote a main levee.

In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, {Jnited.
States of America.

Votentpour: Argentine, .Canada, Chine, Cuba,
E!:''Ypte, France, Norvege.. Royaume-Uni. de
Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, EtatsUnis d'Amerique.

4bstaining: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.• Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

S'abstienl1ent: Republique socialiste sovietique.
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

The proposal was adopted by9 votes in favour,
with 2 abstentions.

Par 9 voi.1: contre zero, m/ec 2 abstentions, la'
propositio,ft est adoptee.

The. PRESIDENT : T now propose to· adjourn this
meeting of the Council. At the earliest possible
moment; when I have worked out a proposal to
bring before the Council in accordance with the
procedure we have just adopted, I shall call an"'
other meeting.

Le PRESIDENT (t1'adltit de l' angla.is): Je pro"
pose d'ajourner le Conseil, que je convoquerai
des que possible, Iorsque j'aurai prepare, conformement a la i5uggestion du representant de I
Norvege, .une proposition qui sera soumise au
Conseil de securite.

The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

La seance est levee a .11 h. 50.

AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
PERU-PEROU
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Libreriu internacional del Peru
I.
S.A.,
2, Keskuskatu
Alsina 500
HELSINKI
Casilla 1417
BUENOS Anms
LIMA
AUSTRALlA-AUSTRAlm
FRANCE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
PHILIPPINES
Editions A. Pedone
255a George Street
13, rue Souffiot
D. P. Perez Co.
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
PARIS, Ve
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
GREECE--GRECE
Agence et Messageries de la
POLAND-POLOGNE
"E.ieftheroudakis"
Presse.. S. A.
Spm.dziema Wydawnicza
Librairie internationale
14·22 rue du Persil
"CZ'ytelnik"
Place de la Constitution
BRUXELLES
38 Poznanska
ATHENES
WARSZAWA
BOLlVIA-.BOLlVIE
GUATEMALA
Lihreria Cientffica y Literaria
SWEDEN-SUEDE
'Jose Gouhaud
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes KungI.
Casilla 972
Sucesor
.
Hofbokhandel
LA PAZ
Fredsgatan 2
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
CANADA
STocKHouI . .
GUATEMALA
,
The Ryerson Press
SWJTZI:IUAND..:....SUISSE
HAITI
299 Queen S~reet West
Libr~li:je .raYot S,·,!\.
Max' BOllchereau
TORONTO
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY.
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
CHILE-CHill
MON'fREUX, NEUCH;iTEL,
Boite postale I11-B
Edtriundo Pizarro
BERNE, BASEL
PORT-AU-PRINCE
Merced 846
HansRaunhardt
ICELAND-ISLANDE
SANTUGO
IGrchgasse 17
Bokaverzlun Sit;fusar Eymundsonnar
CHINA-CHINE
ZURICH I
Austurstreti
18
The Commercial Press Ltd.
REYKJAVIK
SYRIA-SYRIE
211 Honan Road
Librairie universelle
SHANGHAI
INDIA-INDE
DA;MAS
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Scindia House
TURKEY-TURQUiE
Libreria Latina Ltda.
NEW DELHI
Librairie Hachette
Apartado Aereo 4011
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BOGOTA
, IRAN
,~. ".~BEYOGLU·IsTANBUL .
,·)3ongahe Piaderow.
;l:,
"
',-.'
COSTA RICA-CaSTA·RICA
.'
731 Shah Avenue
Trejos Hermanos
.UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA-TEHERAN •
Apartado 1313
UNION SUD·AFRICAINE
SAN JOSE
Centra\ News Age~<::y
IRAQ-IRAK.
Commissioner & Rissik. Sts.
CUBA
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
.JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETOW
La Casa Belga
The Bookshop
and DURBAN
Rene de Smedt
BAGHDAD
O'Reilly 455
UNITED KINGDOMLEBANON-LlBAN
LA HABANA
ROYAUME·UNI
Librairie universelle
•CZECHOSLOVAKIA- .
H. M. Stationery Office
BEYROUTH
P. O. Box 569
TCHECQSLOVAQUIE
LUXEMBOURG
LONDON, S.E. 1
F. Topic
Libtairie J. Schummer
Narodni Trida 9
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
Place Guillaume
PRAHA 1
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHES
LUXEMBOURG
CA~DIFF. BELFAST, BInMINGHAM
DI:NMARK-DANEMARK
and BRISTOL
Einar MUIiksgaard
.
NETHERLANDS-PAYS·BAS
Ny5rregadc;: 6 .
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Kj1IBENHAVN
Lange Voorhout 9
ETAlS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
'S·GRAVENHAGE
DOMINICAN IREPOBLlCInternational Documents Servic
REPUBUQUE DOMINICAINE
Columbia University' Press
NEW ZEALANDLibreria Dominicana
2960 Broadway
NOUVELLE-ZELANDE
Calle Mercedes No. 49
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Apartado 656
VVaring Taylor Street
URUGUAY
CWDAD TRU:JILLO
VVELLINGTON
Oficina de Represeni:ad6n": de;J},,;
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Editoriales
United Nations Association of
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
New Zealand
Nneve de Octuhre 703
MONTEVIDEO
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
Casilla 10-24
VVELLINGTON
GUAYAQUIL
VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
NICARAGUA
IiGYPT-EGYPTrii
Conde a Piiiango 11
Ramiro ·Ramirez V.
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
CARACAS
Ag~ncia de Puhlicaciones
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
MANAGUA,
D.
N.
CAffiO
YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVI
ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
NORWAY-NORVEGE
Drzavno Preduzece
Agence ethiopienne de puhlicite
Johan GrundtTanum Forlag
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
Moskovska Ul. 36
P. O. Box 8
BEOGRAD
OSLO
- ADDIS.AREBA
Printed in the U.S.A.

Pcice in the Ul1t~cd States: 10 cents
