General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

1116

Recalling that the establishment of the new international
economic order requires effective support for t~e 1mpro~ement and expansion of educational syste~s and tor the traming of specialized personnel and qua!tfted cadres for the
economic development of the developmg countnes.
Convinced of the topicality and urgency of the provisions
on education contained in the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 123
Recalling that, since its establishment, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzat1on has constantly striven for the effective _realization of !he right to
education and equality of educational opportumt1es f~lr_ all,
without distinction as to race, color, sex, language, rehg1on,
political or other opinion, national or social origin_, ~~onomic status or birth and that, for many years past, act1v1t1es
directed to securing the right to education and the extension
and improvement of educational and training systems in
member States, more particularly in _the developmg cou~tries, have occupied a central place m that organization s
programme,
Taking note with satisfaction of the interest sh(_)wn by th_e
Executive Board of the United Nations Educat10nal, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the implementation of
General Assembly resolutions 34/ 170 and 35/ 191 .
I. Invites again all States to consider the adoption of
appropriate legislative, adminis~rative and other measures.
including material guarantees. m order to ensure the full
implementation of the right to universal education th:ough.
inter alia, free and compulsory pnmary education_. umversal
and gradually free-of-charge secondary education, equal
access to all educational facilities and the access of the
young generation to science and culture:
2. Invites all States to give all necessary attention to
defining and determining in a more precise i_nanner the
means for implementing the provisions concemmg the role
of education in the International Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade:
3. Invites all specialized agencies to co-operate with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to ensure education a high priority in the implementation of various programmes and projects within the
framework of the International Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade;
4. Appeals again to all States. in partie_ular the_ developed countries, to support actively through _1ellowshtps and
other means, including the general mcreasmg of resources
for education and training. the efforts of the developing
countries in the education and training of national personnel
needed in industry. agriculture and other economic and social sectors;
5. Expresses its thanks to the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for the report on the right to education, 124 prepared
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 35/ 191;
6. Requests the Director-General of th~ U~ited Natio~s
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzat1on to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report
dealing with the questions raised in resolution 35/191 and
also in the present resolution, on the basis of the broad lines
of approach established in the draft medium-term plan of
the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural
Organization for 1984-1989, with a view to fostering the
full implementation of the right to education.
JO 1st plenary meeting
16 December 198!

36/153.

Assistance to refugees in Somalia

The General Assemblv,
Recalling its resoluti(;n 35/ 180 of I~ Decem~er 1980 on
the question of assistance to refugees m Samaha,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/31 of 6 May 1981.
Taking note of the report of the ~e~retary-Gene~al transmitting the report of the review m1s~10n to Sor~al~a 125 and
the report of the United Nations High Comm1~s10ner f(_)r
Refugees 126 on the conditions of th~ refugees m Somalia
and containing an assessment of their over-all needs,
Having heard the statement of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, 1 ~ 7
Deeply rnncerned at the need to continue to provide assistance to the refugees in Somalia,
I. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General
and of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
on the situation of refugees in Somalia;
2. Expresses its appreciation to_ the Se_cretary-General
and the High Commissioner for thetr contmued efforts to
mobilize international assistance on behalf of the refugees
in Somalia:
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the assistance rendered to refugees in Somalia by various Member States, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme_. the United Nations
Children's Fund and other concerned mtergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations;
4. Appeals to Member States, internat~onal organi_zations and voluntary agencies to render maximum matenal,
financial and technical assistance to the Government of Somalia in its efforts to provide all necessary assistance to the
refugees;
5. Requests the Secretary-General. in co-operation wi~h
the High Commissioner, to dispatch a mission to Somalia
early in 1982 to make a comprehensive review of the ov_erall needs of the refugees, including those aspects relating
to their settlement and rehabilitation;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to submi~ the_ rel?°rt of t~e
proposed review mission on the refugee situation m Somalia
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular sess10n
of 1982;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with the High Commissioner, to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
/01 st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/154.

Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights

The General Assemblv,
Recalling its resolution 34/171 of 17 December 1979, in
which it reiterated its appeal to States in areas where regional
arrangements in the field of human rights do not yet exist
to consider agreements with a view to the establishment
within their respective regions of suitable regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,

' ., Ai.'\6/ I 36

"'Resolution 35156. annex, sec! 0.
124

See A/36/524.

"" A/36/136/Add. l and Corr. I, annex.

'_._. O.fficial Records o(rhe General Assemb/_y. Thirty-sixth Ses.,·ion, Third
Committee, 56th meetin)!. paras. 1-3.
