S/2021/90

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 January 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 27 January 2021 from the President of the
Securit y Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs; Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations;
Mr. Atul Khare, Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support; and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China,
Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in
connection with the video-teleconference on “Maintenance of international peace
and security: Follow-up on the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020)”, convened
on Monday, 25 January 2021.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020by the
President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security
Council members (S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary
circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these briefing and
statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
President of the Security Council

21-01114 (E) 290121 250221

*2101114*

S/2021/90

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo
Thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to update the Security Council on the
impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on peace and security.
Since the Council last met on this issue in September (see S/2020/897), the
devastation wrought by the pandemic has deepened. More than 2 million people
have died. Close to 100 million — over 1 per cent of the world’s population — have
been infected. Workers have lost over $3 trillion in wages. And new strains of the
virus are poised to unleash more severe waves of infection at a time when health
systems and social safety net are already on the brink.
The pandemic’s impact on peace and security is of pressing concern. The
trends that we reported on in September, and which the Secretary-General had
already warned about in July, have intensified.
By upending lives and economies, challenging community relations and
undermining trust in the very institutions meant to address its fall out, the pandemic
has exacerbated inequality and corruption; bred misinformation, stigmatization and
hate speech; and created new flashpoints for tension and increased risks of instability.
We remain particularly alarmed by the impact of COVID-19 on women and
youth as well as other populations suffering from marginalization. This includes
the loss of employment and income and the dramatic escalation of gender-based and
domestic violence. Young women and men are also at risk of being left behind in
education and economic opportunities.
The pandemic has hindered diplomatic action and complicated our
peacemaking efforts. It has not, for the most part, affected the underlying dynamics
of armed conflicts. Yet, by exacerbating existing fragilities it has amplified the
prevention challenge I underlined in September and made the steps needed to address
that challenge more urgent.
The Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire generated widespread
support and, in some instances, added new momentum to faltering peace processes.
Libya is an example of how sustained political engagement, more unified support
from the international community, and commitment by the parties can lead to
tangible progress.
The signing of a ceasefire agreement by the Libyan parties on 23 October
was a major achievement. Since then, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission has
been working to operationalize the ceasefire agreement and establish a ceasefiremonitoring mechanism.
The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum met in Tunis, despite an initial lack of
much-needed in-person meetings, thanks to the creativity and perseverance of all
involved. The Forum represents a pivotal opportunity for moving towards inclusive,
intra-Libyan political negotiations and national elections on 24 December 2021.
I would like to thank the Government and people of Tunisia for their support in
assisting with mitigation measures, which enabled the holding of this event. Libya
remains at a critical juncture; it is imperative that the Libyan parties maintain the
momentum towards peace, with the full support of the Security Council.
Afghanistan is also at a historically consequential inflection point. The
Afghanistan peace negotiations present an opportunity to end decades of instability
and conflict. The increased levels of violence in the country underscore the stakes.
2/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

The United Nations will do everything in its power to assist Afghans and achieve an
inclusive, negotiated political solution to the conflict.
In Mozambique, notwithstanding serious obstacles caused by the pandemic,
insurgent groups, with the active support of the Secretary-General’s Personal
Envoy, began a process of disarmament. An estimated 29 per cent of the process
was completed in 2020 — an important milestone. The announcement of a unilateral
ceasefire by a breakaway group of the Resistência Nacional Moçambicana on 23
December is encouraging and will allow negotiations to take place without the threat
of violence.
And in eastern Ukraine, the ceasefire agreed on 21 July has continued to hold,
constituting the longest such period since the start of the conflict and giving us cause
for hope.
Despite these positive developments, in a number of other contexts, the
ceasefire call had more mixed results. In some situations, regrettably, we saw
dangerous escalation.
In the South Caucasus, despite the support of both Armenia and Azerbaijan
for the Secretary-General’s ceasefire appeal, large-scale hostilities in and around
Nagorno-Karabakh broke out in September. The clashes presented a serious risk
of regional escalation. The Secretary-General welcomed the 9 November ceasefire
and called on all concerned to cooperate fully with United Nations entities to ensure
unfettered access to conflict-affected areas.
We take note of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Group co-Chairs’ united position for a comprehensive and sustainable
settlement of the conflict and hope that both countries will embark on a path
of dialogue.
The pandemic has affected how we support political and peace processes.
Without exception, our special representatives, envoys and missions have had to
adjust to the changing reality brought about by the pandemic, combining virtual and
in-person work and taking calculated risks to fulfil their mandates to advance peace
processes, de-escalate crises and prevent conflict.
New tools — such as digital focus groups — have been developed and used to
broaden the inclusiveness of our engagements. They have been particularly useful to
enhance our outreach to women and youth.
In Yemen, our Special Envoy has not let up on efforts to help bring the
devastating conflict to an end. He has continued his shuttle diplomacy, in addition
to virtual meetings. With the support of the Swiss Government and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Special Envoy successfully and safely convened
the parties in Geneva last year for talks that led to the largest prisoner swap since the
start of the Yemeni conflict.
Our urgent work to end the suffering in Syria also continues. Today, the
fifth meeting of the Syrian Constitutional Committee is taking place in Geneva, a
demonstration of the determination of the Syrian people to resolve issues that have
undermined peace in that war-torn country. And here, let me thank the Government
and people of Switzerland for their cooperation in hosting this and other meetings
during the pandemic.
Furthermore, we have had to adapt our electoral assistance to comply with
virus-related restrictions and to bring it in line with Government decisions to hold
elections as planned or reschedule them. Since the onset of the pandemic, we have
supported 18 countries in holding 19 elections and one referendum. In addition, we
21-011143/41

S/2021/90

provided electoral assistance to eight countries where elections planned for 2020 did
not take place.
In Bolivia, for example, despite tensions over the initial postponement of
elections, thanks to the commitment of the Bolivian people and the support of the
United Nations, polling took place peacefully in October.
As the impact of the pandemic continues to increase, thus deepening
vulnerabilities and fomenting grievances, the risk of tensions and instability will
continue to rise, magnified by inequalities in the global recovery. As wealthier
countries get vaccinated, the developing world, including countries already affected
by conflict and instability, risk being left behind. That would be a catastrophic moral
failure, as Mr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus noted last week. It would also be a
severe blow to peace and security.
One thing is clear — the pandemic has served as a political stress test as
much as a structural and public health one. It has laid bare where acute crisis is seen
as an opportunity to gain advantage in the battlefield or as a pretext to perpetuate
or entrench oppressive practices. But it has also confirmed that where there is
real political will to make and sustain peace, almost no barrier is insurmountable,
especially if there is support from the global community.
The collective and individual engagement of members of the Council will
remain crucial, especially in supporting the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire and engaging with parties to conflicts and their backers to ensure that the
appeal is heeded.
The pandemic was impossible to predict. Many of its consequences for
peace and security are not. Not surprisingly, COVID-19 has hit hardest in the most
vulnerable places and among the most vulnerable people. That is why recovering
better must involve strengthening our capacity for prevention with more political and
financial investment. The support of the international community in this endeavour
is critical.

4/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex II
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix
I am grateful for this opportunity to update the Security Council on the
measures taken to address the challenges the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic poses to peacekeeping operations and to the countries where they are
deployed. I am pleased to join Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo, Khare and
Lowcock in briefing the Council.
In my remarks today, I will focus on five key messages.
First, since we last briefed the Council, in September (see S/2020/897),
complex political situations have continued to feel the strain of COVID-19.
In South Sudan, for instance, the pandemic has further delayed the
implementation of the peace process, which was already hampered by a lack of
political will and resources and has at times resulted in increased mistrust and
hostility between the parties. In Cyprus, restrictions have limited contacts between
the two communities.
In some cases, the pandemic has led to the crystallization of tensions among
stakeholders. In Lebanon, it has exacerbated an already difficult political and
economic situation. In the Central African Republic, some political actors have tried
to leverage the pandemic as a pretext to delay the presidential election and establish
an unconstitutional transition.
The COVID-19 crisis has put a spotlight on the importance of women’s
leadership during crisis. Women are on the front lines responding to and preventing
COVID-19 and helping mitigate the political risks associated with the pandemic.
In the Central African Republic, women leaders called on the signatories of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic to
support the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and came out massively to
advocate for peaceful and inclusive elections.
Nonetheless, the pandemic has exacerbated existing gender inequalities, as
resources are diverted elsewhere. Incidents of domestic violence against women and
girls have multiplied. Women are also disproportionately exposed to and impacted by
the pandemic, due to their abundant representation in health-care roles, the informal
sector, the service sector and as caregivers in the home.
Secondly, despite these challenges, our peacekeeping missions continue to
deliver on their mandated tasks. With the collaboration of Member States, troopand police-contributing countries and host States, missions have demonstrated
adaptability, resilience and innovation.
For instance, in Darfur, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) provided technical, advisory and logistical support for peace
negotiations, including the facilitation of virtual meetings, which culminated in the
signing of the Juba Peace Agreement in October. Now, virus-related restrictions
continue to present challenges and risks as UNAMID continues its drawdown and
liquidation process.
In the Central African Republic, despite daunting challenges and attempts to
disrupt the holding of the elections, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) supported holding
elections, including through an interim cooperation arrangement implemented in a
very short time frame, with continued attention on preventing the spread of the virus.
And in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
21-011145/41

S/2021/90

in Mali (MINUSMA) continues to use its good offices to support the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States to assist in setting up the transition.
Despite the challenges the pandemic posed for mandate delivery, peacekeeping
operations have also continued to prevent and respond to threats to civilians, as those
have not been diminished by the pandemic. In Mali, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the operational tempo of peacekeeping
operations has remained very high. Operations have been adapted to limit the risk
of spread of the virus to local communities. Remote predeployment visits have
been conducted to validate the operational readiness of contingents and units for
deployment and rotation.
Thirdly, while they have been adapting to these challenges, peacekeeping
operations have put a constant and steadfast emphasis on ensuring the safety and
health of their personnel, be they military, police or civilian. Under-SecretaryGeneral Khare will further address that area in his statement. The implementation
of preventive measures to minimize the risk of COVID-19 transmission, including
through physical distancing, travel restrictions, telecommuting and rotations of inoffice staff, has remained a cornerstone of our approach.
As of today, 25 January, across all field missions — totalling more than
100,000 people — 2,486 cumulative cases among United Nations personnel and
their dependants have been recorded, with 2,047 recovered, 439 active cases and,
unfortunately, 24 deaths. I would like to pay tribute to the peacekeepers who died
because of COVID-19 and express my deepest condolences to their countries and
families. Protecting the health, safety and security of peacekeeping personnel will
remain a priority.
This also contributes to protecting the communities in which operations are
deployed. In that regard, we have continually focused on safely conducting rotations
of uniformed personnel. Following their partial resumption in July, concerted
efforts by troop- and police-contributing countries and missions have led to a steady
increase in the number of rotated units and a decrease in the backlog of pending or
postponed rotations.
As of the end of December, 77 per cent of rotations scheduled for the second
half of 2020 had been completed, 21 per cent of rotations were ongoing and only 2 per
cent had been postponed. Those figures fully match those from before COVID-19.
Pre-deployment awareness training for COVID-19 has also been developed and
disseminated in order to equip all peacekeepers with the knowledge and skills
needed to protect themselves and their colleagues from the disease.
The implementation of these measures rests on the strength of partnerships
that are at the core of peacekeeping. Partnerships with troop- and police-contributing
countries have continued to be critical. I wish to once again salute them for their
cooperation and their commitment in these challenging circumstances, and for
their continued and steadfast engagement with United Nations peacekeeping. In the
Secretariat, in the spirit of the Secretary-General’s reform, the Headquarters Field
Support Group on COVID-19 has continued to help coordinate the support we provide
to peace operations, together with the Department of Operational Support and the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. I would like to thank all our
colleagues at Headquarters, as well as the leadership and peacekeeping personnel in
all missions, for their ongoing commitment to tackling the challenges of COVID-19.
Fourthly, since the beginning of the pandemic, peacekeeping operations have
consistently endeavoured to support host country authorities to contain the spread of
COVID-19, at both national and subnational levels. For instance, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
6/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

(MONUSCO) provided support to the Congolese authorities in developing procedures
and policies to manage the implementation of COVID-19 response measures, as well
as ensuring security and air transport for the movement of materials.
To combat misinformation, MINUSMA, MINUSCA, MONUSCO and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan have used their own radio stations to uphold
factual narratives. They have also contributed to sensitizing the population through
campaigns, dedicated radio programming, partnerships with community stations
and, in some cases, have hosted distance learning programmes for school pupils to
continue their education.
To address the adverse socioeconomic impact of the pandemic, missions have
supported women’s economic empowerment and leadership activities. In contexts as
varied as Abyei, Kosovo and the Central African Republic, they have supported the
local initiatives of women’s organizations, including initiatives aimed at producing
face masks.
And across missions, the United Nations police continues to support the firstresponder efforts of national police services and other law enforcement entities to
fight the transmission of COVID-19 and to sustain operations while mitigating the
risk of spreading the virus.
Finally, we will also need to turn our collective attention to managing the
long-term impact of the pandemic and the role that peace operations may be able
to play. Over the past year, they have had to adapt, innovate and respond to fastchanging conditions. The pandemic has had an impact on weak economies and
vulnerable communities and has generated additional political and security risks in
already difficult situations. Peacekeeping operations are working to anticipate these
changing risks through long-term horizon-scanning, with a view to better preparing
for them.
We will also need to continue drawing lessons from the pandemic and
understanding its impact on peace operations so that good practices can be fostered
and emulated. We already see that enhanced coordination among Headquarters, field
missions, the wider United Nations system, Member States and partner international
organizations has played a key role in that regard. The importance of engaging and
involving women has become even more acute. In these areas and others, we will
continue to draw on lessons at the level of the peacekeeping system.
Despite all the challenges, the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
have continued to provide a framework for our response and a road map for our
collective efforts to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. We have continued to
work on all its priority areas while adapting its implementation to the constraints
of the pandemic. We are currently evaluating the progress that has been achieved,
identifying remaining or new challenges that we need to tackle and, on that basis,
adjusting our action.
The COVID-19 pandemic presents a test of our collective commitment to
international peace and security. I would like to salute the courage and tenacity
of the women and men serving in peace operations, both uniformed and civilian,
who, in these exceptionally trying circumstances, have continued to demonstrate
dedication and commitment to, and solidarity with, the populations they serve.
In these circumstances, we are grateful for the Council’s strong and steadfast
support to peacekeeping, which remains indispensable as we continue to face the
unprecedented challenges posed by COVID-19.

21-011147/41

S/2021/90

Annex III
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support,
Atul Khare
The goal of the Department of Operational Support (DOS) has been to give
our field operations the assurances, tools and support needed to continue to carry
out their mandates.
We have activated our supply chains and have taken proactive measures to
support the field with supplies, equipment and personal protective equipment. Over
4 million items of personal protective equipment and equipment for intensive care
units have been procured and distributed to field missions, along with 35 testing
machines and 150,000 antibody test kits.
Medical facilities in Juba and Goma have been upgraded by adding over 30
medical staff and equipping them with polymerase chain reaction testing and intensive
care unit capacities. Guidance and training materials have been provided to the field
by our public heath colleagues. That includes coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
predeployment training for uniformed personnel, also available as an application,
training on the standardized treatment process for COVID-19 patients, an exchange
of best practices on the management of COVID-19 cases and training on World Health
Organization (WHO) standards related to hospital readiness for epidemics.
We have conducted virtual walk-throughs of a total of 22 duty stations, 43
contingents’ living arrangements, 83 clinics and hospitals — distributed over 11
missions, including the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS).
We have done our best to provide simple but effective solutions to reduce
the risk of spread, such as foot-operated hand-washing stations, indoor tents to
implement social distancing, staggered mealtimes for soldiers and repurposing gym
and recreational areas for quarantine purposes.
We have also relied on innovation to minimize exposure and contact. The Field
Remote Infrastructure Management technology platform uses sensors to remotely
manage field missions engineering and facilities infrastructure, reducing the overall
exposure to COVID-19.
The United Nations System-Wide Task Force on COVID-19 Medical
Evacuations (MEDEVAC), led by my Department, has now conducted 140
MEDEVACs as part of an inter-agency and system-wide effort. That includes 2
international non-governmental organizations, 4 from special political missions,
4 from other Secretariat entities, 32 from peacekeeping operations and 98 from
agencies, funds and programmes.
Regional hubs have been established in Nairobi, Accra, Costa Rica, and
Kuwait, with the facilities in Nairobi and Accra now receiving the largest number of
MEDEVACs. We are grateful to European countries for the initial MEDEVACs to
Austria, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland, Australia and Turkey.
Discussions are ongoing with the Governments of China, Cuba, Russia and
Viet Nam, which have indicated their willingness to receive patients.
We express our appreciation to Spain for agreeing to accepting MEDEVACs,
and to France for its willingness to accept foreign uniformed peacekeepers in its
8/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

military hospitals. We also thank troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/
PCCs), including Burundi, Egypt, India and Peru, which have welcomed home their
uniformed personnel for treatment.
The mechanism has been a success and has given our personnel and partners
the confidence to stay and deliver in some of the Organization’s most difficult duty
stations around the world.
The rotation policy has allowed for the quick detection of cases and the ability
to isolate and replace personnel without delay. Predeployment cases have been
detected among uniformed personnel before their arrival in UNMISS, UNSOS, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and MONUSCO.
The new long-term air charter agreements introduced in July 2020 were
designed to reduce the cost of troop movements by 15.5 per cent. Since the
resumption of the rotations, we have witnessed savings that, regardless of the
restrictions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, are significant. We have also
seen on average a decrease in cost of 8 per cent in movements conducted under the
letter-of-assist arrangement. The single point of entry of our Uniformed Capabilities
Support Division has proved invaluable in working closely with TCCs and PCCs to
manage rotations.
We are working with other partners, including the African Union and the
European Union, to prevent and mitigate the spread of COVID-19 in various
operational contexts and to exchange lessons learned. We continue to plan for
the future.
The Secretary-General has tasked DOS to coordinate a system-wide
vaccination effort for all United Nations personnel and dependents worldwide. I
am encouraged by the positive responses that we have received to the SecretaryGeneral’s call for host countries to include United Nations personnel in their national
roll-out programmes and to provide access to the vaccine in accordance with the
WHO prioritization framework. I wish to thank Israel for becoming the first country
to have provided the first doses to seven peacekeepers in Camp Ziouani.
In cases where vaccine delivery will not be possible through the host country,
DOS will identify alternative arrangements in coordination with the Resident
Coordinators and Designated Officials and our United Nations counterparts in the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility.
A group of friends of TCCs and PCCs has been convened to agree upon a
pragmatic, coherent and common approach to the vaccination of troops and police.
Nevertheless, even as we move forward with vaccination roll-outs, we must remain
vigilant and simultaneously continue our focus on the prevention and mitigation of
the spread of COVID-19.

21-011149/41

S/2021/90

Annex IV
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
When I last briefed the Security Council on the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), together with Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, in September (see S/2020/897), I warned members that the virus
and its secondary effects would hit the world’s most fragile and conflict-affected
countries hardest. That is still the case.
As Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix said, the pandemic is hampering our ability
to resolve and end conflicts. That, in turn, has major humanitarian consequences, as
most of the people who need our assistance live in conflict settings.
Ten days ago, the world passed the grim milestone of 2 million deaths from
COVID-19. Almost 98 million people are confirmed to have contracted the virus
across the world. Twenty-four million, that is, almost a quarter, live in countries
facing humanitarian or refugee crises. That is the tip of the iceberg. Most cases
are still not in the figures. It is clear that many poor countries are in the midst of a
dangerous further wave. New and more infectious variants will make that worse.
Remarkable progress with vaccines shows the way out, but no one will be safe
until everyone is safe, and the risk that the most fragile countries are at the end of a
long, slow moving queue for the vaccine imperils us all.
The secondary consequences of the virus are still even more lethal. This
year, we estimate that 235 million people will need humanitarian assistance and
protection — 40 per cent more than last year and almost entirely due to COVID-19.
The worst global economic contraction in 90 years is worst of all in the poorest and
most fragile countries. Many countries may lose a decade or more of per-capita
income growth. Sovereign debt defaults loom. Extreme poverty is rising for the first
time in 20 years.
With all that comes a steep increase in food insecurity. Multiple famines
are on the horizon. Public services are disappearing. In more than 20 countries in
which my Office is present, disruption in routine immunization campaigns leaves
millions of children vulnerable to killer diseases such as measles and cholera. School
closures leave children more likely to be married off or recruited into armed groups.
The number of out-of-school children is set to increase by 24 million owing to the
pandemic. Women and girls are being hit the hardest. They are the first to miss
meals and they represent 70 per cent of the world’s hungry. Gender-based violence
continues to proliferate, causing a deadly shadow pandemic of violence resulting
from the behaviour of men. The picture for the world’s most vulnerable people is
therefore bleak.
I want to say a few words about how the humanitarian system has responded
to COVID-19. In 2020, humanitarian agencies provided life-saving assistance to
almost 100 million people.
Through the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19, we raised
almost $4 billion thanks to generous contributions from 160 donors. With that money,
we were able to transport more than 26,000 health and humanitarian personnel and
more than 118,000 cubic metres of critical COVID-19 cargo, reach 74 million people
with critical water and sanitation supplies and services, provide 75 million women
and children with essential health care and assist more than 33 million refugees,
internally displaced people and asylum seekers affected by the pandemic.
10/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

But it has become harder to reach people. More must be done to improve
access to the most vulnerable and to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
and health workers. While the humanitarian community has managed to sustain and
scale up assistance to an unprecedented level, that effort has been outpaced by the
growing scale of the crisis. I seek the Security Council’s help in three areas.
First, we need immediate and generous funding for the Global Humanitarian
Overview 2021, which we published last month. In 2021, the United Nationscoordinated humanitarian system needs $35 billion to reach 160 million people. We
need additional funding if we are to avoid some of the worst-case scenarios that lie
on the horizon.
Secondly, their shareholders must do more to strengthen the support that the
international financial institutions provide to their most vulnerable members. It
is staggering to me that of the $110 billion pledged by the international financial
institutions since March, only $11.7 billion, just 10 per cent, was targeted at lowincome countries. Only $7 billion has actually been disbursed, which is equivalent
to about $10 per person.
Thirdly, we need to take urgent action to ensure that vaccines reach the most
vulnerable people in the world. Countries should scale up their support to the Access
to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator and the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility. While they have the primary responsibility for vaccinating their own citizens,
Governments should also consider channelling surplus doses through the COVAX
Facility. That is not about generosity but a matter of the self-interest of wealthier
countries. New analysis reported by The New York Times yesterday suggests that
wealthy countries vaccinating themselves by the middle of the year, but with poor
countries largely excluded, could reduce the global economy by $9 trillion, nearly
half the costs accruing to wealthy countries themselves. National Governments must
also fulfil their responsibility to include in their national vaccination plans all highrisk populations within their territories, including refugees, internally displaced
people and people living in areas under the control of non-State armed groups.
We must also ensure that COVID-19 vaccines do not get financed in the
very poorest countries at the expense of other life-saving activities. If money is
diverted from routine immunization, famine relief or other health services to pay
for the COVID-19 vaccine, the result will be more, not less, loss of life. We have
reasons for hope. The speed with which effective vaccines have been developed is a
historic achievement for humanity. But we have also seen a dangerous failure to take
adequate action to help the world’s most vulnerable countries. The next six months
will be crucial. Today’s decisions will determine our course for years to come.

21-0111411/41

S/2021/90

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
China thanks Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General Khare and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
for their briefings.
In July last year, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2532
(2020), supporting the Secretary-General’s global ceasefire initiative and calling
for a people-centred approach in combating the coronavirus disease pandemic. The
resolution sets out a direction for the maintenance of international peace and security
in the context of the pandemic. So far, more than 180 countries have endorsed the
global ceasefire initiative, and significant progress has been made on the situations
in Libya, the Sudan and other countries. Regrettably, however, even under the impact
of the pandemic, some conflicts still continue. Some countries that had previously
ceased fighting are once again in turmoil.
The year 2021 is critical to the global fight against the pandemic. The Security
Council should take this opportunity to expedite the implementation of resolution
2532 (2020), strive to promote a global ceasefire and unite to fight the pandemic.
First, we need to step up efforts towards a ceasefire and the cessation of
violence. In armed conflicts in the context of the pandemic, no one wins. Given
that the virus is a common enemy, all parties to a conflict should unconditionally
cease hostilities, leave the smouldering battlefield and mobilize to the front line of
the pandemic. The United Nations should seize this opportunity to follow up on the
implementation in a timely manner and step up its good offices to create more space
for political resolution.
Secondly, we need to coordinate the prevention and control of the pandemic
and the work of the United Nations on the ground. Pandemic mitigation,
peacekeeping and humanitarian work all seek to save lives and should be carried
out in an integrated manner. We should continue with our diplomatic engagements,
dialogue and coordination and maintain the momentum for the political settlement
of hotspot issues. It is necessary to stabilize the supply chain, ensure the delivery
of humanitarian supplies and better protect the safety and health of United Nations
personnel on the ground. The Secretariat, host countries and troop-contributing
countries should strengthen communication and develop a feasible plan for
vaccinating field personnel as soon as possible.
Thirdly, we should increase support for countries in conflict to fight the
pandemic. Such countries are the weak link in the global fight against the pandemic.
The international community should step up its support to those countries, increase
aid delivery and the exchange of experiences and strengthen capacity-building so that
vaccines will be accessible and affordable in conflict-affected countries. Meanwhile,
those countries should also strive to create conditions for the international community
to support the fight against the pandemic.
Fourthly, unilateral sanctions should be lifted as soon as possible. Such
sanctions violate international law, seriously undermine the capacity of the countries
concerned to access the necessary resources to combat the pandemic, endanger the
lives and health of innocent civilians and lead to serious humanitarian consequences.
We urge the relevant countries to heed the international call for an immediate lifting
of the illegal unilateral sanctions.
12/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Unity and cooperation are the most powerful weapons in the fight against
the pandemic. Our approach must be based on science and facts. Multilateralism
is the most effective path. The politicization of the pandemic will lead only to the
ravage of the virus and the further spread of the pandemic and will not provide a
solution. China sincerely hopes that the Security Council will make a fresh start in
the new year, follow the correct direction in the fight against the pandemic and lead
by example by boosting trust in, and providing impetus for, the global fight against
the pandemic.
The Chinese Government and people through arduous efforts have made
significant strategic achievements in combating the pandemic. We launched the
largest global emergency humanitarian operation in the history of new China,
providing anti-epidemic assistance to more than 150 countries and 10 international
organizations and sending 36 medical expert groups to 34 countries in need. As
the largest producer of medical supplies, China has provided more than 220 billion
masks, 2.3 billion protective suits and 1 billion testing kits to countries around
the world. Vaccines are an important tool to fight the pandemic. China already
has one vaccine in use with conditional approval and many others in clinical trials
at different stages. Despite the huge demand for vaccines within China, we are
providing support and assistance within our abilities to other countries, especially
developing countries, in various ways. As of now, many countries are using the
Chinese vaccines. In addition, China joined the World Health Organization’s
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility, actively supports the Group of 20 in
promoting international cooperation on vaccines. We will continue to advance the
equitable distribution of vaccines and strive to make vaccines an accessible public
good that is affordable to people of all countries.

21-0111413/41

S/2021/90

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Estonia to the United Nations
First, I want to thank the briefers for their overview on the topic.
When Estonia first tried to raise the issue of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in the Security Council in March 2020, the numbers were the following:
413,000 confirmed cases and more than 18,000 deaths. That is according to the
World Health Organization as of 25 March 2020. If we fast forward not even a year,
but only 10 months, the numbers are the following: over 100 million cases and more
than 2 million deaths. That is an increase of over 24,000 per cent in confirmed cases
and over 11,000 per cent in deaths.
This is an unprecedented situation for all of us, which means that we must be
more cooperative than ever to come through the pandemic with as little damage as
possible. For that, we need strong multilateralism, and we feel that we have wind in
our sails. The Security Council must show strength and unity in dealing with the
security implications of the pandemic.
Estonia continues to stress that all States Members of the United Nations
follow norms of responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. During the fight against
the pandemic, the greatest resources must go into tackling the virus, not attacking
health organizations or citizens online. We also hereby reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire.
That notwithstanding, our global response to the pandemic has been
weakened by the malicious use of cybermeans. According to the European Union
Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation, COVID-19 has sparked an upward trend
in cybercrime. Many attacks have been directed against health institutions. We
must address and condemn cyberattacks against hospitals, which can pose a direct
threat to human lives. Countries should take steps to strengthen the rule of law in
cyberspace and curb malicious activities against the health sector.
We must not diffuse our focus. Using COVID-19 as a pretext for lifting sanctions
is misleading. Sanctions are too often made a scapegoat for the mismanagement of
resources by Governments that are not willing to take responsibility for their actions
or omissions. European Union (EU) sanctions are targeted and do not obstruct
the fight against the pandemic, as they and United Nations sanctions include the
possibility of applying humanitarian exemptions. Targeted sanctions do not play a
role in how well a country can deal with the pandemic.
We know that the pandemic and its consequences have a growing negative
impact on human rights, democracy and the rule of law, as well as on civic space.
Curtailing human rights and restricting civic space under the pretext of COVID-19
is unacceptable.
Last but not least, Estonia reiterates its support for ensuring global access
to medicines, vaccines and medical equipment to face COVID-19, as outlined in
the COVID-19 omnibus resolution in the General Assembly (General Assembly
resolution 74/307).

14/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
First of all, I would like to thank Tunisia for organizing today’s meeting. More
than six months after the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), upon the initiative of
our two countries, the time has indeed come for taking stock, but also, and above all,
for engaging collectively to speed up the implementation of the resolution.
I also thank Rosemary DiCarlo, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mark Lowcock and Atul
Khare for their briefings. They are proof that the entire United Nations system has
been mobilized to deal with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I would
like to pay tribute to the absolutely outstanding work that has been carried out by all
United Nations actors and teams in New York and in the field.
Above all, the cessation of hostilities is an indispensable condition for
effectively fighting the pandemic. Despite some of the progress that has been noted,
particularly in Libya with the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement, and despite more
than 180 countries supporting the Secretary-General’s appeal, the situation, as we
have seen, remains very unstable in many countries. In Syria, Yemen and the Sahel,
the civilian populations continue to pay a high price.
As Mr. Lacroix pointed out, the Blue Helmets are doing a remarkable job
in extremely difficult conditions. More than ever, we must support peacekeeping
operations and enable them to fully implement their mandates despite the pandemic.
We also need to think about how to take peacekeeping personnel into account in
vaccination strategies.
We have said it several times: the vaccine against COVID-19 must be a global
public good, accessible to all, and we fully support the COVAX initiative. Global
access to this vaccine will be a test case for a new multilateralism, bringing together
both States and private companies.
On the humanitarian front, the situation just presented to us by Mr. Lowcock
is alarming: the number of people in need of humanitarian aid has never been so
high. The pandemic has pushed more than 88 million people into poverty, and
more than 270 million people are now acutely food insecure. We have a collective
responsibility to prevent the return of famine, particularly in Yemen.
It is essential to support the implementation of the United Nations Global
Humanitarian Response Plan to COVID-19 as well as to fund the different
humanitarian response plans. France will continue to do so and will increase the
level of its humanitarian aid to €500 million in 2022. In addition, humanitarian aid
will be one of the priorities of the French presidency of the Council of the European
Union in the first half of 2022. The European Union has also made it possible,
through a humanitarian air bridge, to transport more than 1,700 humanitarian and
medical personnel and more than 1,200 tons of aid.
The pandemic has been accompanied by an increase in attacks on
humanitarian and medical personnel, which is unacceptable. The perpetrators of
these crimes must be brought to justice. We will not stop repeating that respect
for international humanitarian law is non-negotiable. I am thinking not only of the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel, but also of the guarantee of safe
and unhindered humanitarian access.
21-0111415/41

S/2021/90

We must also step up our efforts to limit the negative and disproportionate
effects of the pandemic, in particular on women, young people, girls, refugees and
displaced persons. It is essential to enable their full participation in both the design
and implementation of the response to the pandemic. As it is more determined than
ever, France will organize the Generation Equality Forum, in partnership with
Mexico and UN-Women, in the first half of 2021.
Finally, the global health architecture must be consolidated around the
World Health Organization (WHO). In particular, the WHO’s role in coordination,
preparedness and response to future health crises must be strengthened, the alert
system must be upgraded, the implementation of the International Health Regulations
must be strengthened, and a crisis-investigation mechanism must be set up.
The current health crisis has also highlighted the need for reliable, sciencebased information on the links among human, animal and environmental health.
This is why we fully support the launch of the One Health High-Level Council of
Experts announced by the heads of the WHO, the World Organization for Animal
Health, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the United
Nations Environment Programme. We hope that the High-Level Council can be put
in place before the World Health Assembly to be held in May 2021.
There is no time to lose. We must collectively intensify our efforts to enable
the full implementation of resolution 2532 (2020). Council members can count on
France’s full support.

16/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur
I thank all the briefers for their useful insights into the various dimensions
of the challenges we face today owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. We take this opportunity to continue our dialogue as a follow-up to
resolution 2532 (2020).
We express our deepest condolences to all States Members of the United
Nations and to the United Nations community as a whole that have lost oved ones to
COVID-19. We commend the work of our peacekeepers, front-line and health-care
workers, as well as humanitarian partners, for assisting in COVID-19 response plans.
While the pandemic continues to rage across the world, 2021 has started on a
positive note with many countries having initiated the vaccination process. However,
until everyone is safe, no one is safe. We should endeavour to work towards making
the vaccine accessible on a universal, equitable and affordable basis.
As the largest vaccine-producing country in the world, India is fulfilling its
commitment to making its vaccine production and delivery capacity available for the
benefit of all of humankind. Two vaccines have already been granted approval for
emergency use in India. We plan to vaccinate about 300 million citizens in the first
six months.
We have already airlifted more than 6 million doses to nine countries in
phase 1 as grant assistance. Contractual supplies to various countries are also being
undertaken in a phased manner. We will also gradually supply the COVAX facility of
the World Health Organization (WHO). In addition, India has also provided training
to several partner countries to strengthen their clinical capabilities and enhance their
vaccine-administration capacities.
The pandemic, for one, has disrupted humanitarian aid flows and threatened
hard-won development and peacebuilding gains. In fragile and conflict-affected
States with weak governing institutions and faltering health systems the pandemic
has had a devastating impact on the vulnerable parts of the population, particularly
women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities. The pandemic has also
highlighted vulnerabilities of States in dealing with threats posed by the misuse of
social media, disinformation campaigns, possible opportunities for bioterrorism and
cyberattacks on critical infrastructure.
The Secretary-General’s noble call for a global ceasefire and the 90day humanitarian pause was well-intentioned. However, many of the ceasefires
announced in the wake of the call were not negotiated, and as such have since
expired or in some cases broken down. In conflict situations, we have seen no let-up
in fighting, and, in some cases, conflicts have only intensified. It is important that
the call by the Secretary-General be heeded. In this context, we reiterate our call for
a comprehensive ceasefire in Afghanistan.
At the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic, India responded to the SecretaryGeneral’s call and upgraded the medical facilities of United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Goma in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Juba in South Sudan.
India has also assisted more than 150 countries through urgent health and medical
supplies. We have pledged $15 million for the Gavi Alliance and operationalized the
COVID-19 Emergency Fund for our neighbours, with an initial contribution of $10
million. In the spirit of South-South cooperation, through the $150 million IndiaUnited Nations Development Partnership Fund, we have responded to the requests
of Member States for COVID-19-related assistance.
21-0111417/41

S/2021/90

While countries such as India have launched vaccination drives and assisted
others during the pandemic, there are countries that continue to foment terror
and indulge in hate speech and widespread disinformation campaigns. While we
are working with the scientific community, the medical fraternity, industry and
academia to find solutions to COVID-19, these globally recognized State sponsors
of terrorism have used the pandemic to ramp up recruitment and infiltration activity
to spread the venom of terror. The international community needs to hold those
countries accountable for their actions. We are glad that resolution 2532 (2020) had
the foresight to recognize the threats posed by such State sponsors of terrorism and
ensured that the Secretary-General’s global ceasefire call did not apply to Security
Council-listed individuals and terrorist entities.
It is heartening to note that, despite the numerous challenges to our
peacekeeping missions due to the pandemic, peacekeeping missions have adapted and
updated their contingency plans to ensure the safety of their personnel and protect
their capacity to continue critical operations, thereby continuing to deliver on their
mandates. The Council also needs to recognize the sacrifices of our peacekeepers,
especially in tough mission settings where tours of duty were extended. We are also
glad to note that, despite the severe logistical restrictions and funding limitations, the
Peacebuilding Commission convened a series of virtual consultations with countries
and regions affected by COVID-19.
As the world continues to deal with the pandemic, the Council’s initiatives on
combating COVID-19 should transcend conflict lines and contribute to global social
cohesion. The Council needs to have an approach centred around the human being
to tackle the pandemic. Lack of funding for emergency relief and the complications
created by the pandemic have pushed some of the world’s neediest populations closer
to famine conditions. The donor community and civil society organizations should
sustain the necessary support and partnership they offer during the crisis.
As a priority, the Council must work towards supporting initiatives that
guarantee a safe and sustained recovery of economies in conflict situations and
ensure speedy and equitable distribution of vaccines and therapeutics among the
most-disadvantaged populations in conflict-ridden countries. We also need to put in
place an inclusive system that will provide for early vaccination of our peacekeepers,
humanitarian workers and other United Nations front-line workers and guarantee
safe and secure access for humanitarian operations.

18/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I thank the Tunisian presidency for convening today’s important debate, and I
want to offer special thanks to each of our excellent briefers this morning.
When the Security Council finally adopted resolution 2532 (2020), in July
last year, the world had already endured six long months of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). In many countries, it seemed then that the end might be in sight.
However, in this crisis, for which the world had failed to prepare, the worst was yet
to come. Let us be clear: for many, the darkest days are now.
In the COVID-19 pandemic, as with climate change, we may all be experiencing
the same storm, but many of us are in different boats. The effects of the pandemic
have been, and will continue to be, much more severe for those living in countries
in, on the verge of or at risk of conflict.
While the World Health Organization (WHO) is rightly leading the global
response, we are convinced that the Security Council cannot ignore the threat
to peace and security posed by the pandemic. COVID-19 has increased poverty,
disrupted education and worsened food insecurity. It has weakened economies and
eroded trust in public institutions. We all know that these factors can lead to or
exacerbate conflict. As we see it, there are three key areas where the international
community can and should act.
First, we can act now to prevent conflicts resulting from the interaction of this
health crisis with pre-existing fragilities. This means fully implementing resolution
2532 (2020). As we have seen in Libya, a cessation of violence creates space for
dialogue. It also frees up essential resources to combat the pandemic, including
for health systems that will be essential to combating the virus and to vaccination
programmes. Ireland continues to fully support the Secretary-General’s call for a
global ceasefire. We urge all parties to conflict to heed it.
Within the Council, we must listen to — and act on — the analysis on
COVID-19 provided in the Secretary-General’s regular reporting. To prevent crises,
we need to be engaged in preventive diplomacy, looking at where COVID-19 is
exacerbating tensions that could potentially lead to the outbreak of conflict. The
Council’s voice matters. That means calling out discrimination, including in access
to health services. We must be united against disinformation, against hate speech
and against stigmatization, which sometimes targets health workers and United
Nations personnel.
In post-conflict contexts, we simply have to safeguard the really hard-won
peacebuilding gains. The Peacebuilding Commission’s own reorientation of its work
since March, focusing on the impact of the pandemic on countries on its agenda, is
a welcome example of a very pragmatic implementation of the resolution. Ensuring
equitable access to quality, safe and effective vaccines will be an important pillar for
global recovery and for stabilization in fragile contexts.
Secondly, we must carefully consider the impact of COVID-19 on United
Nations peacekeeping operations. United Nations peacekeeping missions have
admirably adjusted to the new challenges posed by the pandemic, including
through the reallocation of resources, some delayed rotations and remote working
arrangements. We commend the United Nations for enabling peacekeeping missions
to continue their work, not least in the protection of vulnerable communities.
21-0111419/41

S/2021/90

As an experienced troop contributor, we know that community engagement
is a vital aspect of peacekeeping. The pandemic has created new challenges for
peacekeepers in reaching and protecting those vulnerable populations. We believe
that we must ensure that peacekeepers are fully supported and fully resourced in the
implementation of their mandates. We also need to be watchful for disproportionate
measures at local levels that impede peacekeepers’ access, and we need to be alert
to the risk of misinformation. We welcome the measures that the United Nations has
put in place to help protect both peacekeepers and the communities they work with.
Our peacekeepers are front-line workers, just as health-care and humanitarian
actors are. That should be taken into account as we plan vaccine rollout. We appreciate
last week’s discussion on the vaccination of United Nations peacekeepers against
COVID-19 and the implementation of transitional rotation measures and welcome
the suggestion for the group of friends of troop- and police-contributing countries to
further discuss those issues.
Thirdly, in conflict situations, if humanitarian access was already a significant
challenge, this has been exacerbated by the pandemic. While countries necessarily
introduced movement restrictions to combat COVID-19, these should not hamper
the ability of humanitarian and health workers to reach those in greatest need. Those
affected by conflict before the pandemic — internally displaced persons, refugees
and migrant workers — have been hardest hit during the pandemic. We also know that
there has been a disproportionate impact on the most vulnerable women and girls,
and we are concerned with the increase in gender-based violence. The SecretaryGeneral, and Mark Lowcock this morning, have called on us to be alert; we need to
match our vigilance with follow-through.
We are living in unprecedented times, dealing with unprecedented challenges
that test all of us, every day. But that does not mean that we become observers.
The Council has a duty and responsibility in these times to step up. Where conflict
continues, preventing the spread of a pandemic, mitigating its impact and protecting
civilians is more difficult than ever. Vaccinating those most vulnerable is an
enormous responsibility for the international community, but clearly one on which
we must deliver. Dr. Mike Ryan of WHO has regularly reminded us that no one is
safe until all of us are safe. No one should be left behind.

20/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I thank Rosemary DiCarlo, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mark Lowcock and Atul
Khare for their briefings.
Kenya applauds the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) and its linking of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to international peace and security.
We also strongly applaud President Joe Biden’s decision to re-join the World
Health Organization and to make global efforts designed to stop and prevent
COVID-19 a part of his strategy.
Kenya is proud of the concrete contribution to the continuity of United Nations
work across Africa that will be enabled by the United Nations-the Nairobi Hospital
Treatment Facility in Nairobi, as briefed by Under-Secretary-General Khare. The
facility is equipped with 150 beds, including 15-bed intensive care units and 45bed high-dependency units. It is a partnership between the Kenya Government,
the United Nations and Nairobi Hospital, which is Kenya’s largest private hospital.
The facility will cater for United Nations staff in Kenya, Africa and beyond,
and Kenyans.
The Kenya Government’s commitment to that project reflects the importance
that we hold in hosting the only United Nations headquarters in Africa and the
Global South. We continue to work with the United Nations to improve facilities
and the processes that enable the United Nations to carry out its duties in Nairobi
efficiently and effectively.
I thought Mr. Lowcock’s assessment of the economic effects of the pandemic
to be astute. I would highly recommend more briefers who specifically speak to that
aspect, especially the potential link between economic and political crises.
It is a clear in the historical record that economic crises have often sparked
their political counterparts and that the most pronounced economic troubles,
particularly those that deeply upend the social order, have led to sustained insecurity
and even State collapse. It is also a matter of fact that this pandemic is causing
extensive economic stress globally, particularly in countries without expansive
fiscal or monetary space.
It is therefore not a stretch to argue that, without vaccine access for the most
fragile countries, the destruction to their economies wrought by the pandemic may
lead to threats to peace and security of a magnitude that compels the action of the
Security Council.
It is of course understandable that States prioritize the care of their citizens.
And, by some happenstance, it is largely the countries that have taken the lead in
the production of vaccines that are also the hardest hit. We therefore find it entirely
understandable that, being in the grip of emergency, they will focus strongly on the
domestic challenge.
However, there are now ominous signs that the lack of vaccination in entire
stretches of the world, for long stretches of time, may in time lead to mutations that
endanger us all, including risk to those countries that today have the greatest access
to the vaccine. It is for those security and public-health reasons that we discourage
vaccine nationalism. It does a profound disservice to the very people it is invoked on
behalf of, and along the way endangers global peace and health.
21-0111421/41

S/2021/90

We urge the members of the Council, which include countries with aboveaverage resources and industrial capacities, to show global leadership by ensuring
vaccine availability and affordability to the most fragile countries and regions.
We also know that, beyond this pandemic, every country and every region
faces historic challenges that will require multilateral, connected solutions. From
climate change to the dangerous political instability caused by inequality, and a
growing trust gap between people and institutions, we are living on the brink of a
rapid unravelling of the global order.
The anger and alienation that billions feel due to perceived and real
marginalization, alienation, indignity and the turn to religious extremism is leading
to the rise of new fascisms. A shot of faith is needed by those billions to know that
the United Nations, as a collective of nations and as an organization, can reach out
to them whether they are rich or poor, brown or white. The COVID-19 vaccine is
the shot in the arm that will make them feel that we around this table are equal to
the moment.
We stand on the fork of a road to different futures. Ensuring that the same
old tired hierarchies of wealth do not apply to vaccine access will catapult us
into a post-COVID future in which we can successfully tackle other pressing
challenges together.

22/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks the presidency of Tunisia for having placed this issue on the
agenda. We also thank the Under-Secretaries-General for their informative briefings.
We commend the leadership of Tunisia and France in having achieved the
adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), on an immediate global ceasefire in the light
of the pandemic caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), on which we are
following up today. We reiterate Mexico’s unequivocal support for that resolution
and for the Secretary-General’s call for a humanitarian truce, which has not been
achieved in all cases. It is necessary to renew and strengthen the Security Council’s
commitment to that common goal.
Threats to international peace and security are multidimensional and
constantly evolving, and the pandemic has led to unprecedented multidimensional
disruptions. These are exacerbated in conflict and post-conflict situations, because
while the problem originates in the area of public health, it goes beyond it, as we
have seen. The pandemic has caused great harm to the economy and public finances,
undermined politics, exposed the unacceptable level of inequality that prevails,
severely put to the test multilateral institutions and become, de facto, an international
security issue.
The leadership and collective commitment of the Security Council, beyond
our natural and welcome differences, is essential to strengthening the unity and
coordination of the United Nations, mitigating the ravages related to the pandemic
in conflict situations and containing the increasing deterioration in situations of
instability and violence. It is necessary to strengthen the measures adopted to ensure
the continuity of the work of peacekeeping operations and of the special political
missions undertaken by the United Nations.
The entire world has found that the effects of the pandemic further escalate
existing challenges in terms of, inter alia, insecurity; violence; inequality; poverty;
unemployment; health services, including mental health; human rights; and
democratic governance. Added to this is the complex landscape that has led to
misinformation; this is a new challenge whose consequences were underestimated
that distorts facts, generates mistrust and hampers strategies aimed at responding to
the pandemic.
We are convinced that resolution 2532 (2020) was a step in the right direction
but believe that it should have been taken earlier. We must now redouble our efforts
to continue strengthening global actions to promote post-pandemic recovery. That
is where the Security Council must play a more active role in guiding the quest for
solutions based on a preventive approach that includes inclusive measures, such as
“build back better”.
The United Nations priority approach to overcoming the crisis, which, owing
to its dimensions, affects international security, must include universal and free
access to vaccines. We must make vaccines, drugs and all essential medical supplies
available to everyone, without exception. It has to be said as many times as necessary,
because it is true that no one will be safe until we all are safe.
For that reason, Mexico welcomes the recent decision of the United States
to join COVAX, a multilateral effort by more than 170 countries, to ensure
effective international cooperation that guarantees equitable access to vaccines
21-0111423/41

S/2021/90

against COVID-19, in line with resolution 74/274, submitted by Mexico last April
and which was co-sponsored by 178 countries and adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly.
Effective cooperation implies working jointly with all stakeholders and
relevant bodies. For that reason, Mexico also acknowledges the work being done by
the Group of Friends of Solidarity for Global Health Security, which brings together
more than 40 Member States from all regions and which works to raise awareness
about the implications of global health crises for global security. Not to recognize
that dimension would be to shirk our current and even more serious responsibility in
the face of future pandemics.
Mexico expresses its commitment to a multilateralism that is capable of
ensuring timely and effective action on the part of the United Nations system as a
whole. For that to happen, the Security Council must agree to address the threats to
international security that may be posed by health crises of global significance such
as the one that we are experiencing now.

24/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
As the co-author, along with France, of resolution 2532 (2020), it is only
natural for Tunisia to devote a meeting to it during its presidency in order to assess
the implementation of that important resolution. I would like to recall that under my
country’s presidency, in September, a meeting of the same type was convened (see
S/2020/953), again at the request of Tunisia and France.
When resolution 2532 (2020) was adopted, on 1 July 2020, we were far from
being able to imagine the devastating effects of the pandemic in terms of loss of
human life, the impact on the world economy and, in general, on our habits and our
ways of living and working.
Unfortunately, the year that has just begun is, in many respects, looking
similar to the one that has just ended, with the addition of a second wave of the
deadly pandemic, owing to a new variant of the virus that is more virulent and fasterspreading. Allow me here to thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix, Mr. Khare and Mr.
Lowcock for their additional briefings, which have enlightened us about the various
facets of this terrible pandemic.
Despite the tremendous challenges faced by countries large and small, rich and
poor alike, there is hope thanks to the outstanding work done by the pharmaceutical
companies, which has enabled the creation of vaccines whose distribution and use
have already begun. As we have often said in previous statements, it is imperative to
ensure that vaccine distribution does not give rise to protectionist and inconsistent
health responses, where some countries would use this common good as an instrument
for advancing their hegemonic vision and other spheres of influence. No country or
region of the world can feel protected or safe until all other countries and regions are,
because the virus knows no borders.
In that regard, as resolution 2532 (2020) underlines, the fight against the
pandemic, of which vaccine distribution is an integral part, requires strengthened
national, regional and international cooperation and solidarity, as well as coordinated,
inclusive and comprehensive international action. The delivery of the vaccine to lowincome countries and areas of conflict can be achieved only through that dynamic
of multilateralism.
To that end, the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), at the Summit they just held on 23 January,
established a vaccine procurement process through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access (COVAX) initiative, led by the World Health Organization, based on the
initiatives already undertaken by Member States and the international community,
with a view to ensuring the availability of vaccines in sufficient quantities, in
accordance with the recommendations of the Niamey Summit. They also agreed that
the vaccination campaign should start in the ECOWAS region by the end of June
2021 at the latest.
In addition to an equitable distribution of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
vaccine, my delegation believes that it is necessary to resume vaccination campaigns
against other serious diseases that have been interrupted because of the pandemic.
The interruption of immunization cycles exposes more than 80 million children under
one year of age to vaccine-preventable diseases in a context where those countries
face several other challenges, such as insecurity and recurrent humanitarian crises.
21-0111425/41

S/2021/90

Beyond being a health crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic has become a so-called
poly-pandemic, threatening to wipe out decades of development progress, further
exacerbating State fragility and even becoming a catalyst for violent conflict.
In the Sahel, a region where climate change and acts of terrorism have an
impact on populations, the pandemic has added a new layer to an already disastrous
situation given the fragile health systems that have made populations particularly
vulnerable to disease and hunger. Today we are witnessing an acute rise in food
insecurity levels in this region as in many others, including Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, South Sudan, the Sudan and Yemen, to
name but a few. Faced with this complex situation, we must support, more than ever,
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, and at the same time ensure that
the conflicts on our agenda are given due attention before this pandemic develops.
The need for humanitarian assistance, coupled with the need for vaccine
distribution when the time comes, requires us to secure the corridors of passage,
free from controversy and political considerations. That is how we will help provide
assistance to people in need, including women, children, refugees, the elderly and
people with disabilities.
In that regard, I am pleased to thank the Secretary-General, who, through his
various reports to the Council, has sought to shed light on the impact of the pandemic
on countries in crisis, as well as on the capacity of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions to carry out their priority mandates in a context that has
become especially difficult.
At this time, when health personnel and humanitarian workers are spearheading
the fight against the coronavirus pandemic and its consequences, I would like, in
conclusion, to pay special tribute to those women and men, who work day and night
to be of service to others, often at the risk of their own lives.

26/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank the Under-Secretaries-General for their briefings this morning.
We meet as we are facing perhaps the darkest hours of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The number of deaths has now surpassed 2 million people.
And the virus has exacerbated human suffering in conflict areas.
Progress on vaccines gives us hope. But we need to reach the most vulnerable.
For that purpose, Norway is proud to co-chair, together with South Africa, the Access
to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator Facilitation Council. Securing fair and global access
to vaccines and mitigating the negative consequences of the pandemic require an
effective and efficient multilateral system. The Security Council must also play its
part in that and deliver a united response.
Like many other countries, Norway echoed Secretary-General Guterres’
timely call for a global ceasefire. We encouraged parties to conflict to adhere to the
appeal. However, as we have all seen, the response has not been sufficient. Where
ceasefires were announced, most were unilateral and limited, lacking follow-up
mechanisms for coordination, monitoring and conflict management. We should
apply lessons from that experience as we assist parties moving forward. One lesson
to draw is the importance of encouraging mutual commitments by conflict parties to
allow ceasefires to serve their purpose — whether it is vaccine distribution or steps
towards a settlement.
The leadership and coordination by the World Health Organization, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Development
Programme were essential to ensure effective and immediate health, humanitarian
and socioeconomic responses. We also commend the Secretary-General for his swift
response when Norway proposed establishing the COVID-19 Response and Recovery
Fund in March 2020. The pandemic has demonstrated the need for strong and efficient
United Nations collaboration at the country level. Reports from the field confirm the
importance of the strengthened United Nations Resident Coordinator system — a
key element of United Nations reform. The pandemic has also highlighted the need
for a global health agenda that can improve resilience, prevention, preparedness and
response to health threats. Multilateral cooperation in those areas is more important
than ever.
Despite the lack of implementation of a full global ceasefire, important
results have been achieved. In particular, United Nations missions have delivered
impressively towards the objectives set out by the Secretary-General in April last
year. Their efforts should continue to support national authorities, protect United
Nations personnel, mitigate the spread of the virus and assist in the protection of
vulnerable communities while ensuring operational continuity.
In addition, it remains essential that humanitarian workers get safe and unhindered
access to those in need, including for vaccination. Norway supports the United Nations
in its efforts to ensure humanitarian access under those challenging circumstances. We
particularly stress the key role of local first-line humanitarian workers.
COVID-19 has exacerbated protection challenges, including combating sexual
and gender-based violence. Violations against children also persist. And the lack of
safe access to education remains a key concern. Norway will continue to prioritize
the protection of civilians in response to the pandemic, including the implementation
of the Safe Schools Declaration.
21-0111427/41

S/2021/90

COVID-19 has impacted us all, but not evenly. We have seen disproportionate
impacts among countries, communities and even genders. We need a gendertransformative perspective, and, above all, human rights, the rule of law and gender
equality must underpin our global response to COVID-19.
The pandemic has also brought into sharp relief the importance of the women
and peace and security agenda to every aspect of crisis prevention and response.
At the community level, women peacebuilders and human rights defenders have
also found themselves at the forefront of COVID-19 prevention and response efforts.
They remain a vital component of pandemic response and recovery, and are key to
long-term resilience, peacemaking and peacebuilding.
The world is facing several crises at once: the global pandemic, climate change
and biodiversity loss. They interact and reinforce one another. They exacerbate
existing vulnerabilities and add complexity to situations where communities are
already under stress from armed conflict. Our recovery efforts provide an opportunity
to build back better and greener, and perhaps more peacefully. The many pressures
exerted by the pandemic shift conflict dynamics in different ways. Some conflicts will
harden, while in others new windows for coordinated diplomatic efforts might open.
It is our duty as the Security Council to closely watch those shifting dynamics
to coordinate efforts and facilitate humanitarian access and peaceful resolution of
conflicts when possible.

28/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex XIV
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
We thank our speakers today for their briefings.
Russia was among the first countries to support the call of Secretary-General
Guterres, on 23 March 2020, for a global ceasefire and advocates strict compliance
with resolution 2532 (2020). We continue to stress the need for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause in conflict zones. However, that
should not apply to operations being carried out against internationally recognized
terrorist groups.
Unfortunately, the full implementation of the resolution’s provisions is
stalling. In particular, violent hostilities continue in various hotspots around the
world, including those fuelled from the outside. We are seeing some terrorist groups
seeking to benefit from the situation in order to gain an advantage on the ground.
It is important to bear in mind that a ceasefire is not the only thing that
resolution 2532 (2020) calls for. In particular, it supports the Secretary-General’s
call for the lifting of illegal unilateral sanctions, which limit the capacity of
countries, especially developing and least developed countries, to respond to the
challenges posed by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its
socioeconomic impact.
The persistent adherence by a select group of States to illegitimate and
inhumane unilateral restrictions, adopted in defiance of the Security Council, is
disappointing. In that connection, we recall the Russian President’s initiative to
create “green corridors” free of trade wars and sanctions to deliver essential goods
and medicine to countries in need.
I would like to commend the professionalism of United Nations peacekeepers
and the staff of United Nations special political missions, who continue to honourably
carry out their duties despite the gravest of circumstances. It is encouraging that
Blue Helmets continue to provide comprehensive support to host Governments in
combating the epidemic.
It is now more important than ever to ensure the uninterrupted delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the most vulnerable populations. At the same time,
such work must be carried out on the basis of full respect for the sovereignty of the
recipient States and without any preconditions, that is, in strict compliance with the
Guiding Principles on the Right to Humanitarian Assistance and General Assembly
resolution 46/182. In that context, we express concern over the increasing frequency
of attempts to erase those fundamental provisions from resolutions extending the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We share the message of the resolution on the importance of an inclusive,
comprehensive and global response to the coronavirus pandemic, with a coordinating
role for the United Nations. The unconditional support of the World Health
Organization (WHO) as the leading body for mobilizing States’ efforts in the fight
against COVID-19 remains relevant.
For its part, Russia continues to contribute to international efforts to combat
COVID-19 as much as it can. It cooperates with WHO, the World Food Programme, the
United Nations Development Programme and other organizations and mechanisms.
21-0111429/41

S/2021/90

As the Council knows, Russia created and registered the world’s first Sputnik-V
coronavirus vaccine. That enables us to assist countries in need on a bilateral basis.
In December 2020, the process of mass vaccination was launched in our country.
President Putin’s proposal to provide Russian vaccines free of charge to United
Nations staff remains in effect.
We are ready to cooperate productively with all interested partners to
effectively combat the pandemic and prevent vaccine discrimination.

30/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex XV
Statement by the Second Deputy Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah
DeShong
Let me begin by thanking the President for convening this timely discussion
and expressing our appreciation to Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo, Lacroix,
Lowcock and Khare for their comprehensive briefings.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to pose disastrous
health, socioeconomic and security challenges in every corner of the globe. The
humanitarian impacts of the pandemic, which are felt most acutely in conflictaffected countries, necessitate greater attention and urgent action by the international
community to alleviate the suffering of those made most vulnerable, including
women and children, internally displaced persons and refugees.
We commend the continued efforts by the Secretary-General, his Special
Representatives and Special Envoys and the range of United Nations presences, both
at Headquarters and in the field, to facilitate peace talks geared towards achieving
a global ceasefire as part of the COVID-19 response; provide operational support
to affected countries to help bolster health and safety; mitigate the risk of virus
transmission among deployed personnel; and maintain the delivery of mandates,
despite the immense risks posed by the pandemic.
We reiterate our full support to the provisions of resolution 2532 (2020) and
emphasize that only through a total cessation of hostilities will conflict-affected
countries be able to effectively manage the health crisis as they mend their social
fabrics and advance peace processes. In Libya, the Sudan and South Sudan, although
the peace processes are still delicate, the positive overall developments stand as a
testament to the ongoing commitments of United Nations personnel, both uniformed
and civilian, to achieve sustainable peace. Yet, as we saw with the horrendous
slaughter of innocent civilians by rebel forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in mid-January and the recent series of armed group attacks in the Central
African Republic, more must be done to achieve peace for those who yearn for it.
If we are to successfully address the simultaneous challenges of COVID-19
and conflict, greater political will, scaled up humanitarian and developmental
assistance, full respect for international law, including international humanitarian
law, and earnest efforts towards pursuing dialogue, compromise and reconciliation
are all required. As vaccines are rolled out to combat the disease, we must also
spare no effort to ensure that they are equitably available to all, including conflictaffected and least developed countries. In that regard, our delegation calls for greater
financial support to the COVAX Facility to strengthen the global immunization
campaign against COVID-19. In addition, we need an enforceable, international
rules-based compact among all countries and major pharmaceutical companies to
deliver, universally and affordably, COVID-19 vaccines.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its support of the key coordinating
role of the World Health Organization (WHO) in ensuring safe and effective vaccine
distribution. We also underscore the firm partnership between WHO and the Africa
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, which highlights the importance of
strong cooperation at the regional and subregional levels, not only for traditional
security issues but across the entire spectrum of the peace and security, development
and humanitarian nexus.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of an integrated and coordinated
approach in which all organs of the United Nations, its relevant specialized
21-0111431/41

S/2021/90

agencies and programmes, Member States and other important stakeholders, such
as international financial institutions, work together to systematically address the
variegated challenges and dimensions of COVID-19. As we seek to recover from
the pandemic, let us also seek to advance peace and justice for all, in accordance
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Let us remember that unless
everyone is safe, no one is safe.

32/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Atul Khare and Mark Lowcock for their
valuable briefings.
Since the pandemic began, Tunisia has been warning of its direct effects
on international peace and security, and my country’s President has called on the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in addressing the consequences of
the pandemic. Tunisia has stressed the need for a joint and coordinated response
under United Nations auspices, based on a broader concept of collective security and
on greater cooperation and international solidarity.
Today, nearly a year after the onset of the epidemic, and despite the efforts
made and actions taken, the world is still reeling from the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic at various levels. The pandemic continues to spread
across the globe, leaving in its wake more than 2 million deaths and 100 million
infections. In addition, the world economy has sustained heavy losses in all sectors
and countries, and the social repercussions of those losses — a dramatic rise in
unemployment, widespread poverty and a decline in growth indicators — have been
severe. The effects of the pandemic have been harsher and felt more profoundly
in conflict zones and refugee camps, exacerbating the situation in those areas and
disrupting the work of United Nations missions to establish and build peace, as well
as humanitarian relief efforts. Today millions, especially children, are at risk of
famine as a result.
Our meeting today highlights our shared conviction that the repercussions of
the pandemic on international peace and security are dire. It also highlights the urgent
need to continue redoubling and intensifying efforts to implement resolution 2532
(2020), which was adopted unanimously following a Tunisian-French initiative. That
resolution constitutes a milestone in the Council’s work and the effort to establish
a shared international understanding of the nature of the unprecedented challenge
facing our world today, a challenge that portends increasingly complex situations,
particularly in conflict zones, additional tensions and conflicts in the world and new
crises that imperil peace, security and stability and the destructive effects of which
will affect all our countries and peoples, without exception.
We commend the valuable efforts of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, chief among them the World Health Organization, to help countries
combat the pandemic. We highly value the continued work of United Nations
missions to establish and build peace, their valuable efforts and the great sacrifices
they make to achieve peace, restore security and stability in conflict zones and assist
local authorities with their efforts to address the pandemic, despite the difficulties
involved. In that context, we reaffirm that the establishment of a com-prehensive
global ceasefire, in implementation of resolution 2532 (2020) and in response to the
Secretary-General’s call, is a matter of urgent priority. Such a ceasefire would make
it possible for international efforts to be focused on confronting the pandemic and
containing its effects, particularly in conflict zones.
We reiterate that the COVID-19 pandemic will be a major factor in exacerbating
the fragility that will fuel tensions and violence and prolong conflicts around the
world, given that the immediate, direct repercussions of the pandemic on the global
21-0111433/41

S/2021/90

health situation and on international peace and security will continue to be felt for
several years, if not for decades.
In the midst of this difficult situation, producing a COVID-19 vaccine is an
important step towards reducing the spread of the disease and containing its effects.
However, such an achievement hinges on international cooperation and solidarity in
order to ensure equitable access to vaccines for all, especially for people in countries
with limited capabilities or those dealing with conflicts or their aftermath.
We believe that this issue is also linked to international peace and security,
since the failure to provide equitable access to vaccines would deepen feelings of
injustice, fuel tensions and affect international efforts to address the pandemic. It also
runs counter to the principles of human solidarity and to the concepts of collective
security and shared destiny. Abiding by those principles and concepts is essential
if the world is to succeed in rising to this unprecedented challenge, as no one can
be secure until everyone is secure. On the other hand, my country stresses that it
is necessary to vaccinate personnel serving in United Nations missions in conflict
zones and in areas where tensions persist, so that those missions can continue to
carry out their vital tasks and fulfil their mandates. Moreover, a ceasefire and the
cessation of hostilities are prerequisites for conducting vaccination campaigns in
such areas.
In conclusion, I reiterate that it is necessary to strengthen international and
United Nations efforts to address this pandemic, and that the Security Council has
a pivotal role to play in dealing with its implications for international peace and
security. I also stress the importance of following up on the implementation of
resolution 2532 (2020) and developing the mechanisms for its implementation, in line
with developments in the epidemiological situation and its effects on international
peace and security and on United Nations efforts to resolve conflicts.

34/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
May I start by thanking you, Mr. President, for calling this debate. The United
Kingdom reiterates its full support for the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire and the implementation of the commitments under resolution 2532 (2020).
Sadly, as we have heard, despite a global pandemic of historic proportions,
peacebuilding has not always been afforded the priority it deserves. There has indeed
been some progress, but the implementation of the resolution continues to be mixed,
as the following three examples illustrate.
In Yemen, as we also heard, the Houthis failed to reciprocate the Saudi-led
coalition’s unilateral ceasefire offers in 2020, and the recent Houthi attack on Aden
has gravely undercut peace efforts. Now is the time to rally round the efforts of the
Special Envoys of the Secretary-General to secure a lasting political solution to the
conflict. The stakes have never been higher, and the humanitarian crisis, already the
world’s worst, is significantly worsening with the effects of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. In September, the Foreign Secretary warned that Yemen had
never looked more likely to slide into famine. According to the latest Integrated Food
Security Phase Classification data, published in 2020, 16,500 Yemenis were living in
famine conditions, a number now set to almost triple to 47,000 by June 2021.
Secondly, in South Sudan, sustained increases in violence throughout 2020,
combined with record flooding, mean areas of the country now likely face famine
or famine-like conditions. This is a catastrophe that the Government of South Sudan
must urgently address with international support. The 2018 peace deal remains the
best chance of an end to violence and longer-term stability. However, implementation
has stagnated. As such, greater coordinated international and regional pressure is
needed on the Government of South Sudan to ensure they deliver their commitments.
More encouragingly, we welcome the signing of the Juba Peace Agreement
on 3 October 2020 by the Government of the Sudan, the Sudan Revolutionary Front
and the Sudan Liberation Movement Minni Minawi faction. This is a crucial step
towards comprehensive peace. But despite that progress, significant challenges
remain there too, including intercommunal violence. The violence that occurred
recently in West and South Darfur serves to highlight the continued need for the
protection of civilians, which the full implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement
could help provide for. We encourage the signatories to the Agreement to begin
swiftly the process of implementation, particularly those provisions of the Agreement
pertaining to security arrangements and addressing the root causes of conflict. We
also urge all those who remain outside the peace negotiations to engage immediately
and constructively without preconditions.
As we heard throughout 2020, we sadly saw the voices of women side-lined in
peace processes. This is a grave problem, not just morally but also because peace is
more sustainable when it meets and reflects the needs of all people, men and women.
The United Kingdom strongly urges the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women and youth, religious groups and non-governmental organizations in
peacebuilding. And we must ensure women are able to carry out their work
free from threats and violence. No woman should have to risk her safety to heal
her community.
Finally, as we know, the COVID-19 pandemic threatens international peace
and security. Ending the pandemic requires equitable global access to vaccines. Yet
there are particular barriers to vaccine delivery in contexts affected by conflict and
21-0111435/41

S/2021/90

insecurity. We welcome the initiative of the Tunisian presidency to do more at this
critical time. Building on resolution 2532 (2020) the United Kingdom will convene
a meeting during our presidency next month to address potential barriers to vaccine
access such as ceasefires, logistics and funding for delivery.

36/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the Permanent Mission of
the United States of America to the United Nations, Rodney Hunter
I thank Tunisia for convening today’s discussion on the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and for the leadership it has shown on this critical issue.
It has been over a year since the world became aware of this terrible virus,
and none of us have been spared its impacts. We express profound sorrow for the
deaths, illnesses and economic devastation that have occurred as a result of this
horrible pandemic.
On behalf of the United States, I want to express our deepest condolences
to the members of the United Nations community who have lost loved ones and
colleagues to the pandemic. The city we call home, New York, was hit particularly
hard by the pandemic, and I want to express our deep appreciation for those on
the front lines — the doctors, the health-care workers and others who have risked
their lives and, in doing so, have saved countless others. Their selfless courage and
selflessness show the best of who we are as human beings, and we should strive to
emulate that same spirit here in the Security Council and in our work each and every
day. We thank them so much.
The United States is committed to working together with other countries to
combat this deadly virus. As a first sign of our renewed commitment to supporting
multilateral efforts to fight the pandemic, on 20 January President Biden signed a
letter to the Secretary-General retracting the previous Administration’s notification
of the United States intention to withdraw from the World Health Organization
(WHO), as well as a letter informing the WHO Director-General of that decision.
Despite all that the global community has endured during this pandemic,
there is light at the end of the tunnel. It is nothing short of a modern scientific marvel
that, in less than one year, numerous safe and effective vaccines and therapeutics
have been developed around the world. The United States is working to ensure those
vaccines get to those who need them most, and we will also work with our partners
to facilitate access to those most in need. No one will be safe until the virus is finally
and completely defeated.
As the Chief Medical Adviser to President Biden, Dr. Anthony Fauci, told our
WHO colleagues last week that the United States
“will commit to building global health security capacity, expanding pandemic
preparedness and supporting efforts to strengthen health systems around the
world and to advance the Sustainable Development Goals”.
WHO must play a central role in our combined response to this pandemic,
and we look forward to working with the Global Alliance for Vaccines and
Immunization (GAVI), WHO, the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator and the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility to help facilitate a rapid global
vaccine roll-out. As a WHO member State, the United States will work closely
with all Security Council members to ensure WHO is strengthened and reformed
appropriately, not only to face this current challenge but also to effectively stand up
to other challenges yet to come.
The language in resolution 2532 (2020) remains as relevant and critical now as
when it was adopted in July 2020. Conflict-affected countries, weakened by war and
violence, remain highly vulnerable to this virus, particularly as COVID-19 becomes
more transmissible. Public-health officials must have the space and safety needed
21-0111437/41

S/2021/90

to continue fighting this virus, to provide affected populations with accurate and
factual information and to deploy vaccines, diagnostics and therapeutics.
We are all concerned with ensuring that conflict-affected countries are able
to access testing, combat disinformation, safely treat their patients, continue to
implement public-safety guidelines and access and deliver the critical vaccines,
diagnostics and therapeutics needed for recovery. Many of the countries affected
by conflicts also suffer from poverty and lack of humanitarian assistance, including
access to sufficient volumes of vaccines to protect their populations.
We were pleased that, well before the Security Council adopted resolution 2532
(2020), several armed groups declared ceasefires to heed the Secretary-General’s
call. As early as April 2020, fighters in 12 countries had put down their weapons,
including those involved in some of the world’s most intractable conflicts.
But, unfortunately, many of those ceasefires have not held, and parties have
resumed fighting even as the virus raged on. We strongly urge States and other
parties to armed conflict to respect existing ceasefires, or to conclude new ceasefire
agreements so that they may focus on managing this pandemic and protecting
their citizens.
Faithfully implemented, ceasefires would provide a necessary respite for
women, children and men on the front lines of violence and conflict, and thus
particularly vulnerable to the virus. We must also ensure that vitally needed
humanitarian aid, and those delivering it, are fully protected and able to do so,
especially in these vulnerable regions. And humanitarian access must be urgently
granted to reach those who need aid.
From a vaccine-management perspective, including extreme cold-chain
requirements for delivery of some vaccines, organizing mass vaccination events
amid violence and conflict will be immensely difficult. Relevant public-health
authorities must be given the space and safety they need to operate efficiently and
quickly, not just to vaccinate against COVID-19 but to maintain critical vaccination
campaigns against polio, measles and other devastating diseases.
We also condemn terrorist organizations that have taken advantage of this
difficult situation to escalate violence while Governments try to focus on containing
the virus. We will continue our legitimate operations against these terrorist groups,
which threaten peace everywhere.
The United States continues to lead the world’s scientific, humanitarian
and health-assistance response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We will engage
internationally, including partnering with WHO and the entire United Nations
system, to combat COVID-19, promote health and advance global health security
to save lives, promote economic recovery and build better resilience against future
biological threats. The United States will also seek to bolster GAVI and the COVAX
Facility to support vaccines reaching all parts of the globe, new approaches to health
security and an acceleration of the Global Health Security Agenda.
The United States has already announced over $1.6 billion in additional
economic, health and humanitarian assistance as part of about $20.5 billion in United
States funding to combat COVID-19.
Today’s humanitarian landscape is unprecedented in its magnitude,
acceleration and complexity. COVID-19’s second-order impacts on the most
vulnerable have been catastrophic — rising food prices, as we have heard today,
falling incomes, drops in remittances, interrupted vaccine programmes, school
closures and a civilian protection crisis. Those impacts continue to be felt acutely by
vulnerable and marginalized populations, including here in the United States.
38/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

We have all acutely felt the impacts of this horrific pandemic, and we must be
united in our efforts to eliminate it. As I said before, we know there is light at the
end of this tunnel, and we must not let this virus stall long-standing efforts towards
peace and security. Joining together with the United Nations and other international
partners, the United States will continue to lead the fight against COVID-19 during
this critical time, and we will do all we can to ensure a safer and more secure world,
both now and in future.

21-0111439/41

S/2021/90

Annex XIX
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Viet Nam to the United Nations,
Pham Hai Anh
I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Rosemary DiCarlo, JeanPierre Lacroix, Atul Khare and Mark Lowcock for their comprehensive briefings.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) was a landmark action
by the Security Council. Yet the resolution is not an end in itself. Monitoring its
implementation is no less important. One of its key purposes was to support the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. As the briefers highlighted, the
ceasefire has been observed in some situations, and several elections and referendum
processes have been resumed. However, in many corners of the world ceasefire
commitments have not been observed and conflicts and violence have continued or
even intensified.
The resolution also recognizses the significant threat of the pandemic to
international peace and security, including by exacerbating humanitarian situations
and endangering peacebuilding and development gains. As we can initially assess,
inequalities and other underlying causes of conflicts and violence, aggravated by
the economic and social impacts of the pandemic, will take devastating tolls in the
long run and risk being exploited by extremists and terrorists. While vaccination
programmes are under way in several Member States, this is yet to become the case
in many others, particularly in the global South.
Six months into the resolution’s implementation, we appreciate this opportunity
to take stock of our progress and identify gaps for further improvements. In that
context, allow me to stress the following points.
First, ceasefires must be strengthened if we are to protect all humans from
the double impact of conflicts and the pandemic. Warring parties must match
their words with deeds in adhering to their commitment to cease hostilities and
allow humanitarian response. We call for a framework to effectively oversee the
implementation of ceasefires in conflict areas. We support greater efforts by the
Secretary-General’s Special Representatives and Special Envoys to help secure
lasting solutions to conflicts and violence after the ceasefire. Regional and local
actors can and must play constructive roles in confidence-building and preventive
diplomacy, including through mediation.
Secondly, we must further support safer and strengthened United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We commend the steps taken by United Nations missions
and offices in adapting their operations and discharging their mandates. Keeping
the peace and protecting civilians require, first and foremost, not becoming a source
of contagion. Therefore, it is essential to strengthen the medical capacity of United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions so as to protect their own personnel and
better assist host countries in their pandemic response. Missions, troop- and policecontributing countries as well as host countries must work together to identify
adaptation measures to allow for safe and timely rotations. We note the positive
assessment of Under-Secretary-General Lacroix as to the ratio of rotations reaching
that of the pre-coronavirus period.
Thirdly, while the pandemic is an ongoing challenge, it is also an opportunity
to shape our future. Strengthening our commitment to international cooperation
and multilateralism, with the fundamental role of the United Nations system in
catalysing and coordinating the comprehensive global response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the central efforts of Member States therein, is
key to our long-term comprehensive strategy. Member States must support a robust
40/41

21-01114

S/2021/90

and resilient global health system, with the World Health Organization playing a
crucial role. We must pay heed to alleviating the economic and social impacts of
the pandemic, facilitating fair and equitable access to vaccine and medicines and
ensuring economic resilience and financing for development for least developed,
developing and conflict-affected countries. We must not allow our hard-won
peacebuilding and development gains to be disrupted or reversed.
In conclusion, resolution 2532 (2020) is a first step in recognizing the
immediate danger of the COVID-19 pandemic to international peace and security
and mapping our collective action. Its effective implementation and the long-term
issues I mentioned require comprehensive and strengthened follow-up, including
through appropriate updates and further guidance. The people in countries in
situations of armed conflict or affected by humanitarian crises look to the Council
for its continued unity, solidarity and leadership. We must not fail them.

21-0111441/41
