United Nations

S/PV.9230

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9230th meeting
Wednesday, 21 December 2022, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mr. Mythen
Ms. Mbabu
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on humanitarian needs in the Syrian Arab
Republic (S/2022/933)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585 (2021), and
2642 (2022) (S/2022/956)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-76585 (E)
*2276585*

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

in both Government-controlled areas and areas outside
Government control, where the situation remains most
dire, especially in camps for the displaced.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on
humanitarian needs in the Syrian Arab
Republic (S/2022/933)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021) and 2642 (2022) (S/2022/956)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/933, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on humanitarian needs in
the Syrian Arab Republic, and document S/2022/956,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332
(2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504
(2020), 2533 (2020), 2585 (2021) and 2642 (2022).
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Two weeks ago, I visited Damascus
to continue my discussion with the Syrian Government
on advancing the political process to implement
resolution 2254 (2015). As I did so, conditions on
the ground were pointing in worrisome directions.
Syrians are facing an ever-deepening humanitarian
and economic crisis, inside and outside the country and
2/22

21/12/2022

We are dealing with a situation that is the result
of more than a decade of war and conflict, corruption
and mismanagement, the Lebanese financial crisis, the
coronavirus disease, sanctions and the fallout from the
war in Ukraine. United Nations assessments tell us that
parents are skipping meals so their children can eat.
Electricity and fuel, including heating oil, are scarcer
than ever. Many are increasingly unable to access
clean water and health care, or even to communicate
with loved ones or colleagues, because of connectivity
outages and failing infrastructure. I heard directly from
United Nations colleagues that the needs of Syrians
are rising just as resources are falling. Even those
who would not normally need assistance — those who
receive regular salaries, for instance — are in need,
given the depreciation of the lira. No doubt, the situation
will only get even more severe as the winter progresses.
The Government has closed state agencies for
several days as a result of energy shortages. Some
civil servants are unable to travel to work because they
lack fuel. In Damascus, there were tangible signs of a
worsening crisis: dark streets, unlit houses and little
traffic. Payments come in thick stacks of bills, as the
Syrian pound depreciates to new record lows.
This bleak humanitarian and economic picture is
bad enough; add to it the continued armed conflict and
the dangers of military escalation, and the potential
for catastrophic deterioration is all too real. We have
thankfully not seen further large-scale military
operations by any one player this month. But the
situation cannot be said to have improved in any way.
The same dangerous dynamics exist, with impact
on civilians. We have seen that the same dangerous
dynamics exist with impacts on civilians. We have seen
reports of sporadic pro-Government airstrikes in the
north-west, Turkish airstrikes in the north, and strikes in
Damascus and the south-west attributed to Israel; shelling,
rocket fire and intermittent clashes on contact lines,
involving the full spectrum of actors — the Government,
the armed opposition, the Syrian Democratic Forces and
the Security Council-listed terrorist group Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham; continuing attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) against all of those actors, in all
quarters of Syria, with reports that ISIL’s leader was killed
in southern Syria in October; and reports of tensions,
continued protests and the use of force in Al-Sweida.
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

We need to shift those worrisome dynamics. When
I briefed the Council last month (see S/PV.9204), I
flagged a number of priorities that we need to focus
on. I have been working on all of those priorities in
my diplomatic engagements with the Syrian parties and
with international stakeholders.
The first priority is to step back from escalation
and restore relative calm on the ground. Let me remind
the Council that a patchwork of agreements and
arrangements reached bilaterally between some key
actors brought about a relative reduction in violence
in recent years, notably between Russia and Türkiye
for Idlib in 2020, and between Russia and Türkiye and
Türkiye and the United States in 2019 for the northeast, as well as Russian-United States deconfliction.
But those fragile agreements and arrangements do not
amount to a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire in line
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Violence continues, and the careful work to establish
those agreements and arrangements could be undone in
a moment, despite all players often acknowledging that
there is no military solution and that the military phase
of the conflict is over. Any escalation could reignite
a conflict that in reality has not ended, endangering
regional stability and creating conditions in which
terrorism can thrive. Once again, it would be civilians
who would pay the price.
We convened a ceasefire task force plenary meeting
in Geneva last Friday to convey a common message to
all key Member States with influence on the ground: to
show restraint, to protect civilians, to restore calm, to
work to consolidate that patchwork of agreements and
arrangements into a nationwide ceasefire and to ensure
a cooperative approach to countering Security Councillisted terrorist groups, in line with international law.
The second action needed is to renew the framework
in the Council on the humanitarian front. Unfettered
humanitarian access to all Syrians in need throughout
the country, by all modalities, remains imperative. As
the Secretary-General has stressed, and as Mr. Griffiths
will surely do after me today, cross-border aid continues
to be indispensable. I understand that important progress
has been made on all of the priorities of resolution 2642
(2022), namely, cross-border and cross-line access as
well as the implementation of early-recovery projects.
We should protect and build on that progress through
the extension of the resolution, for the benefit of all
Syrians. This is a core message to the Council today:

S/PV.9230

please continue to support this framework; millions
of Syrians depend on it. Please also be generous in
responding to the United Nations humanitarian appeals.
The third point I have stressed is the need to
resume and make more substantive the Constitutional
Committee meetings in Geneva. As I told the Council
last month, the United Nations stands ready to resume
Constitutional Committee meetings in Geneva as soon
as readiness to do so from others exists. On that there
is nothing new to report, particularly on the Russian
position regarding Geneva. Nevertheless, I continue my
efforts in that regard, including reminding Governmentnominated co-Chair Kuzbari in Damascus of the need to
reply to my June letter on improving working methods,
to which Syria Negotiations Committee-nominated
co-Chair Al-Bahra has already responded.
The fourth point I am focusing on is prioritizing
work on the detained, the disappeared and the missing.
In Damascus, I underlined the importance of sharing
information on detainees and releases. I also stressed the
need to safeguard detainees’ right to communication,
as loved ones deserve to know if they are alive. I will
continue my engagement with the Syrian Government
and all other stakeholders to push for releases and
information, commensurate with the scale of the issue,
while maintaining my dialogue with family, victim
and survivor associations. I also look towards 2023
with hope of seeing a missing persons’ institution
mandated by the General Assembly, as recommended
by the Secretary-General. That would be a pathway
to generate some tangible progress for the millions
of Syrians affected by this file and provide adequate
support to survivors and families.
The fifth point is to further the dialogue towards
identifying and implementing initial step-for-step
confidence-building measures. I am convinced that it is
possible that the Syrian stakeholders and international
players could find a way to make some precise, concrete,
reciprocal steps that could move us some way along
the path of resolution 2254 (2015). If that were done,
I believe it could begin to have a meaningful impact
on the lives of ordinary Syrians, shift some of the
negative dynamics on the ground and build some trust
and confidence between the parties and in the political
process. I had a long exchange with Foreign Minister
Mekdad in Damascus on that, and I appreciated his
willingness to engage. The dialogue has certainly
deepened, and I welcome the invitation to return to
Damascus in the New Year for a new round of talks.

22-765853/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

I also met in Geneva with Badr Jamous, President
of the Syrian Negotiations Committee, and discussed
a range of issues in resolution 2254 (2015), including
steps that all parties could take to help build trust and
confidence and bring an end to the suffering of all Syrians.
And I look forward to further engagement with the
Syrian Negotiations Committee in the New Year as well.
Let me stress a sixth and final point. I will continue
to rely on the insights and advice of the Women’s
Advisory Board. I will continue to mainstream gender
in all our work. And I will continue to engage with a
broad range of Syrians through the Civil Society Support
Room to strengthen dialogue on issues relevant to the
political process and to ensure inclusive participation.
This month Syrian women and men told us that
social trust remains in short supply. The role for civil
society to help rebuild Syria’s social cohesion is more
imperative today than it has ever been. Syrian women
have been admirably resilient, enduring mounting
hardships, particularly as heads of households. Their
empowerment and inclusion is essential.
As 2022 draws to a close, we look back on a very
difficult year. The needs of the Syrian people have
reached the worst levels since the conflict began,
against a backdrop of further economic collapse and
ongoing violence. No tangible progress has been made in
advancing the political process. And global geopolitics
made a difficult situation even more complicated. This
is a bleak picture.
But it is sometimes said that the hour is darkest
before dawn. Syrians of all backgrounds tell me
that the current situation is unacceptable and also
unsustainable. And I sense a growing realization in all
quarters that allowing the status quo to continue and the
situation to deteriorate is simply not an option. That is
why I appeal to all members to get behind the agenda I
have laid out today. Syria needs sustained international
attention, starting with unity in the Council behind
the humanitarian framework, but also on all the other
aspects I have highlighted.
I and my team will spare no effort to bring about
some movement on this extremely difficult conflict
in the year ahead. We must give Syrians hope for the
future. Our goal remains a comprehensive political
solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) that meets
the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians and restores
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. I am counting on members’ creativity,
engagement and support.
4/22

21/12/2022

The President: I thank Mr Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I am afraid the Security Council
will hear from me in very similar terms and words to
the ones that we just heard from Mr. Pedersen about
the extraordinarily gloomy and dire situation facing
the people of Syria. I am grateful to Mr. Pedersen for
his exposition.
Many records were broken in 2022, all of them
overwhelmingly negative. The hostilities, for example,
continued to take a substantial toll, especially along the
front lines, despite a widespread acknowledgement that
the military objectives are out of line, as Mr. Pedersen
said. In north-west Syria alone, at least 138 civilians
were killed and 249 injured. The number of people
who need humanitarian aid climbed to 14.6 million,
which is an increase of more than 1.2 million compared
to 2021. That number will go up in 2023 once again
to reach a new and awful record of 15.3 million. We
have not seen those kinds of numbers, death rates,
damage and need since the beginning of the crisis.
More than 12 million people, which is more than half
of the population of Syria, are struggling to put food on
the table. Mr. Pedersen spoke movingly, I thought, of
the economic situation facing them. Nearly 3 million
additional people could slide into food insecurity.
Socioeconomic conditions continued to deteriorate.
Spiralling domestic inflation, most evident in the
continued devaluation of the local currency — and
coupled with the rising global food and fuel prices that
we know so well — is putting basic food items and
other essentials out of reach for millions of families.
Prices for essential food commodities, the core need
and the basic food basket for a family in Syria, have
surged by more than 90 per cent during this year. It is
of course therefore no surprise that the vast majority
of families in Syria are unable to meet their own basic
needs. Families headed by women feel the impact of
these alarming trends most acutely. This is the worse
since the crisis began, and I do not believe that 2023
will bring the people of Syria much relief.
Despite funding challenges and a complex
operational environment — perhaps the most complex
in all the world’s humanitarian response programmes
today — our humanitarian partners have been
delivering life-saving assistance to 7.8 million people
every month this year, including 2.7 million reached
through the cross-border operations that Mr. Pedersen
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

referred to. The year 2022 was also notable as the year
of cholera, making a resurgence for the first time in
Syria in 15 years, as indeed it is in many places around
the world, profiting, as it does, from health systems
under strain. Outbreaks of cholera usually occur in
communities struggling to access safe water where the
sanitation and public health infrastructure has been
damaged owing to conflict or natural disasters, of which
Syria has both. Some 62,000 suspected cholera cases
have been reported as of 18 December, and sadly, 100
people have died. Humanitarian partners are scaling up
surveillance and testing capacities, monitoring water
quality, training health-care workers and promoting
awareness. And we urgently need additional funding to
continue responding to that particular outbreak.
As we speak and sit here, millions of people in
Syria are spending their twelfth consecutive winter in
displacement. For the 2 million living in tents, camps
and makeshift shelters, winter is a cruel time indeed,
with its sub-zero temperatures, strong winds, sudden
squalls, snowstorms and flooding that destroy their
shelter. Approximately 6 million people — an annual
increase of a third — are in need of urgent assistance
this winter. The winterization response, which agencies
deliver to respond to special winter needs, led by our
colleagues at the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, is 21 per cent funded. That
means that more than two thirds of the people who need
help to deal with the scourges I just mentioned will not
receive it. Families will not have fuel, heaters, blankets,
winter clothes and other items that they need merely
to ward off the cold and protect their children from its
terrible grip. Once again, it will of course be families
headed by women that will be the most gravely affected.
The general funding outlook for Syria is fairly
discouraging too. We are not far away from the end
of 2022, and the 2022 humanitarian response plan for
the country is 43 per cent funded. And I am sure that
is where we will end the year — under half funded.
The low level of funding this late in the year is in fact
unprecedented. We know the many reasons that have
contributed to that. But let us please try not to let this
become another disappointing record next year.
Women and girls are bearing the brunt of the
continuing crisis. Gender-based violence is rampant
in Syria in the form of physical, sexual, psychological
and indeed economic abuse. Approximately 7.3 million
people, an overwhelming majority of whom are women
and girls, need support to confront and overcome

S/PV.9230

gender-based violence. That is 7.3 million who are in
need of such support — a third of the total population.
We must ensure that they receive that support. We must
give them our help and a steady shoulder.
In less than three weeks, resolution 2642 (2022),
which enables us to deliver cross-border humanitarian
assistance to north-west Syria, to which Mr. Pedersen
also referred, is due to expire. Needless to say, I am
asking for the Council’s support to enable us to do our
job, do what generous Member States require of us and
deliver that assistance to all who need it, no matter
where they are. I cannot stress enough the importance
of maintaining that lifeline for the millions of people in
the north-west in particular. This is not about excluding
the north-east but about focusing on the north-west. Not
renewing the resolution jeopardizes the delivery of aid
when people need it most, amid a cholera outbreak and
in the middle of winter.
I also want to give the Council some statistics on
early recovery. Since January, at least 125 humanitarian
agencies have been implementing 374 projects in every
governorate in Syria in early recovery. As a piece of good
news, those projects have received a record $517 million;
274 of the 374 projects are funded and have received a
little less than that amount. In this way early recovery,
as the resolution requires, has been built up. But we
also need the continued facilitation and support of all
the parties in the region, and the Council, to improve
our cross-line access. In the north-west, the ninth crossline mission to Sarmada, in Idlib governorate, was
completed at the beginning of this month. Therefore,
our record this year is better. The inter-agency convoy
delivered food, medicines, sanitation and hygiene items
and reproductive health kits.
Of course we need to see more of those convoys.
However — and I must repeat this, as I always
do — they cannot compensate for the massive scale of
the cross-border operation. For every month in 2022,
on average, nearly 600 trucks have delivered food
and other essential aid across the border to north-west
Syria. Cross-line deliveries are therefore an essential
complement, and it is essential to build them up. Early
recovery is essential, simply for the self-respect and
future prospects of the people of Syria. The crossborder mechanism cannot be substituted. I am sorry to
be so gloomy. I join Mr. Pedersen in his priorities, his
humanitarian framework and all other efforts that he
and his Office need in order to try to bring an end to
this tragedy for the people of Syria.

22-765855/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Geir Pedersen and
Martin Griffiths for the overview on the political and
humanitarian situation in Syria.
The Russian Federation’s unchanging position
is that there is no alternative to a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political process carried out under the
United Nations mediation and based on full respect for
the principles of the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
without any external interference. In that regard, we
consistently support the efforts made by made by
Mr. Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Syria, within the framework of his direct
mandate, as stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015), the key
element of which is Syria’s Constitutional Committee.
We take note of Mr. Pedersen’s efforts to depoliticize the
Geneva platform, as well as to ensure the resumption of
the Committee’s regular sessions, and his engagement
with Syrians on that matter, including during his recent
visit to Damascus, earlier in December. We believe that
key decisions as to the modalities of subsequent rounds
of inter-Syrian consultations need to be made by the
Syrians themselves, without any external pressure.
The situation in Syria’s north continues to raise
concern. Military operations in the governorates of
Aleppo, Raqqa and Al-Hasakah have already caused
deaths, not only among the Syrian military, but also
among civilians, including reporters, in addition to
destroying civilian infrastructure. Against that backdrop,
we condemn the continued illegal aerial attacks by the
Israeli air force. In November, at least two such cases
were reported — an aerial attack on the Al-Shayrat
military airbase, located to the east of Homs, as well as
strikes from the Mediterranean targeting Syria’s central
and coastal areas, which killed six Syrian military
personnel and wounded four more. We are convinced
that achieving long-term stability and security in Syria
can only be possible by fully restoring the country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as ending
the illegal foreign presence and the practice of turning
Syria into an arena for settling geopolitical scores.
We are painfully aware of the continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation in Syria. The cost of the basic food basket,
6/22

21/12/2022

which far exceeds the monthly income of most
Syrians, combined with the high inflation rate and the
devaluation of the Syrian pound, means that, according
to United Nations estimates, the number of people in
need of assistance in 2023 will reach yet another record
high, amounting to 15 million people. Amid the fuel
shortages, there have been catastrophic power outages.
In a number of governorates, electricity is available
only for 20 minutes once every five hours, including
in critical infrastructure such as hospitals, schools and
municipal facilities.
The chronic water crisis and deterioration of key
communications triggered an outbreak of cholera in
September in Aleppo governorate, which then spread
not only throughout the rest of Syria, but also to
neighbouring Lebanon. We are of course reassured
to know that half of the world’s supply of the cholera
vaccine has been sent to Syrians. However, the special
World Health Organization epidemic response plan is
only one-third funded.
Of the few positive changes, we note the fact that
the 2022 humanitarian response plan is 43 per cent
funded — which, as Mr. Griffiths just said today, is not
enough. We also note the dispatch of the ninth convoy
from Aleppo to Sarmada and the plans to dispatch
a tenth, as well as the establishment of access to Tel
Abyad and Ras Al-Ayn. However, those are the very
basic results, and it took the United Nations much too
long to achieve them. And it is hard to fight the feeling
that more efforts are being spent on trying to prove the
indispensability of the cross-border mechanism than
arranging cross-line deliveries.
Let me say frankly that the current humanitarian
situation in Syria does not provide a favourable context
for the discussion on renewing the cross-border
mechanism. The point is not that we are against helping
ordinary Syrians, as some delegations will try to portray
today. The point is that the global community should
sincerely try to help all Syrians, without discrimination
and politicization. But unfortunately, there is still a long
way to go before that can be achieved. We can say that
in principle, in the past six months, our former Western
partners have not changed their opportunistic approach
to this matter. Like careless students on the eve of an
exam, they remember the provisions of resolution 2585
(2021) and 2642 (2022) only when they are about to
expire and try to present the situation as though they
have been diligently implementing those resolutions
over the past six months. We can clearly see that that is
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

not quite the case, to say the least. In particular, despite
the three rounds of informal interactive dialogue, the
overall picture of the cross-border mechanism has not
become transparent. Representatives of United Nations
agencies and Western donors only go around in circles
and juggle numbers, including on early recovery, trying
to prove how much they are doing while they carefully
dodge questions.
Nevertheless, even those decoy tactics cannot
hide the obvious fact that there is still an inexplicable
and unjustified geographical imbalance in the
implementation of early-recovery projects in Syria.
Half of the donor funds go to Idlib, 15 per cent go
to the trans-Euphrates area, and only 35 per cent go
to Damascus-controlled areas, where most of the
population lives. Those figures clearly demonstrate
how politicized the discussion on the Syrian file is
and the extent to which Western donors disregard the
resolutions of the Security Council. Added to that is
the absolutely unacceptable desire of Western States
to maintain the wrongful and illegitimate unilateral
sanctions against Syria, which have a devastating effect
on the lives of ordinary Syrians.
Contrary to obvious facts and the conclusions of
authoritative experts, the West tends to explain all of
Syria’s problems on the allegedly incompetent acts of the
authorities. And when we raise those issues, including
within the framework of the interactive dialogues I just
mentioned, Western delegations hypocritically try to
prove that is an unrelated matter. How can they talk
about helping Syria while at the same time trying to
hold the country by the throat?
Another taboo topic is the issue of creating
artificial impediments to the return of Syrian refugees
from neighbouring countries. Both Damascus and the
refugees themselves, as well as Syria’s neighbours, have
an interest in seeing the refugees return. However, that
approach does not sit well with the United States and its
allies, who believe that the Government of Syria may
receive vast political dividends after a mass return of
its citizens. Once again, as in the case of the sanctions,
the West prioritizes its own political goals over the
interests and even the lives of ordinary Syrians.
How does the Council think the Syrian side should
perceive this whole situation? What reasons does
Damascus have to believe the new hypocritical and
opportunistic Western promises? Moreover, does it help
Damascus to see how Western countries are acting like

S/PV.9230

a mother hen nurturing the international terrorism of
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in Idlib — a group that continues
to benefit from the deliveries via the cross-border
mechanism owing to its lack of basic transparency?
Does it help Damascus that the commitment to Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as stipulated in
the resolutions of the Council, is nothing but an empty
phrase for the West? We will put all this on one side
of the scales and try to imagine what should be on the
other side to justify our authorization yet another sixmonth extension of the cross-border mechanism. Let us
be clear: arguments about the lack of an alternative to
the cross-border mechanism are unconvincing because
the lack of an alternative is artificially supported by
the mechanism’s supporters’ inaction. Perhaps new
arguments in favour of the cross-border mechanism
will appear in the course of today’s meeting, but so far,
to be perfectly candid, there have been very few.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their briefings. We would also like to
acknowledge and thank the tireless and principled work
of the current co-penholders, Ireland and Norway.
This is the ninth meeting of the Security Council
since the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022) in July: six
briefings and three informal interactive dialogues, where
United Nations leaders and humanitarian officials have
repeatedly described for the Security Council the scale,
transparency and necessity of cross-border deliveries
of humanitarian assistance. Before the authorization for
cross-border deliveries ends on 10 January, the Council
must confirm the extension of the authorization, as
envisioned in resolution 2642 (2022).
This is not a complicated issue. The Council
recognized in July the need for cross-border deliveries
of humanitarian assistance to mitigate the devastating
humanitarian situation in Syria, which continues to
constitute a threat to peace and security in the region
(see S/PV.9089). The Council recognized in July that the
need for cross-border deliveries would extend beyond
10 January. The facts that led to that decision in July
have not changed. Humanitarian conditions in Syria are
worse than they have ever been since the start of the
conflict, as Mr. Griffiths mentioned. Some 15.3 million
people will require humanitarian assistance in 2023.
Cross-border humanitarian assistance deliveries
are the most cost-effective and scalable way to provide
food, medical supplies and other essentials to 2.4 million

22-765857/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

Syrians who are at risk of starvation, disease and
exposure to brutal winter conditions in the north-west.
The United Nations cross-border operation is among
the most secure and transparent anywhere in the world.
There is simply no substitute for cross-border assistance.
The United Nations has implemented every element
outlined in resolution 2642 (2022), notably increasing
cross-line assistance deliveries and continuing the
nationwide implementation of early-recovery projects.
The United Nations has dispatched four cross-line
aid convoys in the five months since we renewed
the mandate in July, almost doubling the total of
cross-line missions since they began in August 2021.
United Nations experts have provided the Council
a clear and logical accounting of their planning and
efforts, which have been carried out consistent with
humanitarian principles. The United States has done its
part, including funding early-recovery projects in all
14 governorates of Syria and encouraging the provision
of cross-line aid as determined by humanitarian needs.
The continued presence of thousands of thirdcountry nationals in displacement camps and detention
centres in Syria further complicates the humanitarian
situation in Syria and must be addressed. Violence is
prevalent in the camps, and thousands of vulnerable
children are growing up in them without access to
education, protection, including proper documentation,
medical care and other basic services. Moreover, these
camps and detention facilities are targets for attack
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
underscoring the urgency to facilitate durable solutions
through voluntary, safe and dignified returns and
repatriations. We call on all States to repatriate their
citizens from the camps and detention facilities.
We welcomed the adoption of resolution
2664 (2022) and greatly appreciate Ireland’s close
collaboration with us in facilitating discussions with
the Security Council over the last few months. The
resolution established a humanitarian carve-out to the
asset-freeze measures across United Nations sanctions
regimes. We note that the applicability of this carve-out
to the Security Council’s ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions
regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) will provide
important assurances to humanitarian actors in Syria,
including those delivering cross-border aid.
Just yesterday, the United States Department of
Treasury released a new package of general licences
to implement resolution 2664 (2022) across our
8/22

21/12/2022

domestic sanctions programmes, including some of
the programmes related to Syria where humanitarian
authorizations did not otherwise already exist. These
updates to United Nations and United States sanctions
facilitate humanitarian aid while maintaining sanctions
on bad actors. This is a significant step for United Nations
sanctions related to Syria and builds on significant
carve-outs already within United States sanctions for
humanitarian aid for the Syrian people, including the
delivery of food, medicine and other aid. As we better
align these carve-outs across United Nations and
United States sanctions, we are making clear that our
sanctions should not impede humanitarian activity or
the provision of assistance to all in need.
Turning to the political situation, we regret there
has been no progress on the Constitutional Committee,
as its work has been blocked by arbitrary demands from
Russia on unrelated issues. We support a Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned process, and we call on the Al-Assad
regime to cooperate with Special Envoy Pedersen’s
efforts to reconvene the Constitutional Committee,
agree to and implement a comprehensive, nationwide
ceasefire, and humanely release the more than 130,000
missing or arbitrarily detained persons.
We remain concerned about the continued violence
and recent escalation in northern Syria, which is putting
civilians at risk and threatens the progress made in
defeating ISIL. We urge all parties to de-escalate
immediately, protect civilians and civilian objects and
uphold international humanitarian law. We welcome
Special Envoy Pedersen’s convening of the ceasefire task
force in Geneva last Friday and hope the resumption of this
format of meetings can help ensure stability on the ground.
The start of the new year presents an opportunity
for the Al-Assad regime to begin the process of healing
the country that it has so thoroughly shattered. We urge
the regime to make clear its support for the provision of
humanitarian assistance to all in Syria, including through
cross-border deliveries, and to make clear its intention to
constructively participate in Constitutional Committee
meetings in Geneva as soon as Special Envoy Pedersen
can convene them.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I deliver this statement
on behalf of Norway and Ireland, as co-penholders on
the Syria humanitarian file. I thank Mr. Pedersen and
Mr. Griffiths for their briefings today. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Griffiths and his team
for the two reports with which we have been supplied
on the situation in Syria (S/2022/956 and S/2022/933).
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9230

That situation could not be clearer. Syrians continue
to suffer. The humanitarian situation continues to
worsen. And aid, through all modalities, continues
to be indispensable for millions of people across the
country. An estimated 15.3 million people will require
humanitarian protection and assistance in 2023. That is
yet another significant increase, up from 14.6 million in
2022, which was the highest number of people in need
since the beginning of the conflict.

Despite notable progress on cross-line deliveries,
they remain at this time unable to substitute the
size or scope of the massive United Nations crossborder operation. The highly monitored crossborder mechanism continues to be an indispensable
lifeline — as Special Envoy Pedersen said — providing
food, shelter, water, sanitation, hygiene, protection,
vaccines and critical medical services to millions of
Syrians in need.

Syrians are having to work harder than ever
before just to survive. Humanitarian suffering as a
result of protracted conflict has been exacerbated by
food insecurity, the coronavirus disease pandemic,
a dire economic situation, a water crisis and cholera.
Astoundingly, from the 1 January to 30 September of
this year, 450 civilians, including 123 children, were
killed as a result of hostilities and violence in Syria.
Those 123 children should be safe and well, learning,
growing and flourishing.

The impact of years of conflict, instability,
recurring displacements, poor living conditions
and ongoing economic struggles is clear. The rise in
suicidal ideation and suicides is grim evidence of an
encroaching mental-health crisis. Conflict, hunger
and cold are stealing the lives of civilians. But so too
is hopelessness caused by the burden of the ongoing
conflict and the resulting extreme hardship. It is within
our power, in this Chamber, to address at least some of
that lack of hope by ensuring that aid continues to reach
those most in need.

Civilians are not a target. We echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call upon all parties to take constant care
throughout their military operations to spare civilians
and civilian objects, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
Food insecurity has reached record heights.
Children in particular are suffering. Cases of severe
acute malnutrition rates have doubled since last year.
Many children are stunted and at risk of irreversible
damage to their health. As the income gap soars,
families are unable to afford food. Parents are going
without as they try to keep their children from starving.
In this context, early-recovery assistance is
vital. From the provision of seeds and installation of
streetlights to the rehabilitation of bakeries, schools
and irrigation networks for agriculture, early-recovery
support is changing lives in every governorate of
Syria. Between January and September, an estimated
10.8 million Syrians were reached directly or indirectly
by projects aimed at increasing resilience. We welcome
that progress, underpinned by resolution 2642 (2022).
It must continue.
When it comes to delivering life-saving aid to
people in need across Syria, all channels of access
should be consistently available. Cross-line convoys
of aid to north-western Syria continue to increase in
frequency and size, and we encourage continued efforts
in that regard.

I repeat that 15.3 million people in 2023 will
require humanitarian assistance in Syria. I know we
often hear staggering numbers in the Chamber, but we
must remember that they are much more than numbers.
These are vulnerable people, including elderly persons
and children, who need food, water and warmth. They
need safe, dignified shelter; they need help; they
need the Council to act. We must continue to use all
modalities to deliver humanitarian aid to those in need.
To echo the Secretary-General, the continuation of
the cross-border mechanism, which remains a lifeline
for millions of people, by the Security Council is critical.
It is a moral and humanitarian imperative. We cannot
abandon these people at a time of such acute need.
I will now address the political situation on behalf
of Ireland. My country is seriously concerned about
the continuing hostilities on the ground in Syria,
particularly given the worrisome escalation in the
north in recent weeks. Information received by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights that some of those attacks do not appear
to be aimed at specific military targets, while hitting
residential areas and densely populated internally
displaced persons (IDP) camps, is deeply concerning.
Indiscriminate attacks are unacceptable and
prohibited under international humanitarian law. All
parties to the conflict are obliged to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Those who violate international

22-765859/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian law must be held accountable. We call
on parties to exercise maximum restraint and reiterate
the need for a nationwide ceasefire, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/956)
highlighted the dire security situation for those living
in the Al-Hol camp. In 2022, 42 people were reportedly
murdered at the camp, including 22 women and 4
children. Impunity for killings, rapes and other acts of
violence remains rampant, while people are living in
overcrowded and miserable conditions. Ireland echoes
the call of the Secretary-General for local authorities in
control of those camps to abide by their obligations under
international law. We urge the international community
to take action in order to ease the suffering of those in
Al-Hol and other IDP camps. We are concerned about
reports that internally displaced women and adolescent
girls lack access to life-saving sexual and reproductive
health services.
Ireland remains very concerned about the plight
of those detained and missing in Syria, with tens of
thousands of families left without any knowledge
of their loved ones. Ireland calls on the Syrian
Government and non-State groups to account for the
fate and whereabouts of those detained and to allow
human rights agencies access to places of detention.
I would like to conclude my statement by thanking
Special Envoy Pedersen for his tireless efforts to advance
the Syrian political process throughout Ireland’s term on
the Council. We reiterate our support for Mr. Pedersen’s
important work on step-for-step building measures and
efforts to reconvene the Constitutional Committee in
Geneva. Any new constitution and related political
process must include the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women. After years of conflict, the
Syrian people deserve progress towards stability and
security. That can be achieved only through dialogue
and agreement on a lasting political solution.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings.
For some time now, the security situation in Syria
has been turbulent. Türkiye has repeatedly pounded
northern Syria with air strikes and artillery shelling
and continues to threaten to launch ground actions.
Israel has frequently attacked targets within Syrian
territory. Syria is a sovereign State. Any military
operations on its soil without the consent of the
10/22

21/12/2022

Syrian Government, whatever the pretext, constitute a
violation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
call on Türkiye and Israel to immediately cease crossborder attacks and find solutions through dialogue and
consultation. The illegal presence of foreign troops on
Syrian territory must also end.
At the end of the day, a proper settlement of the
Syrian issue can be achieved only through political
means. The sooner a political solution materializes,
the earlier the people’s suffering will be alleviated.
Resolution 2254 (2015) represents the international
consensus on the Syrian political process and must
be fully implemented. We welcome Special Envoy
Pedersen and his team engaging extensively with all
parties on implementing the resolution. We hope that
the Constitutional Committee will reconvene as soon
as possible on the basis of the Syrian-led and -owned
principle. We support the Special Envoy’s step-for-step
approach and encourage him to continue to enhance
communication with all parties on confidence-building
measures towards an early agreement.
Resolution 2642 (2022) will expire in January. It has
played its part in easing Syria’s humanitarian situation.
Relevant United Nations agencies have also contributed
to its implementation. However, its comprehensive and
effective implementation is still some way off. Crossborder aid was an interim arrangement in response to
special circumstances. Eventually, it has to transition
to cross-line aid in a gradual and orderly way. The
international community must advance cross-line aid
with the same vigour afforded to cross-border aid.
Priority must be given to the assurances of supplies and
funding for cross-line aid, in close coordination with
all parties, especially the party in de facto control of
north-western Syria so that it can become the primary
channel of humanitarian relief for Syria.
Early-recovery projects can help cultivate
endogenous drivers for Syria’s development. In the past
five months, funding for such projects has improved,
but is still far behind in meeting the needs of the
Syrian people. China urges all donors to put the wellbeing of the entire Syrian population first, provide
sufficient financial support with no strings attached to
early-recovery projects and ensure their even-handed
delivery across Syria. Given that explosive remnants
of war have taken a heavy toll on the normal life and
work of the Syrian people, we hope that the relevant
operations will be incorporated into the early-recovery
programme without delay.
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9230

Unilateral sanctions and their excessive enforcement
run counter to the efforts of the Council and the
international community to improve humanitarian
access and increase humanitarian resources in Syria.
The Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of the
unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human
rights stated explicitly in her report (A/HRC/51/33)
that such measures have exacerbated the humanitarian
crisis in Syria. The Secretary-General also stated in
his report (S/2022/933) that unilateral sanctions have
impeded humanitarian work with regard to procurement
and payments. Once again, China calls on the countries
concerned to lift their unilateral coercive measures
against Syria without delay.

the progress, even if limited, made in deliveries
through the cross-line modality since the adoption
of resolution 2642 (2022) in July. While maintaining
respect for Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
we should redouble our efforts to address the reasons
for the delays to a more significant increase in
humanitarian aid. The need to ensure transparency
and accountability is valid for both modalities of
humanitarian assistance. Brazil also encourages further
progress in the development of early-recovery projects,
without geographic discrimination. In addition to
addressing immediate needs, such projects can lay a
foundation for alleviating the humanitarian crisis in
Syria in a more sustainable manner.

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would first like to thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for their briefings.

We welcomed the adoption earlier this month of
a standing humanitarian carve-out, applicable across
all United Nations sanctions regimes, under resolution
2664 (2022). With regard to Syria, we understand that
the resolution could enhance the ability of humanitarian
actors to deliver aid in areas outside Government
control, including in sites where Al-Qaida or Da’esh
affiliates are actively present. It is therefore important
to strengthen oversight in order to prevent the diversion
of aid.

Unfortunately, after 11 years of conflict, the
humanitarian situation in Syria continues to take an
appalling toll on human life. Its scale and severity are
affecting the Syrian population in areas both within and
outside Government control, particularly in the northwest. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian
and medical personnel, and full compliance with
international humanitarian law must remain priorities.
Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons have
an essential role to play in building a peaceful and
prosperous future for Syria. Their fundamental rights
must be fully respected, including their right to a safe
and voluntary return.
Brazil believes that we should refrain from
politicizing the humanitarian response in Syria. The
delivery of aid must be impartial and non-discriminatory
and reach all in need, regardless of their political
affiliation. For the time being, the cross-border
mechanism, which is set to expire in less than a month,
remains a vital component of the humanitarian response
in the country. We recognize the persistence of obstacles
that prevent the scaling up of cross-line deliveries,
particularly into the north-west, both at the speed and
to the level required to meet humanitarian needs.
The Council’s organization over the past six months
of three informal interactive dialogues on Syria provided
useful opportunities to consider the many challenges
holding back progress in cross-line deliveries to all
parts of Syria. In particular, we note the difficulties of
coordinating the organization of humanitarian convoys
with multiple parties and authorities. Brazil welcomes

Brazil reaffirms its commitment to playing a
constructive role in the Syrian file. The Council
should redouble its efforts to end the current political
stalemate, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), with a
view to achieving a solution to the conflict in Syria.
A true Syrian-led and -owned political process,
without foreign interference, is essential to promoting
sustainable peace while preserving Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council — Ghana,
Kenya and my own country, Gabon (A3).
We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Geir Pedersen, and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for their briefings on the
most recent political and humanitarian developments
in Syria. We also welcome the representatives of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and
the Republic of Türkiye to today’s meeting.
The escalation of hostilities in northern Syria,
especially in Idlib, is particularly alarming. The use of
force on demonstrators in the south continues, as well
as air strikes, mutual bombing and clashes, with the

22-7658511/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

potential for escalation. Once again, it is civilians who
are paying a heavy price for the conflict. Hostilities and
military operations affecting civilians have intensified
in various parts of the country. During the reporting
period, civilians were killed or injured as a result of
air strikes, ground strikes and attacks with various
kinds of improvised explosive devices and gunfire. The
hostilities have also had an impact on civilian objects,
further eroding access to basic services and livelihoods.
Based on incidents reported across the country, as
documented by the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, from 1 to 13 October this year a total
of 42 civilians, including seven women and 13 children,
were killed as a result of the hostilities, and at least
60 civilians, including 14 women and 13 children, were
injured. The A3 strongly condemns such indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian objects in violation of
international humanitarian law, including the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution.
Terrorist acts have also continued. Da’esh, which
is listed as a terrorist group by the Security Council,
continues its attacks, including on civilians, in Dara’a,
Deir ez-Zor, Al-Hasakah and eastern rural Homs and
Hama. Any additions to the list of terrorist groups will
only worsen the dire security situation and continue to
endanger the lives of innocent civilians. We therefore
call for concerted efforts to combat terrorist groups
listed by the Council. We are very concerned about the
squalid conditions for detainees in Syria, especially
in the Al-Hol camp. The detainees’ treatment and
living conditions should be improved immediately.
We reiterate our call to States to repatriate their
citizens, especially women and children, in a safe and
dignified manner in line with the applicable norms of
international humanitarian law.
After a decade of conflict, Syria is now experiencing
a considerable increase in humanitarian needs, and the
number of people in need of international assistance
to survive continues to rise every year. The ongoing
violence, a protracted economic crisis, difficult weather
conditions and a lack of access to basic services in the
context of a cholera epidemic that is now affecting every
governorate are all challenges for the Syrian people.
Food insecurity is worsening and is especially affecting
children at risk of malnutrition. In Al-Hol and other
camps in north-eastern Syria, children are constantly
exposed to violence and deprived of basic rights,
including access to education and health services.
12/22

21/12/2022

With regard to the plight of women in Syria, the A3
echoes the Secretary-General and urges the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic to develop legislative and
policy measures to eliminate discrimination against
women and girls in every area of life and to achieve the
goal of gender equality, including by using quotas and
special measures. Cognizant of the absolute importance
of saving lives and fully responding to the humanitarian
needs of the ever-increasing number of Syrians in
distress, the A3 supports the United Nations-supported
cross-border operations, which continue to play a key
role in reaching many people in need and for which
there is no substitute in terms of scale. In that regard, the
renewal of the cross-border mechanism for the delivery
of humanitarian aid is not just necessary but appropriate
and urgent. We therefore welcomed the passage of a total
of 29 convoys, or 1,377 trucks, as part of the cross-border
operations through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing.
On the political front, the A3 welcomes the ongoing
efforts of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen to advance his stepfor-step confidence-building process in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and to convene
a ninth session of the United Nations-facilitated, Syrianled Constitutional Committee. We note in particular his
bilateral engagement with the Syrian Government, the
Syrian opposition and other key stakeholders. We hope
that the ninth session of the Constitutional Committee
will allow for the fundamental challenges facing the
Committee to be addressed.
Nevertheless, there is an urgent need to achieve
a nationally facilitated ceasefire in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). Calm on
the ground is essential to create an environment
conducive to moving the political process forward. We
therefore call on all parties to prioritize the needs of
the Syrian people, to exercise restraint and to engage in
meaningful negotiations.
The issue of the fate of detainees remains a major
concern for the A3. We call for those responsible to be
held to account for their actions.
We reiterate our commitment to respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Finally, the A3 reiterates its solidarity with the
Syrian people in their quest for lasting peace and
stability. The resolute commitment in good faith of
Syria’s neighbouring countries is fundamental in order
to achieve that.
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Juul (Norway): As my Irish colleague
presented our joint statement as co-penholders on the
humanitarian situation, I will now make a statement on
the political situation in Syria. I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings.
As this is Norway’s last meeting on Syria during
our current term on the Security Council, let me offer
a few reflections.
It is heartbreaking to have seen a continuation of
hostilities, civilian casualties and even escalations in
Syria in the past two years. There truly are no military
solutions to the conflict. A nationwide ceasefire must
be prioritized. We have called and will continue to
call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint and
abide by their obligations to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
Norway would like to commend the vital work of
Special Envoy Pedersen and his efforts to implement
resolution 2254 (2015), including to bring the parties
to the negotiation table. The Special Envoy’s recent
mission to Damascus to consult with the parties and
other key actors is positive. We fully support his stepfor-step approach to seek a new dynamic towards a
solution in Syria, and we encourage a renewed sense
of urgency for the Constitutional Committee. We
continue to urge all parties to work in good faith with
the Special Envoy.
Let me also stress our support for the Special
Envoy’s inclusive approach to the political process and
underline the importance of his regular consultations
with the Civil Society Support Room and the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board. Women’s participation is
central to building lasting peace and stability. It is
also crucial to draw on the broad diversity of Syrian
civil society organizations and to truly engage them in
efforts to move the political process forward.
It is regrettable that, in the past two years, we have
not seen much progress on resolving the important
issue of those missing and arbitrarily detained. Many
Syrians and their families are affected — they do not
know what happened to their loved ones.
While the announced general amnesty for
non-lethal terrorist crimes was positive, it is important
that the amnesty is implemented, both broadly and
with priority, in order to build confidence and share
information with the public.

S/PV.9230

In conclusion, let me once again thank the Special
Envoy and underline that Norway will continue to stay
engaged and support United Nations efforts to find a
political solution, which the Syrian people desperately
want and deserve. Progress towards a political solution
will not only benefit the people of Syria, who have
suffered for too long, but also strengthen neighbouring
countries and the broader international community.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I want to start by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen
and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their
comprehensive and sobering briefings today.
At the outset, on the humanitarian situation,
the facts on the ground are clear. As Special Envoy
Pedersen said, we have an ever-deepening humanitarian
crisis. An estimated 15.3 million Syrians will be in dire
need of humanitarian assistance by early 2023, with
approximately 12 million facing acute food insecurity.
The report of the Secretary-General published this
month (S/2022/933) sets out the criticality of food, shelter
and medical assistance, in particular in the response to
cholera and the provision of immunization services.
The United Nations has also clearly explained
that cross-line operations complement but cannot
replace or compensate for the cross-border mechanism.
Therefore, my first point is that, with millions of
Syrians facing another harsh winter, the moral and
humanitarian imperatives are clear: renewing the
cross-border mandate in January and continuing crossborder assistance is essential to the United Nations
humanitarian operation and provides a lifeline to those
people in desperate need.
My second point is that a political solution, as
others have said, is the only way to bring an end to
the humanitarian crisis. That means implementing
resolution 2254 (2015) through, namely, a nationwide
ceasefire; the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees; free and fair elections in line with a new
constitution; and the release of those arbitrarily detained.
We know that thousands of Syrians are arbitrarily
detained in regime detention centres, and information on
their whereabouts is withheld from their families. Worse
still, the Syrian Network for Human Rights reported
yesterday that hundreds of detainee deaths, including
many children, were never reported to their families.
I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his work to address gender-based violence.
Colleagues will recall that, three weeks ago, the United

22-7658513/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

Kingdom hosted a conference on the prevention of
sexual violence in conflict in order to strengthen the
global response to that problem.
We therefore call for the immediate reconvening
of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva to focus
on the substance of the political transition. The Syrian
opposition remains ready to engage in good faith. We
urge Russia and the regime to do the same.
My third point is that, as we have heard, continuing
the status quo is not an option. Syria needs the Security
Council to unite and to support the renewal of crossborder aid within a humanitarian framework and the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), leading to a
political solution.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me also begin by
expressing our thanks to Special Envoy Pedersen and
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their briefings
today and for their tireless efforts to improve the lives
of ordinary Syrians. The grim reality that they have
described is another reminder of how challenging the
situation in Syria is for the international community
and how little has been achieved despite efforts. We
welcome the recent engagement of Special Envoy
Pedersen with the parties with regard to reconvening
the Constitutional Committee and promoting his stepfor-step initiative. We share the view of the Special
Envoy that those are important steps that all parties
could take to help build trust and confidence and end
the suffering of all Syrians. There is no alternative to
negotiations and the constitutional route to return Syria
to normality.
The humanitarian catastrophe in Syria is humanmade. It is a political choice. But there should be no
doubt concerning the renewal of the humanitarian
mandate — the lifeline for millions of Syrians. Both
the 12 December special report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/933) on humanitarian needs in Syria
and his regular 60-day report (S/2022/956) emphasize
that cross-line operations, while important, cannot
currently replace the cross-border operation in size or
scope. We also want to stress the important role that
carveout resolution 2664 (2022) can play in the case of
Syria. The renewal is the bare minimum we can do to
meet the basic needs of the people in Syria. The Council
will lose its credibility in the eyes of Syrians and of
the world if it fails to live up to meeting its minimal
humanitarian obligations.
14/22

21/12/2022

The Syrian regime has fed the Syrian people and
the world with false hopes about the whereabouts
of hundreds of thousands of missing persons and
detainees. The Syrian regime must immediately release
all detainees and provide complete information about
all missing persons. We strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for a new mechanism on missing
persons to provide long-awaited closure for millions
of Syrians. At the same time, Syria needs all the help
it can get to move out of the hellish place it has been
forced into. It needs to restore its basic infrastructure
to make normal life possible, and the life of ordinary
Syrians bearable. Concrete plans and projects within
the framework of the step-for-step approach are
needed. But we cannot pay for the restoration of normal
life in Syria without fighting impunity and holding the
perpetrators of all crimes accountable.
In conclusion, Syria needs an inclusive and
active political process, with the full and meaningful
participation of women and civil society, to allow for
a political transition to take place, and we encourage
Special Envoy Pedersen to continue working with
the Women’s Advisory Board and the Civil Society
Support Room in that regard. That is the only way to
meet the aspirations of the Syrian people. Albania fully
supports all efforts to that effect and the role played by
the Special Envoy.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Geir Pedersen and Martin Griffiths
for their briefings.
I would like to underscore the three following points.
First, I regret once again the absence of a political
process. While the situation remains volatile, especially
in the northern part of Syria, we reiterate our call for
a nationwide ceasefire. Meanwhile, the Syrian regime
refuses to engage in a political process as set forth in
resolution 2254 (2015), which, I recall, was unanimously
adopted by the Security Council. The Constitutional
Committee is no longer meeting. The regime refuses
to cooperate with the United Nations with regard to
the fate of more than 100,000 missing persons — a
historically unprecedented statistic. Finally, the regime
does not want to engage in the Special Envoy’s step-bystep approach, which we support.
The United Nations has broadly documented the
atrocities committed by the regime over the past 12
years of war. The use of sexual violence is systematic,
including against children, in the regime’s detention
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

facilities. The Sednaya prison, located in an area under
the regime’s control, is known for the abuses committed
within its walls. Based on United Nations reports and
the testimonies of Syrians, the European Union has
adopted targeted sanctions against the perpetrators
of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Syria.
They include many humanitarian exemptions so as
not to hinder the delivery of humanitarian aid, which,
I recall, has been largely financed by the European
Union and its member States. In total, they have raised
more than $27.4 billion since 2011. That is why, in the
absence of any progress on the political process in
Syria, the French and European positions on the lifting
of sanctions, normalization and reconstruction will
remain unchanged.
Secondly, I would like to recall the responsibility
of the regime for the humanitarian tragedy taking place
in Syria. The brutality of the repression has caused
the largest population displacement of the twenty-first
century. Many major Syrian cities have been bombed or
even completely destroyed by the regime and its allies.
There are 12 million displaced persons and refugees
who hope to return to Syria when the conditions are
right. According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, many refugees
today do not want to return for fear of reprisals,
forced conscription or because their property has been
confiscated. I recall that the several hundred people
who made the choice to return to Syria were unable to
do so without first obtaining the regime’s consent to
cross the border. The security checks are coupled with
administrative detention upon their arrival in places
to which the United Nations most often has no access.
Numerous cases of torture, forced disappearances
and executions have been reported in the detention
facilities. Faced with the scope of such persecution,
many returning refugees are seeking to leave Syria
once again.
That is a deliberate policy of demographic
engineering, which is being pursued today and in which
the international community cannot be complicit.
Lastly, only humanitarian assistance under the
aegis of the United Nations, in accordance with the
norms of international humanitarian law, can help
the Syrian population. The latest special report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/933) leaves no doubt — as
the briefings by Special Envoy Pedersen and UnderSecretary-General Griffiths reminded us— that
needs are ever-greater and the prospects for 2023 are

S/PV.9230

extremely worrisome. The report highlights the critical
and vital role played by the cross-border mechanism,
both in terms of the volume of aid delivered and the
number of its recipients. Such aid is the only means of
survival for more than 2 million Syrians every month.
Cross-line aid is complementary and important, but
it cannot be a substitute for cross-border aid. As the
Secretary-General has stressed, renewing the crossborder mechanism is a moral imperative. France fully
supports that goal. The operation carried out under the
aegis of the United Nations enables ensuring compliance
with the relative Security Council resolutions, which, I
recall, are binding on all parties.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings.
During its two years as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, Mexico has witnessed the
unacceptable human cost of almost 12 years of conflict
and the political stalemate to end it. The reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/933 and S/2022/956) reflect
the alarming data. Next year, almost 15.3 million
people will require humanitarian assistance, the highest
level of people in need since 2011. Inflation has led to
a deterioration in purchasing power and the inability
to purchase basic goods, in a country where cases of
severe malnutrition among children are on the rise. The
impact on mental health and the increase in deaths by
suicide, especially among women and young people,
are alarming.
Given a situation in which humanitarian needs are
not subsiding but, on the contrary, are increasing, it is
clear that all modalities of humanitarian access must
be preserved. That is why we welcome the continued
cross-line deliveries to the north-west. We urgently
call for redoubling efforts to overcome the security
and administrative challenges to continue and increase
such deliveries. However, it is clear that there is no
substitute for the voluminous aid entering through the
Bab Al-Hawa humanitarian crossing.
Moreover, early-recovery projects are critical to the
rehabilitation of basic infrastructure. We also recognize
how demining efforts can help render agricultural land
usable again.
My delegation notes with deep concern the
resurgence in hostilities, particularly the military
presence and movements in the north. We call for

22-7658515/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

exercising restraint and for a national ceasefire. We
stress that there can be no military solution. The
only path to sustainable peace in Syria is an inclusive
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2016). We commend the efforts of the Special Envoy,
including his efforts to convene the ninth meeting of the
small body of the Constitutional Committee, which we
regret has so far not been able to take place. It is urgent
that the international community encourage the parties
to participate in those discussions in order to make
progress towards national reconciliation and rebuild
the social fabric. That is the only way to create the
conditions for the safe, dignified and voluntary return
of millions of Syrian refugees. It is urgent to address
the demands of the thousands of families that have been
torn apart by the disappearances of their loved ones. We
urge the authorities to release the detained, clarify the
situation of the missing persons and grant humanitarian
agencies access to the detention centres.
Accountability also continues to be a crucial
element for advancing towards a resolution of the
conflict. Unfortunately, the progress in that area still
leaves much to be desired. Since it is not possible to
refer the Syrian case to the International Criminal
Court, my delegation urges for strengthened
collaboration with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic.
The nearly 12 years of conflict have resulted in one
of the greatest human crises in living memory — 12
years in which the international community and the
Security Council have failed the Syrian people. Our
debt to the Syrian people increases with each passing
day. The least we can do to mitigate that is to renew
the authorization of the Bab Al-Hawa cross-border
mechanism. We trust that the Council will rise to
that occasion.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank both
Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Martin Griffiths for their
briefings today. As we approach the end of several
Member States’ terms on the Security Council, I want
to take this opportunity to extend my sincere thanks
and appreciation to our colleagues from Norway and
Ireland, the penholders for the Syrian humanitarian
16/22

21/12/2022

resolution, for their professionalism, balanced approach
and tireless efforts to facilitate the resolution on the
cross-border mechanism in Syria over the most recent
period. We hope that the incoming penholders will take
the same approach.
As we near the expiration of the cross-border
mechanism to Syria, I would like to focus today on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. This year, the Syrian
crisis has witnessed worsening humanitarian conditions
and a deepening of divisions with regard to that dossier,
both inside and outside the Council. We must ensure
that a spirit of unity and collaboration prevails among
the members of the Council in the coming year if
we are to lessen the suffering of the Syrian people.
We also stress the importance of not politicizing the
Syrian humanitarian dossier or tying it to progress
on the political track. We all have a moral and human
responsibility to ensure the delivery of assistance to all
in need in Syria, without any political considerations.
In July the Council adopted resolution 2642
(2022) during a period of conflicting positions and
geopolitical complications. That resolution extended
the cross-border mechanism to Syria and for the
first time included a provision on the importance of
ensuring electricity supplies for Syrians, given that it is
a basic and essential humanitarian need. The resolution
also allowed for the convening of informal interactive
dialogues, which helped provide a clearer picture to the
Member States about the difficulties surrounding its
implementation. Given those important elements, which
have strengthened the objectives of the resolution, the
United Arab Emirates supports the extension of the
cross-border mechanism to Syria for an additional six
months. That is currently the best way to move forward.
The United Arab Emirates believes that the
resolution on the cross-border mechanism to Syria
should be treated as one that benefits all Syrians in
all of Syria’s governorates, not only those living in
north-western Syria. It includes sustainable solutions
such as early-recovery projects essential for addressing
the humanitarian situation in the long term, as needs
continue to rise to dangerous levels. According to the
report of the Secretary-General (see S/2022/933), more
than 15 million of Syria’s population of 22 million
people will be in need of humanitarian assistance next
year. We are talking about real people and families
of women and children, not mere numbers. All the
parties on the ground must therefore also enable the
unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid and commit
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

to non-interference in humanitarian operations in order
to ensure that they reach all in need. We also stress the
importance of restoring calm and ensuring de-escalation
across all regions, especially in northern Syria.
The delivery of cross-line assistance requires
security guarantees from all the parties on the
ground and the removal of all obstacles that impede
humanitarian operations in order to enable the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
increase cross-line humanitarian operations, in terms
of both frequency and scale.
In conclusion, we want to emphasize that the
cross-border mechanism to Syria was established as
an exceptional and temporary measure, which means
that we should prioritize the political track, given its
impact on the humanitarian track, including through
our support to the Special Envoy’s efforts. Without
a political solution to the crisis, the humanitarian
situation in Syria cannot be addressed.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and UnderSecretary General Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
We note with regret that there is still no end in sight for
the conflict in Syria and that the political process has not
yet taken off. We continue to urge for a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned political process, in line with resolution
2254 (2015), with a firm commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic. A decisive forward movement
on the political track in Syria remains urgent if the
sufferings of its people are to be alleviated.
The revival of the Constitutional Committee
process is crucial if we are to move forward on the
political track. In that regard, we take note of the efforts
of the Special Envoy, particularly his visit to Damascus
earlier this month. The step-for-step approach that he
advocates requires engagement and response from
all sides and cannot be a one-sided process. The
progressive normalization of Syria’s relations with its
neighbours can contribute positively in that regard,
and we continue to support the Special Envoy’s active
engagement with the region.
In recent weeks, the security situation, particularly
in north-east Syria, has worsened. Moreover, the
activities of terrorist outfits are on the rise. We have
also seen military operations inside Syria carried

S/PV.9230

out by a neighbour. We express concern over such
unilateral actions, which violate Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We believe that withdrawal of
all foreign forces is essential to achieving a nationwide
ceasefire. We note the recent meeting of the ceasefire
task force and hope that the parties will take steps
towards a cessation of hostilities.
The humanitarian situation remains dire, as many
have said. In his most recent report (S/2022/933), the
Secretary-General has projected an increase in the
number of people in need of humanitarian aid from
14.6 million in 2022 to 15.3 million in 2023. UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths has also reiterated
the challenges faced by humanitarian agencies.
Women, children and the elderly continue to be
severely affected, and impediments to humanitarian
assistance persist, both in terms of delivery and
augmentation of financial resources. The restrictions
on financial services have also negatively affected the
work of humanitarian agencies.
We have noted the progress in cross-line deliveries
and early-recovery projects. Our consistent view in
this regard has been that distribution of humanitarian
assistance to Syrians, whether by cross-line or crossborder mechanisms, should be guided by a needsbased assessment, and not by political motivations.
Humanitarian assistance cannot be a matter of
political expediency.
The threat of terrorism to Syria and the region also
cannot be ignored. The sanctioned terror outfits, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham remain active in Syria. We reiterate
our call for the exercise of caution and due diligence
when extending humanitarian assistance to entities
and individuals proscribed under the United Nations
sanctions regime. The global fight against terrorism
cannot and should not be compromised for narrow
political gains. It is urgent and imperative that the
international community display zero tolerance towards
terrorism without any double standards.
In conclusion, I will say that India and Syria share
historic and friendly relations. Over the years, India
has extended humanitarian, technical and development
assistance to Syria through bilateral and multilateral
channels. Consignments of food and medicines have
been supplied to Syria from time to time, including
during the pandemic. India has offered lines of credit
worth $280 million to Syria for building a power

22-7658517/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

plant and a steel plant. A next-generation centre for
information technology was set up in Damascus in
October 2021. Approximately, 1,500 scholarships have
been provided to Syrian students to study in India in
diverse streams, including 200 scholarships in the
current academic year itself.
We stand ready to do more in the coming days and
months to help our Syrian brothers and sisters in their
hour of need. I assure the Security Council that India
will continue to play a constructive and meaningful role
in support of Syria and its people in their endeavour to
attain lasting peace and stability.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We asked for the floor yet again because we
were surprised by the statement made by our American
colleague when he said that Russia suspended the
deliberations of the Constitutional Committee on
the basis of arbitrary demands on unrelated issues.
I want to underscore that we had serious reasons for
suspending the meetings of the drafting commission of
the Constitutional Committee, given that, at the time,
no appropriate guarantees had been extended to the
delegation of the host country.
Furthermore, the meaning of such a suspension in
the deliberations of the Constitutional Committee should
not be overstated. If our Western colleagues have this
urge to move the negotiating process forward, they would
do well to worry about the long-standing stagnation
in the Israeli-Palestinian process, which has resulted
from Washington’s efforts to block the Middle East
Quartet and other international platforms, including the
Security Council, from introducing relevant initiatives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for the support extended by India to Syria. I would
also like to welcome Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Griffiths in
today’s meeting,
Our meeting today on the political and humanitarian
situations in Syria is our last such meeting for this
year. It is convened amid continued major threats and
18/22

21/12/2022

challenges facing Syria over many years — foremost
of which is terrorism, the illegal presence of the
United States and Turkish troops on parts of Syrian
territories, the escalation of recurrent Israeli acts of
aggression on vital Syrian facilities, the expansion
of the humanitarian crisis as a result of the failure
of pledges to the humanitarian response plan being
honoured, and the negative repercussions of the illegal,
unilateral and coercive measures that are nothing but
tools of collective punishment. The Security Council’s
discharge of its mandate in relation to Syria is not
only a legal responsibility, but it is also a moral and
humanitarian necessity that requires the Council to
condemn all violations of Syria’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity and to unconditionally call for the
immediate cessation of those violations.
The Syrian Government has made tireless efforts
to counter terrorism and managed to liberate wide areas
of Syrian territory from the hands of terrorist groups
and restore control of those areas by the Syrian State.
In parallel, the Syrian Government has made efforts to
achieve local settlements and national reconciliation
with a view to realizing normalization. Meanwhile,
a number of presidential amnesty decrees have been
issued, the most important of which is Decree No. 7
of 2022, which is comprehensive in scope and nature
as it relates to addressing terrorist crimes, only
excluding those that have led to human deaths. All of
those measures have contributed to the return of many
Syrians to their homes and to their normal lives. They
have also bolstered Syrian national unity and social
cohesion, along with sustainable stability.
At the same time, Syria has positively responded to
the sincere efforts and initiatives that were made on the
political track. It has supported the Astana meetings and
continued to follow up on the work of the Constitutional
Committee, established during the national dialogue
in Sochi in 2018. We look forward to the ninth round
of the Committee’s meetings after the resolution of
the logistical issues and aspects that some opposition
parties claim to be impeding their work. Syria has also
maintained its communication with Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy for Syria, who visited Damascus this
month, where he met with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates, who assured him of the need for
Syrians alone to determine the fate and future of their
country without any external interference, in addition
to putting an end to all violations of Syrian sovereignty
and immediately lifting the unilateral, inhumane and
illegal coercive measures.
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Since the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022), three
informal interactive rounds of dialogue have been
held by the Council, pursuant to the resolution. The
interactive dialogue was supposed to be a platform for
the assessment and implementation of its provisions.
During those three rounds, my delegation demonstrated
in detail the shortcomings in the implementation of the
resolution, in particular that certain Council members
are unwilling to implement the resolution’s provisions
aimed at alleviating and ending the human suffering of
the Syrian people. In that regard, I would like to briefly
reaffirm certain aspects.
First, cross-border humanitarian mechanism
was a temporary measure taken under exceptional
circumstances that no longer exist. The insistence on
the continuation of that mechanism — with its many
defects, irregularities and ambiguity — reflects flagrant
selectivity and clear distinction among Syrians, who all
deserve to have access to humanitarian aid.
Second, the relentless pursuit by the United States
of America and European Union countries to extend
that mechanism under the pretext of being humane
regarding the Syrian people runs counter to their
immoral, inhumane and unprecedented siege on the
Syrian people. Their siege increases the number of
Syrians who are dependent on humanitarian aid.
Third, some are adamant in preventing progress
in the work of the cross-line humanitarian mechanism
within the country, namely, across conflict lines, which
is evident in their pursuit to prove that the mechanism
is unable to replace the cross-border mechanism despite
the former being fully consistent with the principles of
humanitarian action and respect for Syrian sovereignty.
Fourth, the underfunding of the humanitarian
response plan for Syria due to the failure of some
Western donors to fulfil their pledges undermines the
effectiveness of improving the livelihood of Syrians and
impedes early-recover projects. That has a catastrophic
impact on the daily lives of Syrians and denies them
access to basic services. Electricity, as some noted in
this meeting, is provided for only half an hour every
day in certain areas in Syria.
Fifth, it is unacceptable to ignore the systematic
pillaging of the national treasures of the Syrian people,
such as oil, wheat and gas, at the hands of the United
States occupying troops and affiliated armed groups.
That practice deprives Syrians of their resources and
exacerbates their human suffering in an unprecedented

S/PV.9230

manner. The latest statistics show that the total value of
direct and indirect losses caused by the United States
occupation troops and the so-called international
coalition due to pillaging the oil sector in Syria have
exceeded $100 billion.
Sixth, some — including the Council — deliberately
insist on concealing the adverse effects of the unilateral,
coercive, immoral and inhumane measures imposed on
the Syrian people by the United States and European
Union countries. Any argument that those measures do
not target all aspects of the lives of Syrians is refuted
by the reality of the suffering of the Syrian people.
Moreover, there are no exceptions for humanitarian
purposes as some claim. That is simply an outright lie.
Seventh and lastly, the persistent water cut-off
by the Turkish regime and its terrorist organizations
under various pretexts and their weaponization of
water against civilian Syrians should be denounced
and condemned, as depriving citizens of water is a
war crime under international humanitarian law. That
practice suffocates the lives of more than 1 million
Syrians living in Al-Hasakah governorate and its
surroundings and hinders their access to clean water, a
matter that eventually lead to the outbreak of diseases,
including cholera, and impedes access to irrigation,
thus creating a food security crisis for Syrians.
The Syrian Government continues to facilitate
the work of the United Nations and international
organizations in Syria in order to meet the needs of the
Syrian people and to bolster their resilience. However,
the Syrian Government stresses that the humanitarian
crisis will not be resolved if the Security Council and
the Secretariat remain silent regarding the politicization
of the humanitarian aid dossier, the return of refugees,
the extortion by certain donors, the systematic pillaging
by United States occupation troops, the irresponsible
practices of the Turkish regime or overlooking the
adverse impacts of unilateral coercive measures.
The humanitarian crisis in Syria can be resolved
only when the Council moves immediately to fight
terrorism and to end the repeated violations of Syria’s
sovereignty, and when the Council calls for the
unconditional and immediate lifting of illegal coercive
measures and for donors to fulfil their pledges towards
the humanitarian response plan. The Security Council
should also urge an increase, in quantity and quality, of
early-recovery projects. Moreover, the Council should
guarantee the just distribution without discrimination

22-7658519/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

of relief, humanitarian aid and address the threat
posed by mines, unexploded ordnance and improvised
explosive devices, which constitute a real threat to the
lives of the Syrian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their updated briefings.
After more than a decade of conflict, there is only
one way to end the crisis in Syria, and that is through
a political process that is Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
and facilitated by the United Nations. We commend
Mr. Pedersen’s ongoing efforts and contacts with the
parties aimed at bringing the Constitutional Committee
out of its current impasse. In the context, we welcome
his recent visit to Damascus and close interaction with
the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic. We stress
that the Committee’s work must be conducted in strict
accordance with its terms of reference and rules of
procedure, without interference from outside parties
or outside pressure and without artificial deadlines.
The role of the United Nations should be restricted to
facilitation. It must be a wholly Syrian-led and Syrianowned effort.
We continue to believe that an end to the occupation
and a full restoration of respect for the Syrian Arab
Republic’s national sovereignty and territorial integrity
are preconditions for any political settlement. Similarly,
peace and security in Syria’s north can be achieved
only by upholding and fully respecting the country’s
national sovereignty and territorial integrity. Any
military action would only worsen the already severe
humanitarian situation. Iran again condemns the looting
of the Syrian people’s natural resources, particularly oil
products, in areas occupied by foreign forces. Terrorism
continues to pose a serious threat to Syria and the
whole region. However, the war on terrorism must not
be used to undermine Syria’s national sovereignty or
territorial integrity. In that regard, the illegal presence
of foreign forces in certain parts of Syria, which has
created ideal conditions for terrorist activities, should
end immediately.
With regard to humanitarian issues, we commend the
efforts of the United Nations and its agencies to provide
humanitarian relief to those in need. Despite those
efforts, Syria’s humanitarian situation is challenging,
and the country’s continued economic difficulties have
20/22

21/12/2022

had a widespread impact. We have taken note of the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on Syria’s
humanitarian situation (S/2022/933), which emphasizes
that the country is dealing with various challenges,
including difficulties caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the spread of cholera throughout the
country. According to the report, access to electricity is
among the top three unmet needs. The report indicates
that 15.3 million people will need early-recovery and
livelihood support in 2023. It also highlights that the
lack of electricity has made it more difficult for people
to access essential basic services. We fully support
the call for further expanding early-recovery projects,
including those aimed at ensuring electricity supplies
in Syria, as they are critical to restoring access to
basic services and must not be hampered by unilateral
sanctions. We also request a non-discriminatory and
equal distribution of early-recovery projects, as well as
their transparency and predictability.
The continuing unilateral and illegal coercive
measures remain one of the key causes of the appalling
conditions in Syria, where they have exacerbated
the humanitarian situation. Their negative effects
are also highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report, which expresses serious concerns about the
unintended consequences of sanctions for the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and access to essential
services such as health, education, food security and
electricity. Urgent efforts must therefore be made
to remove such unlawful measures, which can only
prolong the people’s misery.
We underline the significance of the cross-border
mechanism. However, we believe that it must be a
temporary arrangement and that the Syrian Arab
Republic’s legitimate concerns, including ensuring
its national sovereignty and territorial integrity,
must be fully respected. In addition, the absence of
significant progress in cross-line deliveries, as well as
their inequitable and discriminatory distribution, is a
challenge that must be handled in an appropriate and
timely manner.
Despite Syria’s repeated appeals, the Security
Council has maintained a deafening silence regarding
the Israeli regime’s continued aggression and
terrorist attacks on Syria, refusing to condemn those
egregious crimes. As a result, the Israeli regime has
been emboldened to continue its violations of Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as its
systematic and intentional targeting of civilians and
22-76585

21/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East

civilian infrastructure, which are flagrant violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Charter of the United Nations. Under the Charter
and international law, the Syrian Arab Republic has an
inherent right to take all necessary actions to protect its
national interests and security.
We support initiatives such as local and national
reconciliation, which are vital to facilitating the return
of refugees and internally displaced people, and we are
ready to help them succeed. We continue to believe
that a secure, stable and prosperous Syria benefits the
Syrian people and is in the interests of the region and
the international community. To that end, we support
Syria’s standing in the region and are more determined
than ever to strengthen our relations with it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths and Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen for their briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/933),
prepared in line with resolution 2642 (2022), clearly
illustrates the grave humanitarian situation in Syria.
As the report highlights, the humanitarian crisis has
been prolonged, with the people’s needs constantly
growing over the years. There has been yet another
projected increase in the number of people requiring
humanitarian assistance, now estimated at 15.3 million,
the highest since the conflict began in 2011. The harsh
winter months are especially concerning, especially
for the most vulnerable, including internally displaced
persons, women, children, the elderly and people with
disabilities. In view of that grim outlook, the continued
provision of life-saving humanitarian aid is as critical
as ever. The cross-border operation has proved to be
a reliable lifeline for humanitarian assistance for
millions living in north-western Syria. Through that
closely monitored operation, the United Nations
reaches 2.7 million people each month and does so in
an accountable and transparent manner. The assistance
goes beyond physical aid and includes critical support
in education, protection and health services.
There is no match or substitute for the scale, scope
and efficiency of the cross-border operation. Since the
adoption of resolution 2585 (2021), United Nations
agencies have successfully completed nine cross-line
missions to north-western Syria as a complement to the
massive cross-border operation. The most recent cross-

S/PV.9230

line mission, which took place on 30 November, was the
fourth of the monthly convoys that have been conducted
in August, September, October and November since
the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022). The SecretaryGeneral’s report on humanitarian needs in Syria also
provides detailed information on the progress made in
relation to early recovery. We continue to emphasize
that all regions should benefit fairly from those projects,
on the basis of United Nations needs assessments.
We are now exactly three weeks away from the
expiration date of the Security Council’s authorization
of the United Nations cross-border mechanism. It is clear
what must be done. It is clear what the Syrian people,
the United Nations and the humanitarian community
need. As we have said before in this Chamber, there
is no hidden agenda at issue here. The aim is nothing
more than to save the lives of those who depend on
that assistance.
The relevant resolutions adopted by the Security
Council since 2014 have affirmed the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political unity of Syria.
They have established control, oversight, transparency
and accountability over United Nations aid and have
allowed the Security Council to monitor that process. A
halt in the delivery of United Nations food assistance,
critical medical supplies and other life-saving aid
would threaten the lives of millions who rely on us to
keep them alive. We renew our call on all members
to be guided solely by humanitarian considerations.
We cannot afford to politicize the issue. We urge the
Council to continue to do what is right and to support the
indispensable United Nations cross-border mechanism
beyond January 2023.
According
to
the
Global
Humanitarian
Overview 2023 of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Syria ranks second on the
list of countries requiring the most resources for
humanitarian assistance activities. The ability of
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to
respond to the large-scale needs in Syria depends on
access to adequate financing as much as on access
to the people in need. The persistent low financing
rates of the Syrian humanitarian response plans over
the years is a source of concern. That negative trend
continued this year, with the plan receiving only 43 per
cent of what was needed for 2022. We echo the calls for
adequate funding to be allocated to the United Nations
humanitarian response in Syria.

22-7658521/22

S/PV.9230

The situation in the Middle East

21/12/2022

The crimes committed by the Kurdistan Workers’
Party/People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG) and Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF) terrorist organizations are
cause for great concern. In the past two years, more
than 500 Syrians have been killed as a result of PKK/
YPG attacks in northern Syria. The PKK/YPG/SDF
oppresses the people in the north-east and pursues
a separatist agenda. Supporting those terrorist and
separatist organizations under the pretext of fighting
Da’esh runs counter, first and foremost, to the relevant
United Nations resolutions, which reaffirm a strong
commitment to the territorial integrity of Syria.

Our determination is unwavering. We will continue
to take all necessary steps to protect our people and
ensure our border security.

The PKK/YPG also poses a vital threat to my
country’s national security. The attacks last month
in Taksim, in Istanbul, and Karkamış, in Gaziantep,
once again displayed the real face of PKK/YPG/
SDF terrorism being harboured in northern Syria. No
country is entitled to give us lessons about our fight
against terrorism. We reject the entitled statements that
we heard today on what we should and should not do
while defending our borders and protecting our people.

As for the hallucinatory statement by the
representative of the Syrian regime, I will not him
honour him or his delusional statement with a response.

22/22

A sustainable solution to the Syrian conflict can
be achieved only through political means in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). It is crucial that the political
process not be stalled. The Constitutional Committee
sessions should continue under the auspices of the
United Nations. We expect the ninth session of the
Constitutional Committee to be held as soon as possible.
All relevant parties should be encouraged towards that
end. The success of the political process must be a
priority for all.

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite the Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

22-76585
