UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

NEW

RECORDS

YORK

/

Provisional
Adoption

COUNCIL

CONTENTS

Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

agenda (S/Agenda/2171)
of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 22 November 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13636) .

1
1

1

F4PV.2171

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with Qures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolurions and Decisions of the
Security CounciZ. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2171st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 23 November 1979, at 5.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Sergio PALACIOS

de VIZZIO (Bolivia).

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2171)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint

by Zambia:

Letter dated 22 November 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13636)
The ineeting was called to order at 8.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Zambia:
Letter &ted 22 November 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to
-the President of the Security Council (S/13636)
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Spanish): I wish
to inform Council members that I have received a letter
from the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in
which .he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37.of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Ai the invitation of the President, Mr. Kikhia (Libyan Arab;lamahiriya) took the piace reseniedfor him at the side of the
Council chamber.
: 2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council is meeting today in response to a request
by the Permanent Representative of Zambia, which is
contained in a letter &ted 22 November addressed to the
President of the.Council [s/Z3636J.
: 3. Members of the Council have before them the text of a
draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Gabon, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia [S/236&j.

4. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Mr. President, on behalf of
the Zambian delegation, I once again thank you and the
other Security Council members for acceding promptly to
my request for the convening of a meeting to consider yet
another case in a series of unprovoked acts of aggression
committed by rebel Rhodesia against Zambia.
5. Zambia’s decision to request the urgent convening of
this Council meeting should not be taken lightly. The last
time we brought a case of aggression against us before the
Council was in March 1978, in spite of the repeated acts of
aggression which the rebel Rhodesian forces have unleashed
against my country since then. It should be noted that the
Rhodesian forces have been embarking on armed attacks,
aerial raids and bombings of Zambia since October 1978.
The frequency of these aerial bombings and commando
raids has grown in intensity. On each occasion, the
Rhodesians have used even more sophisticated weapons
against our civilian population and refugee centres in
different parts of the country. They have done so with
impunity and a strange sense of sadism. Rhodesian rebels
have perpetrated similar murderous raids against the other
front-line States of Mozambique, Botswana and Angola.
6.. We have on several occasions drawn the attention of
the international community to the grave situation in
southern Africa which threatens the fabric of international
peace and security. The new barbaric and murderous
offensive operations which the rebel @me and those that
conspire with it have mounted against Zambia since
September this year deserve the attention of the
intcmational community through this body. The situation
is indeed very grave.
7; At this juncture, let me catalogue some of the heinous
crimes which rebel Rhodesian forces have committed
against Zambia.
8. On 12 October 1979, the Chambeshi river rail bridge on
the Tanzania-Zambia railway -and the road bridge linking
:
Zambia and Tanzania were ‘both blown up. On 16
November, three other bridges along the Kafue-Chirundu
road in central Zambia were also blown up. On the ,
following day, two road bridges near Rufunsa on the Great
East Road linking Zambia and Malawi were destroyed.
Kaleya bridge, in the southern province, and Chongwe
bridge, again on the Great Easi Road, were destroyed by the
rebels on 19 November. These attacks on Zambia’s road
and rail networks, apart from causing a lot of hardship ._
within the country, itself, have virtually cut off Zambia’s
major transportation links with’the outside world.

9. With the following information I give the very first
preliminary estimated cost of, reconstructing the bridges
destroyed by Rhodesian rebel forces.

country, Zambia depends for its survival on its road and rail
networks for transporting goods to and from the ports. The
road and rail networks are therefore very important to us.
The Rhodesian rebels and their allies are intent on
destroying Zambia’s economy as well as destabilizing the
country. We cannot accept this.

10. The road bridge over the Chambeshi river, which is a
seven-span concrete bridge with a total span of 172 metres,
on the road between Mpika and Kasama, has been
damaged. Of the six supporting piers, two piers on the
Kasama end are completely destroyed, with a resultant loss
of three spans of 25 metres each. A third pier, though still
standing, is cracked and slanting and is therefore unreliable
as a support in this condition. At present, the TAZARA
authorities are engaged in the construction of a temporary
bridge for both rail and road trafftc. The estimated cost of
constructing a new bridge is $US 3,132,500.

19. It is thus evident that the armed attacks are directed at
Zambia. Claims by the enemy forces that the attacks were
not aimed at Zambia are therefore completely unfounded
and without any justification whatsoever. The international
community should accordingly dismiss those lies with the
contempt they rightly deserve.
20. Spokesmen for the rebels have neither disclaimed nor
disguised their responsibility for those wanton attacks.
Even if they denied or attempted to deny any knowledge of
what was happening, it is common knowledge that it is the
Rhodesian rebels and their collaborators who are the
culprits. We have on several occasions caught ‘them
red-handed in the act.

11. The Kaleya bridge decking consisted of five spans,
totalling 34 metres. Neither decking nor supports can be
retrieved for further use. It is therefore necessary to
construct a new bridge at the same location at an estimated
cost of tUS 689,150.

21. The illegal Rhodesian r@ime at Salisbury does not
even pretend that its targets are the freedom fighters, as it
chooses to refer to the refugee centres. It has committed and
continues to commit acts of war against Zambia. In so
doing, it has murdered many Zambians in cold biood and
destroyed property. In the process rebel Rhodes& have
violated Zambia’s territorial integrity. and sovereignty.
They have disregarded all norms of international law and
several resolutions of the United Nations, including thoseof
the Security Council.

12. The estimated cost of reconstructing the Chongwe
bridge is $US 626,500.
13. ’ With regard to the bridges over the Rufunsa river, the
estimated cost of rebuilding them is $US 125,300. The cost
of reconstructing the Kafue-Chirundu bridges is estimated
at $US 1,503,600.
14. The estimated total cost of reconstructing these
bridges is SUS 10,024,OOO. There is no doubt that the
eventual total cost of reconstruction will be much higher
than this figure.

22. There is irrefutable proof that the rebel Rhodesian
forces residing in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia,
together with their allies, are responsible for the damage to
Zambia’s economic infrastructure and the loss of human
lives in their raids.

15. Prior to the recent attacks, there were various casesof
aggression committed against Zambia, in which many
people lost their lives and a lot of property was destroyed.
For example, on 6 September 1979, rebel forces opened fire
at our troops’ positions at Chirundu bridge; on 21
September, enemy troops opened fire and shelled Chiawa
village, killing two civilians and injuring many others; on 13
October, rebel forces bombed Lusiwasi power station,
using rockets and mortars.

23. We are aware that the rebels, as international outlaws,
have no respect for the rule of law. It is the responsibility of
the administering Power, Britain, to bring sanity to bear on
the rebels in its colony. Instead, Britain remains
conspicuously silent whenever Zambia is attacked. When it
has attempted to react, its reaction has either been irrelevant
or, at best, begged the issue.

16. At tne same time, South Amcan troops entered
Zambia and camped at Mwandi, among other villages.
They were also active in Nawinda, Sichili mission, Machile,
Masese and along the Mwandi-Mulobezi stretch in the
western province.
17. I also wish to refer members of the’council to the letter
sent to the Secretary-General on 13 September 1979
[s/135391, in which I detailed the acts of aggression which
were committed by rebel Rhodesia and South Africa
against Zambia over a period of time ranging from January
to August 1979.

24.
For instance, the British Government issued a
statement in London today in which it called on the
Salisbury rbgime and the Patriotic Front to indicate that
they would not ‘carry out:any more cross-border military
incursions and inliltrations between Rhodesia and Zambia.
The British Government added that, for the undertaking
requiring the Rhodesian rbgime and the Patriotic Front
leaders -to cease cross-border operations to work, it would
be essential to obtain the co-operation of the Zambian
authorities.

18. The information which I have just outlined clearly
demonstrates that the rebel Rhode&s have launched an
undeclared war against Zambia. They have concentrated
their attacks on Zambia’s economic infrastructure. Enemy
attacks on Zambia’s bridges are aimed at paralysing the
country’s vital transport network. As a land-locked

25. We consider that portion of the statement which seeks
to implicate Zambia’to’be political blackmail. The war is
between the rebel forces and the Patriotic Front, inside
Rhodesia. The British cannot solicit Zambia’s co-operation
when Zambia’s civilians are being callously and wantonly
murdered by the rebel forces and vital communications are
2

.

being destroyed. The British should not use Zambia as the
sacrificial lamb in their efforts at Lancaster House in
London to negotiate a cease-fire. Britain would be well
advised to deal directly and seriously with the parties to the
conflict.

clared war against Zambia. It is clear that of late the rebel
forces have widened the spectrum of war by attacking and
destroying our transportation networks, both internal and
international. The rebels have severed Zambia’s intemational outlets to the outside world, on which any modem
economy is dependent. The Rhodesian rebels have set back
our development efforts. They are indeed enemies of peace
and progress. To this extent the Government of Zambia
calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom as the
Administering Power and in the exercise of its full responsibility fully and adequately to compensate the Republic of
Zambia for the damage to life and property resulting from
the acts of aggression.

26. Zambia has stated time and again that if successive
British Governments had acted decisively from the
beginning of the Rhodesian crisis the Council would not be
meeting to consider the acts of aggression against Zambia.
27.. It is paradoxical that rebel Rhodesia is escalating its
attacks against Zambia at a time when a peace conference is
in progress in London. It is equally paradoxical that the
rebels should have struck at a time when prospects for
solving the Rhodesian problem appeared promising. It is
unwise for the rebels to bite a country which stands for
peace and freedom, a country which continues to work for
the peaceful solution of the Rhodesian problem. The Commonwealth agreement was concluded in Zambia, yet Zambia is today a target of repeated attacks by the enemies of
peace.

32. That is the context within which we appeal for
international support and assistance to help us to offset the
effects of Rhodesian aggression. We are aware that the
process of reconstruction will be with us for a long time after
any positive developments regarding the independence of
Zimbabwe. It is our considered view that the Security
Council is best able to deal with threats to international
peace and security. Our country is under such a grave threat
that we urge the Council to act promptly on our case. We
are confident that the Council will respond adequately to
that challenge.

28, Are we in Zambia not justified in holding the
administering Power, Britain, responsible for the turn of
events in the area? Salvation in Rhodesia lies in tackling the
root cause of the problem in the region, that is, in removing
the illegal minority regime.

33. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): This meeting is being held at
one of the most critical junctures in Africa’s history. The
incidents and circumstances leading to it are so absurd and
irrational that they only underscore the tragedy of the
situation in southern Africa.

29. The Rhodesian forces would not have been able to
inflict all these losses on Zambia and the other front-line
States had it not been for the support which South Africa is
giving the Salisbury regime. We havealways known that the
illegal r&me at Salisbury has depended on South Africa
and certain Western countries for survival. It is well-known
that the Rhodesians fly South African planes painted in
Rhode&n colours. Furthermore, there is evidence to
suggest that Israel has been responsible for training in
commando tactics and equipping the Rhodesian forces. A
number of States Members of the United Nations are also
guilty of arming and abetting the rebels. The Rhodesians
have no capacity to manufacture the weapons of war which
they repeatedly use against us. We demand sincerity on the
part of those Member States that are responsible for all this.
Many lives have already been lost and lives will continue to
be lost ‘unless they act responsibly.

34. Since its unilateral declaration of independence in
1965, the racist illegal minority regime in Southern Rhodesia has consistently and arrogantly defied the will of the
United Nations. In addition, the illegal regime has excelled
in making a mockery of international law by launching
repeated acts of aggression against all the neighbouring
States, Zambia, Mozambique, Botswana and others, as well
as attacking refugee camps and civilian targets again and
again in open defiance of the 1949 Geneva Conventions.
35. The questions that we must ask ourselves are: Why
does that illegal regime persist in committing those criminal
attacks and acts of defiance, rebellion and desperation?
Who continues to provide it with the material means and
military hardware with which it commits those wanton acts
of aggression against neighbouring States? What Powers
encourage it to behave so brazenly and in the insolent
manner that has character&d its life of rebellion in the last
14 years? How has it managed to survive all the strictures of
international
sanctions all these years, given its
unsophisticated economy and lack of international
recognition?

30. It would be appreciated if the Security Council were to
establish an ad hoc committee from among its members, to
be appointed by the Council after consulting with the
membem,in order to assist the Council in the implementation of any resolution which it might wish to adopt, Thereafter, that ad hoc committee could report its findings to the
Council ,,for any further action.: Such a ,iep would also
augment efforts to mobilize the much needed international
assistance to Zambia arising from the prevailing intemational situation. The Government of Zambia proposes that,
in view of the urgency of the matter, such an &hoc committee should be constituted immediately and should be asked
to report to the Council during December, preferably by 15
.December.

36. The answers may not be difficult to find.
37. First, the administering Power, the Government of the
United Kingdom, has failed woefully to assume its
responsibilities for quelling the rebellion in that Crown
Colony, thereby encouraging the illegal regime to play its
role of international outlaw to the hilt.

3’1. In concluding, I wish to ,reiterate that the situation
created by repeated Rhodesian acts of aggression against
Zambia is very grave indeed. Rhodesia is fighting an unde-

38. Secondly, theinternational sanctions imposed against
the illegal regime have often been breached with impunity,
3
.

even with the connivance of the administering Power, as the
Bingham report’ amply testified.

rebel racist regime of Southern Rhodesia. According to l7re
Washbzgton Post of 21 November, the attacks are aimed at
escalating the destruction of Zambia’s infrastructure and
intended to lead to a breakdown of the London talks. i”?re
Christian Science Monitor of the same date opines that the
recent attacks on Zambian non-military targets by the forces of Southern Rhodesia are a part of a newstrategyaimed
at crippling Zambia’s road and rail facilities and forcing the
country to bring pressure on the Patriotic Front .guerrillas
to make more concessions at the Lancaster House talks in
London.

39. Thirdly, the international community has failed most
regrettably to take firm and effective measures to defend the
conventions and laws freely subscribed to by all States to
sustain the fabric of civilized international conduct.
40. But, above all, the racist regime of South Africa has
consistently demonstrated its contempt for the United
Nations, not only by refusing to apply the decisions of the
Security Council against Rhodesia in obedience to Articles
25 and 41 of the Charter, but also by consistently aiding and
abetting the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia with arms,
men, finance, trade and every other means of sustenance. I
hope that the time will soon come when the United Nations
will realize how seriously the attitudes and policies of South
Africa threaten the image and credibility and, indeed, the
very survival of the Organization.

46. If those are the motivations behind the attacks, then
the rebel regime is a prey to a greater psychosis than we had
imagined. Do they not want peace? Do they not want
international recognition? Do they think.that the Lancaster
House talks would have been possible without the support
and consent of the Zambian Government?
47. When the irrational statements being attributed to
Bishop Muzorewa are read with the recent announcement
by his illegal Government that it was suspending transit of
grain to Zambia, in spite of the fact that Zambia has had a
very bad harvest, then the situation becomes more ominous. The rebel regime is running scared. Bishop Muzorcwa
and his clique are afraid of losing democratic elections in
Zimbabwe. They dream of intimidating Zambia, but are
mistaken.

41. It is with the deepest sense of anger and anguish that
my delegation has once again asked to be allowed to speak
on the question of the senselessacts of aggression committed by the rebel regime in Rhodesia against an independent
African State-this time Zambia.
42. Earlier this month, Angola was forced to come to the
Council with a complaint against South Africa. Today
Zambia is making a complaint against the illegal regime of
Southern Rhodesia. According to information received
from Lusaka, vicious armed attacks by rebel and racist
forces of southern Africa against Zambia have increased
since the beginning of September 1979. As we have just
heard from our colleague and brother, the representative of
Zambia, those acts of aggression have occurred with
increasing frequency during the last few days.

48. Describing the attacks as presaging “a full-scale war
situation”, President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambh .has
ordered a total mobilization of his armed forces and a
call-up of all military reserves. If and when it comes to the
crunch, Zambia will not be alone. Its friends, including
Nigeria, will stand solidly and firmly at its side. ’ I .
49. These acts of aggression by Rhodesia against iambia
pose a threat to international peace and security. It is inthis
regard that we call upon the Security Council to face' up to
its responsibility and condemn the illegal r&me in the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia for its continued acts
of aggression and escalation of violence against Zambia.’

43. A swift glance at those acts of aggression, of wanton
destruction of innFent lives and of intimidation against a
sovereign, independent country leaves us with the following
impressions: the aims of the rebel forces and their friends
are, first, to destroy the Zambian economic infrastructure
and to weaken its resolve to support the liberation movement in Africa in general and in Zimbabwe in particular;
secondly, to escalate and intemationalize the war of liberation in Zimbabwe; thirdly, to intimidate the Zambian populace by disseminating fear and strife, thus causing the
Zambian Government to exert pressure on the Patriotic
Front and make it accede to certain unfair demands in
London; and fourthly, to wreck the talks now going on in
London at Lancaster House.

50. It is with the object of placing the interests of mtemational peace and harmony above those of narrow national_.
privileges that I have the honour of introducing, onbehalf
of the sponsors Bangladesh, .Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait,
Nigeria and Zambia, the Idraft resolution in document
s/13645.
.
51. The draft resolution is the sequel to resolution 424 , .:
(1978). In paragraph, 5 of that resolution the Council
e
44. No one seriously accepts the rationalization of those
,wamed that!
.
,
acts as “hot pursuit**, a concept that is both reprehensible,
I
.
because it is intended to intimidate, and colonial, because it
I
“in the event ‘of further acts of violation of the. saver- .
is often resorted to to defend territories that are being
c eignty and ‘territorial,i&grity
of Zambia by the illegal _i
rapidly lost by colonial Powers. Nor do we accept the
argument that the forces of the illegal regime attack only ’ racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, the Secur- .
ity Council will ‘meet again to consider the adoption pf
guerrilla camps, not Zambian non-military targets.
1
’.
,more effective measures, in accardance with the approp;;
riate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,’
45. There is something sinister and alarming about the
:
including Chapter VII thereof ‘.
recent acts of aggression steadily being launched by the
i
>
;
1 >:‘:
I T. H. Bingham and S. M. Gray, Report on the Supply of Petroleum
52. We believe’ that it is a’ betrayal ‘of the’ ideals of, the ,_ .+.!
and Petrokum
Products to Rhodesia (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery
United Nations if the organized forces of any regime, legal ,; .‘..::
Office for the Foreign and Commonwealth Of@, 1978). ’
’
. ,.
.i
.’
4

unanimously adopted: resolution 424 (1978), which condemned outright the armed invasion which was carried out
by the Salisbury regime against Zambia. Despite that resolution, the Southern Rhodesian racists not only have
refused to give up their piratical policies but on the contrary
have intensified them.

or illegal, can at will attack the territory of a Member State.
Hence the expressions of strong condemnation of the criminal acts of the illegal regime and the collusion between it and
South Africa, which encourages it to mount these attacks,
in operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of the draft resolution.
,.
:
53. Furthermore, we believe that it is only right and
proper that we commend the restraint and forbearance of
the Zambian Government. The Zambian Government has
refused to be drawn into the war that is raging inside
Zimbabwe, thereby not widening the scope and intensity of
that war. More important, it has not relented in its support
for the just struggle for freedom and independence in Africa
in general and Zimbabwe in particular, hence operative
paragraph 3.

59. The aggressive actions of recent daysby the Southern
Rhodesian regime are of such broad scope that there is
virtually a situation of war in the country, and the Govemment of Zambia has been obliged to declare general mobiliration. As a result of these aggressive attacks, there’have
been hundreds of victims among the civilian population and
the economy of the country has suffered tremendous material damage. These actions are not episodic in nature but are
large-scale, mass military operations undertaken simultaneously in various parts of the country.

54. Because of the graveness of the situation and the
principle of compensation implicit in all acts of redress of
grievances suffered, operative paragraphs 5 and 6 are most
important. The identity of the authorities responsible for
these dastardly acts is clear to us. We believe that the
administering Power, the Government of the United Kingdom, and the Government of South Africa, which has over
the years assisted the so-called Government of Rhodesia to
persist in its rebellion, are the real culprits. Hence we invite
attention to‘the principle of compensation in paragraph 5.

60. The aggression of the. Southern Rhodesian rCaime
against the Republic of Zambia cannot be donsidered in
isolation from the events which have recently been occurring in the southern part of the African continent and
around it. These events indicate that the racist regimes in the
southern part of Africa, acting with the connivance and
support of their’ Western protectors, are making wellplanned efforts td preserve their domination.

61. Both the Southern Rhodesian and South African
55. We also think that it is important that some action be
racist regimes, by unleashing an undeclared war against the
taken to ensure that the provisions of this draft resolution
front-line States, are trying’ to force them to cease their
are implemented; hence operative paragraph 7, in which we
support
of SWAP0 and the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe
have asked for the establishment of an ad hoc committee
and
in
this
way to secure further concessions from these
composed of four members of the Security Council, ta be
national liberation movements at the talks concerning a
appointed by the President, after consultation with mem;
settlement in Namibia and Zimbabwe.
bers, in order to assist the Council in the implementation of
this resolution, in particular paragraphs 5 and 6 thereof. We
62. At the same time, certain Western Powers have
hope that this ad hoc committee would appeal to all
.resorted to various diplomatic and political manoeuvres in
Member States and international organizations to,help in _ order to preserve their position in South Africa, in Zimthe immediate and urgent reconstruction of the various
babwe and Namibia, by transferring power to puppets who
economic ir&stmctures and facilities that have been deswould guarantee that the interests of the imperialist transnatroyed so wickedly and wantonly by the illegal for&s of
tional monopolies would remain untouched, thus preservSouthern Rhodesia.
ing the privileges and the defacto domination of the racists.
To these ends, attempts have been made to maintain the old
56. In this connexion, we also hope that, without prejumilitary, political and administrative apparatus in Southern
dice to the bilateral agreements or the discussions between
Rhodesia. For many years now a bloody colonial war has
the Government of. Zambia and the Government of the
been waged with the help of this apparatus against the
United Kingdom, the ad hoc committee would be able to
population of Zimbabwe and neighbouring independent
assist in ensuring adequate and full compensation for the
States..’ ’
.ossesthat the Zambian Government has sustained.
2
63. The Soviet delegation condemns outright the aggres57. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union ‘of Soviet Socialist.
sive actions of the Rhodesian racists against the Republic of
Republics) (intt?p;retation from Russian): The Soviet delega.Zambia. It is our‘cohviction that theirdesperate attempts to
tion has listened carefully to the statements made by the
hold up the ,process of the final liberation of Africa from
representatives of Zambia and Nigeria. Those statements
colonial domination is doomed to failure. The course of
analysed the situation which has arisen as a result of the
events has irrefutably shown that the ‘process now under
aggressive actions of the Southern Rhodesian racists against
, way in southern ‘AfriCa.is irreversible and that no military
the Republic of Zambia. We fully agree with their descrip- ., provocations can stem the tide of the struggle of peoples for
tion of these actions as a gross violation of the sovereignty
the complete and final elimination of the remnants of colaand territorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia, as naked
nialism and racism and the sources of tension and conflict in
aggression, in fact, against that country~
,.,
,that
part of the world.
.:
..
:
.
,’
i8. The Security Council has already on many occasions,
64. The valiant struggle of Zambia and the otherfrontconsidered the question of the aggressive actions of the
line States to defend their independence‘arid sovereignty
illegal regime .of Southern Rhodesia against neighbouring
from any encroachments from outside have won the support andzsympathy of the Soviet Union. We resolutely
States, including Zambia. In March of last year the Council
5

i

-condemn the provocative armed actions of the racist
r6gimes in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia against
neighbouring independent African States; we regard those
actions as a threat to peace and security not only in that part
of the world but in all of Africa and the world as a whole.
Guaranteeing genuine self-determination and ,independence for the people of Zambia would be an important
prerequisite for the removal of the tension and the achievement of peace and security in that part of the world.

ble progress in both the military and the political fields.
Recently the Patriotic Front, Zambia and other front-line
States once again made a great effort towards a speedy and
just settlement of the Rhodesian question and the early
maliration of independence in Zimbabwe. At the London
talks convened on the basis of the “Lusaka agreement” of
the Commonwealth Conference held last August, the Patriotic Front put forward a number of positive and reasonable
proposals, thereby enabling the talks to achieve a certain
amount of progress and winning the praise of the intemational community and world opinion. In these circumstances, the sinister design of the racist forces of Southern
Rhodesia in intensifying their armed aggression against :
Zambia and other front-line States is obviously to exert
pressure on Zambia and the other front-line States and on
the Patriotic Front, in a vain attempt to coerce the front-tine
States into abandoning their support for the just struggle of
the Zimbabwean people and to undermine the struggle of
the Zimbabwe people for national independence andliberation, so as to preserve the defacto control and domination
by the racist forces in Southern Rhodesia.

65. The delegation of the Soviet Union believes that the
~Sccurity Council not only should condemn the recent acts *
of aggression by the Southern Rhodesian racists against
Zambia-acts which represent a gross violation ofthe sovereignty and territorial integrity -of that country-but
should ensure that they arc%ot repeated in the future. In
that connexion, it should be recalled that the Council, in
resolution 424 (1978), decided that
“in the event of further acts of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia by the illegal
racist minority regime of Southern Rhodesia, the Security Council will meet again to consider the adoption of
more effective measures, in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
including Chapter VII thereof ‘.

70. With the same purpose in mind, the chieftains of the
South African racist regime, in collusion with the Southern
Rhodesian racist forces, have continued to clamour recently
that South Africa will not “tolerate” the attainment- of
genuine majority rule and national independence by the
Zimbabwean people, and have openly carried out military
intimidation. However, faced by the Zimbabwean people,
tempered by what it has undergone, and the other great
African peoples, the armed aggression of the Southern
Rhodesian racist forces and the blatant provocations by the
South African racist authorities can only be of no avail. On
the contrary, their criminal acts can only arouse a more
determined struggle by the Zimbabwean people and more
resolute support by the front-line States for this just struggle. We are convinced that, under the leadership of the
Patriotic Front, and with the strong supportbf the peopIe of
all countries, particularly the African front-line -States, the
Zimbabwean people will certainly strengthen its unity and
intensify its struggle, overcome the various obstacles in its
advance, do -away with all outside interference and sabotage, and win final victory in its struggle for national independence and’liberation.

66. That resolution was adopted unanimously. This
means that it was supported by the delegations of the
United States, the United Kingdom and France. Today the
Council is in fact discussing those “further acts of violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia”, mentioned in resolution 424 (1978). The question can legitimately be asked are those delegations now prepared to
support the adoption of effective measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter?
67. So far as the Soviet delegation is concerned, we are
convinced that now the time is ripe for the Security Council
to take effective steps against the Southern Rhodesian
aggressors, and we are prepared to support any proposals to
that effect.
68. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interp~etarionfrom Chinese):
Recently the racist forces of Southern Rhodesia have
launched a series of armed incursions against Zambia, destroying bridges along major roadways and damaging the
economic faciIities. The continuous escalation of the acts of
aggression against Zambia by the Southern Rhodesian
racists not only has once again grossly violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity, of Zambia, resulting in
serious loss of life and property and creating many ditIiculties for the economy of Zambia, but has also been a serious
threat to international peace .and security. The Chinese
delegation strongly condemns the racist forces of Southern
Rhodesia for this unbridled act.of aggression and takes this
opportunity to e?press our deep sympathy with and support
for the Government and people of Zambia, the ,victims,of
the aggression.
.,

.;

71, The Chinese Government and people resolutely support the just cause of the Zimbabwean people and the
correct position of Zambia and the other front-line States of
supporting the struggle of the Zimbabwean people. In our
view, the Security Council should,strongly condemn the
racist forces of Southern Rhodesia for their act of aggression against Zambia, and should adopt practical and effective measures to prevent the recurrence of such armed
aggression. The Chinese delegation also supports the reasonable and correct propositions put forward by Zambia and
..
other African countries.
~..
72. Based on’& foregoing position, the’chinese delega;
tion will vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by
Bangladesh and live other countries in document S/1%45.

69. As 1s well known, the struggle of the Zimbabwean
people to achieve naiional independence based on genuine
majority rule; under the leadership’of the Zimbabwe Patiie
tic Front and with the strong.support of the people of the
world, particularly the front-line States, h,asmade remarka-

73. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation~omFrenc;;):
Once again the Security’Council is called upon,to condemn
attacks by the illegal. regime of Zimbabwe against the
6

Republic of Zambia, an independent State and a Member of
the Organization. For its part, the delegation of Gabon
cannot but resolutely support all measuresthat the Council
may take to restrain Southern Rhodesia and South Africa
‘. and to prevent them from continuing their attacks upon the
front-tine States.

79. It is the position of the United States that the quickest
way to bring about a permanent halt to violence on all sides
is to reach a prompt agreement on the cease-fire and to
begin the implementation of &process which will lead to
elections in Zimbabwe. We urge the Council to do all that is
possible to hasten that result.

74. My country has often condemned their activities, and
we share the suffering of the people of Zambia. The attacks
of which we have been informed by our brother the representative of Zambia and which have, sadly, been accompanied by death and destruction of social infrastructures, of
roads and railway lines are not only a flagrant violation of
the territorial integrity of a sovereign State but also a threat
to international peace and security and, furthermore, a
major challenge to the Security Council and the intemational community, which have repeatedly stated that such
acts against a sovereign State are unacceptable and to be
condemned. These attacks are weighty with consequence,
since they are being carried out at a time when the Lancaster
House conference might enable everyone to hope for an
agreement that would put an end to this tragedy which the
people of southern Africa have been suffering for so long.

80. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is.the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as
Chaiian
of the Group of African States for the month of
November. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make a statement.

.

‘75. For all those reasons my delegation supports the draft
resolution that has been submitted to the Council. It is our
firm hope that the Council will see that its provisions are
applied to; the letter as quickly as possible.
76. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): It is a
source of great regret to my Government that, at this crucial
point in the’efforts to bring Zimbabwe to independence, it
has proved .necessary for the Security Council to meet to
consider the latest raids against Zambia. The United States
has joined with the Council in the past in the condemnation
of similar acts. What is particularly distressing about the
present complaint is that the attacks were directed against
civilian targets in Zambia. Bridges and roads have been cut,
and Zambia is being systematically denied land accessto the
outside world. In addition, supplies of maize through
Zimbabwe-Rhodesia destined for Zambia are being withheld by the ~Salisbury authorities.
77. One of the cruellest aspects of this war is that innocent
people, noncombatants, women and children inevitably
suffer from the conflict. Now they are being made to suffer
through the denial of essential foodstuffs, a deliberate and
inhumane use of civilians as hostages to achieve a political
goal. For these reasons my Government has publicly con:
demned the latest raids into Zambia. .’
78. The United Kingdom, with the full support of the
Commonwealth nations, has undertaken an initiative at
Lancaster House and substantial andencouraging progress
has been made. I wish to reiterate the whole:hearted sup
port of my country for that initiative and to express appreciation to the British Government and to the parties to the
talks for the progress achieved so far. It is precisely because
_ the Lancaster House process offers the best hope of obtaining a negotiated and internationally acceptable settlement
for Zimbabwe that the United States is deeply concerned by
the latest attacks on Zambia. We believe that the negotiations in London must not be jeopardized, and we condemn
any activity which might jeopardize them.

81. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Mr. President, at the outset permit me to thank you and, through
you, the other members of this body, the Security Council,
for giving me this opportunity to speak on behalf of the
African Group, of which my delegation has the honour to
be the Chairman this month.
82. This is the second time this month that the Council has
met to discuss the aggression of the racist regimes in southem Africa against neighbouring countries.
83. The unprovoked aggression of the Southern Rhodesian regime against the people of Zambia can, once again,
only be understood as an attempt to tlirt with the racist
regime of Pretoria and to prove to it that the Rhodesian
r&me can be depended upon to consolidate its racist
schemes at the expense of the African people. This can
undoubtedly be seen from the recent statements made by
Mr. Botha. Reported by l3e New York Times, his so-called
“friendly warning” from South Africa, made before the
aforementioned aggression against Zambia, demonstrates
that:
“Zimbabwe-Rhodesia is a key country for a stable
southern Africa and, if Powers from the outside are
intent on creating chaos, the Government will Seethat
southern African institutions are protected.”
Once more, the aggression can only be comprehended as an
ill-fated response by Abel Muzorewa, who did not hesitate
to declare on television that there was “a lot of wisdom” in
the Botha warning.
84. The events that have taken place in Angola and Zambia during’this month are part of a comprehensive plan,
designed by the imperialist forces and their allies at Salisbury and Pretoria, to bring the African States under their
domination. These imperialist forces and their allies
attempt to create differences and dissensions among’the
African States in order to prevent them from constituting a
major force that would challenge the imperialist
and racist
.
:
forces and their allies.
85. It is clear that manipulative tactics are at present being
undertaken against the front-line States, that there is a
striking parallelism between the policies of the two racist
regimes in southern Africa, and that there is an alliance
between’them to destroy the unity and the .’i&ration move“’
nients in the region.
:

86. The Pretoria and Salisbury, regimes are continuing to
commit these acts of aggression against the front-line States
.in the midst of negotiations on Zimbabwe and Namibia.
Some become sensitive when the Security Council is called
upon, as in the present case, to react to these acts of aggression in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter. We hear suggestions that meetings like this one
complicate the ongoing negotiations, but it is clear now that
peace and security in the front-line States in particular and
Africa in general are continuously threatened by the existence of white minority racist regimes. These odious regimes
are determined to keep the peoples of the region under
eternal subjugation. They are desperately trying to contain
the rising tide and to stop the sweeping force of national
liberation and social revolution. We must do all we can to
prevent them from doing irreparable damage and injury to
the independent States and peoples in the southern part of
Africa.
87. The Salisbury regime’s aggression against Zambia is
yet another in a series of acts which constitute a consistent
and sustained pattern aimed at the destabilization of the
front-line States in the hope of weakening their support for
the liberation movements in Zimbabwe, Namibia and
South Africa. The racist regimes at Salisbury and Pretoria
have stepped up their aggressive attacks against Mozambique, Botswana and, more recently, Angola and today,
against Zambia.

9 1. Finally I wish to read a press release which was issued
by the Secretary-General of the Organisation of African
Unity regarding the recent raids on Zan i:
“The recent raids on bridges and economic targets in
Zambia by forces of the puppet Government in Rhodesia, headed by Bishop Muzorewa, must be blamed
squarely on the Bishop’s masters, the frightened white
minority in Zimbabwe and South Africa. The people of
Zimbabwe must see the mad monk for what he is and
disown him before he reduces Zimbabwe to another
bantustan, which will be rejected like other bantustans
by the OAU and the international community. The
OAU is ready to give President Kaunda any assistance he
may ask for to put an end to the aggression of the
puppets from Rhodesia.*’
92. The African Group reaffirms its support for and solidarity with Zambia. It appeals to the international community to extend support and assistance to the people of
Zambia, including material, political and military assistance. It urges the Security Council to take effective and
relevant action against the illegal r&me at Salisbury. It
calls upon the Council to condemn the illegal regime at
Salisbury for its flagrant aggression against the Republic of
Zambia, to demand that the illegal regime at Salisbury
respect the independence, sovereignty and tenitorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia and to take effective action
against the illegal regime at Salisbury in accordance with the
relevant provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.

88. It is abhorrent and appalling that the aggressive, racist
and Fascist regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury are still sup
ported by the Western countries. Those Powers act thus in
spite of the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. The assistance given to the southern
African regimes by some Western Powers has enabled those
racist regimes to step up their aggression against the frontline States.

93. The PRESIDENT
(interprtiration from Spanish):
There are no more speakers at the moment and I therefore propose that we have a short suspension.
‘,
The meeting was suspended at 10 p.m. and resumed at
lO.SO p.m.

94. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from S’anish): It
is my understanding that members .of the Council are
‘ready to adopt by consensus the draft resohition sponsored by Bangladesh, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria
and Zambia, contained in. document S/13645; Unless
there is any objection, I shall take it that it is’s0 decided.

89. The recent aggression against Zambia is a clear indication that Britain% still backing Salisbury’s stepped-up
attacks on front-line States in the hope that Zambia will be
forced to give up its support of the Patriotic Front and that
the Patriotic Front will make more concessions at the London talks on Zimbabwe. In addition to this, the Pretoria
and Salisbury regimes are planning a common strategy
aimed at preventing the Patriotic Front from gaining power
in the elections proposed by Britain.

The draft resolution was adopted.2

95. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation >om Spanish): I
now call upon those representatives who have asked to be
allowed to- speak after the adoption of the resolution.

.L

90. It is clear, as some previous speakers have stressed,
that the main goals of the attacks and aggression by the
Salisbury regime are the following: first, assisted hy South
Africa and the Western Powers, to destroy the economy of
Zambia ,and to make that country .weaker; secondly, to
escalate the pressure against Zambia in order tointeinationalize the war and push Zambia into seeking,help’frdm
elsewhere; thirdly, to put pressure onthe Patriotic Front to
make more and more concessions; fourthly, to destroy the
talks which are being heid in London; and ftfthly, to prevent
or delay the return of the exiled Zimbabwe patriots ,and
hinder the reintegration of the, refugees in their country.
This aggression threatens peace and security in the region,
and it is for the Security Council to take urgent measures to
prevent any further deterioration of the situation.

‘96. Sir ‘&nhony PARSONS (United Kingdom): First; I
: should like to express my regret to you, Mr. President,
and to all the other.members of the Council for having
‘delayed’ the proceedings of the Council for some hours.
This is a matter of the utmost importance to my Goveinment; it’was essential’that consultations take place’at a
very high‘ievel iti London before my Government could
‘Ibe in a position to give me final instructions. It is evidence
of our desire to co-operate with the Council and toreach
~consens% that these consultations took place even though
’ the hour in London is now well after.midnight.
: ‘,
2 See resolution

455 (i979).

:

8.

:
._. .

97. f begin the substantive part of my statement by
expressing the deepest and most sincere sympathy of my
delegation and of the people of my country for the suffering
and destruction inflicted on Zambia. In saying this, I am
reiterating similar expressions already made by British Ministers in Parliament and directly to President Kaunda. We
deplore any escalation of fighting anywhere, and in particular we condemn any attacks on civilian targets.

103. I say again: nothing must be allowed to deflect us
from the achievement of the agreement which alone will
remedy this desperate state of atfairs.
104. In our view, the wording of the consensus does not
imply that a fresh determination has been made under
Article 39 of the Charter. Moreover, as regards paragraph 5
of the consensus, I repeat what my Lord Privy Seal, Sir Ian
Gilmour, stated in the House of Commons on 21 November-namely that “the British Government do not accept
any responsibility for the damage inflicted in Zambia by the
Rhodesian raids, nor for the payment of compensation”.
But this disclaimer of responsibility does not mean that we
are hard-hearted or unmoved by the suffering of Zambia.
The Lord Privy Seal went on to say on the same occasion
that “as a friend of Zambia and once the cease-fire has been
agreed, we shall wish to play our part in assisting Zambia to
restore her infrastructure’*. Anyone who knows the history
of the relationship between Britain and Zambia since the
independence of that country will know that these are not
empty words.

98. We stand at what may be a unique point in the history
of Africa. The key to unlock the door to peace and stability
in Zimbabwe is in our hands. The key finally to lock the
door on the bitter cycle of violence, death and destruction is
in our hands too. We have reached this position through the
will of all parties to achieve a settlement, through the efforts
of the front-tine States and through the efforts of the whole
Commonwealth, as embodied in the agreement reached at
the Lusaka conference last summer.
99. All these endeavours culminated in the Lancaster
House conference under the chairmanship of my Foreign
and Commonwealth Secretary, a conference which has now
been in continuous session for over 10 weeks. I note at this
point that the chairman of the Lusaka conference was
President Kaunda ofZambia, who also made the journey to
London very recently in order to play a most helpful role at
a particularly difficult point in the negotiations. The Lancaster House conference is in its final stages. A constitution
granting genuine majority rule to the people of Zimbabwe
has been agreed on by all parties. Transitional arrangements under the authority of Britain, and with the observation and active support of the Commonwealth, have also
been fully agreed on.

105. Before I conclude, I feel obliged to reply to one or
two points raised in the debate.
106. The representative of Libya suggested that we were in
some way encouraging the raids on Zambia and that we
wanted the Lancaster House conference to fail. That is an
absolutely monstrous allegation. Words fail me-and I
could have wished that those words had failed him. I vigorously, utterly and totally reject these charges. The record of
our achievement so far at Lancaster House is eloquent
rebuttal in itself.
107. The representative of Nigeria accused my Government of aiding and abetting breaches of sanctions. I cannot
allow this to pass. As the Security Council knows, my
Government has always co-operated closely with the
Rhodesia sanctions Committee: and wherever evidence has
come to light, British firms that have breached sanctions
have been prosecuted. As for the Bingham report, mentioned by the representative of Nigeria, it was commissioned by my Government, subsequently published and
passed to the Director of Public Prosecutions in London, to
seewhether it contained evidence that would justify a prosecution under English law.

100. We are now on the last yards of the last lap. This lap
is the all-important question of a cease-fire, the one thing
which will bring about a cessation of the acts of violence
which have plagued Rhodesia itself and the neighbouring
countries, particularly Zambia and Mozambique. We earnestly hope that the prize of a full agreement, which will be
immediately implemented in all its parts, is only a few days
away from us. The full effort of my Government is concentrated on trying to ensure that nothing deflects us from this
goal in these final moments.
101. My delegation associated itself with the consensus
reached by the Council. We did so simply and only because
we do not wish to do anything-anything-that
might
damage the prospects for an early and successfulconclusion
of the Lancaster House negotiations. There is a great deal of
language in the consensus with which we take issue. It is
one-sided. It is not even-handed. It contains intemperate
phraseology. It takes no account of the fact that for many
years fighting by Patriotic Front and Rhodesian forces has
erupted on all sides and from all sides.

108. In conclusion, I am not ashamed to reiterate once *
more my appeal: let nothing happen which might in any
way deflect us from that prize of a full agreement, of peace
and stability for the people of Zimbabwe, which is now so
close-so very close-to our grasp.
109. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
French): At this late hour I shall be very brief.

from

110. During the last two weeks the Rhodesian army carried out a number of armed incursions into the neighbouring territory of Zambia. France, which in the past has
frequently had occasion to condemn such raids, cannot
remain unmoved by the emotion being felt today by the
Government and people of that country. At the very time

102. I reiterate this with all the passion at my command
we can bring an end to the fighting, both within the country
and across the borders, only when we get agreement on a
cease-tire, when we can implement the whole accord, when
all parties respect it, when we the British Government are in
control. At present we are not-1 repeat: not-in control,
and we cannot guarantee a cessation of hostilities.

’ Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia.

9

115. With regard to the question of compensation, dealt
with in paragraph 5 of the resolution, I wish to stress that it
id the understanding of my delegation that the Government
of the United Kingdom is the “responsible authorities*’
referred to therein. No other interpretation is acceptable to
us in Zambia.

when the encouraging developments in the London conference on Rhodesia-Zimbabwe have given us some reason to
hope that agreement can soon be reached, we cannot but be
deeply worried about the repercussions that these repeated
attacks against Zambia could have on the outcome of the
negotiations, on which peace in southern Africa largely
depends.

116. Strengthened by the support of the Security Council,
we intend to pursue our legitimate claim for compensation
from the United Kingdom for the damages done to our
economy by the rebel Smith colony. We are gratified that
the Council has set up an ad hoc committee to follow the
implementation of the resolution, particularly its paragraphs 5 and 6. We shall co-operate fully with the committee. We hope that this resolution will be followed by
concrete and tangible and generous material and other
forms of assistance to us in this hour of great need, in
accordance with paragraph 6.

111. For that reason the French delegation firmly condemns the recent Rhodesian raid into Zambia and assures
the Government and people of Zambia of France’s solidarity in the sore trials they are undergoing. For that reason
also we joined in the consensus by which the Council has
just expressed its opinion on this subject.
112. In conclusion, I wish to say that only the seriousness
of the facts which motivated this meeting of the Council, as
well as the urgency of the measures to be taken, prompted
my delegation to go along with the procedure that has
characterized this debate. We hope that this procedure will
be regarded not as a precedent but, rather, as an unusual
response to an exceptional situation.

117. We appreciate the strong and categorical condemnations in paragraphs 1 and 2. They are important, and they
give us encouragement. But, quite clearly, they are not
enough. The situation in our country calls more for deeds
than for words. Our people, who have experienced unparalleled hardship and have made tremendous sacrifices in the
cause of justice, freedom and independence in southern
Africa, hope for and expect much more concrete support
from the international community. I hope they will not be
disappointed.

113. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): The hour is late and I shall
therefore not detain the Council much longer. I have asked
to speak at this stage in order to thank the members of the
Council for their support and their solidarity with my country, demonstrated through the unanimous adoption, by
consensus, of the draft resolution in document S/13645.
114. The resolution just adopted is essentially in three
parts. First, it condemns the acts of aggression committed
against my country by the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia, in collusion with the apartheid regime of South Africa.
Secondly, it places responsibility for the acts of aggression
on the administering Power-in
this case, the United
Kingdom-and
calls upon it to take measures which we
know it is capable of taking to put an end to such acts of
aggression. Thirdly, it recognizes the damage done to our
economic infrastructure and, accordingly, calls for intemational assistance to us and upholds our right to full and
speedy compensation.

118. Let me conclude by reaffirming the determination of
my country to continue its uncompromising and resolute
support for the legitimate struggle of the people of Zimbabwe until genuine independence is achieved.
119. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
There are no further speakers. The Security Council has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.10 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: W.S.

1.50

79-70002-April

1982-2.250
