S/PRST/2006/42*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 November 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5556th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 October 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Women and peace
and security”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and recalls the Statements by its
President of 31 October 2001 (S/PRST/2001/31), 31 October 2002
(S/PRST/2002/32), 28 October 2004 (S/PRST/2004/40), and 27 October 2005
(S/PRST/2005/52), as reiterating that commitment.
“The Security Council recalls the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(A/RES/60/1), the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
(A/CONF/177/20/Rev.1), the outcomes of the Conference and of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly, and the Declaration of the fortyninth session of the Commission on the Status of Women on the occasion of
the tenth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women
(E/CN.6/2005/11).
“The Security Council recognizes the vital roles of, and contributions by
women in consolidating peace. The Council welcomes the progress made in
increasing participation of women in decision-making in several countries
emerging from conflict and requests the Secretary-General to collect and
compile good practices, lessons learned and identify remaining gaps and
challenges in order to further promote the efficient and effective
implementation of resolution 1325.
“The Security Council recognizes that the protection and empowerment
of women and support for their networks and initiatives are essential in the
consolidation of peace to promote the equal and full participation of women
and to improve their human security and, encourages Member States, donors,
and civil society to provide support in this respect.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of integrating gender
perspectives into institutional reform in post-conflict countries at both the
national and local levels. The Security Council encourages Member States in
post conflict situations to ensure that gender perspectives are mainstreamed in
its institutional reform, ensuring that the reforms, in particular of the security
* Reissued for technical reasons.

06-58865* (E) 081106

*0658865*

S/PRST/2006/42

sector, justice institutions and restoration of the rule of law, provide for the
protection of women’s rights and safety. The Council also requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations assistance in this context
appropriately addresses the needs and priorities of women in the post-conflict
process.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes take specific
account of the situation of women ex-combatants and women associated with
combatants, as well as their children, and provide for their full access to these
programmes.
“The Security Council welcomes the role that the Peacebuilding
Commission can play in mainstreaming gender perspectives into the peace
consolidation process. In this context, the Council welcomes in particular the
Chairman’s summaries at its country-specific meetings on Sierra Leone and
Burundi on 12 and 13 October 2006.
“The Security Council remains deeply concerned by the pervasiveness of
all forms of violence against women in armed conflict, including killing,
maiming, grave sexual violence, abductions and trafficking in persons. The
Council reiterates its utmost condemnation of such practices and calls upon all
parties to armed conflict to ensure full and effective protection of women, and
emphasizes the necessity to end impunity of those responsible for genderbased violence.
“The Security Council reiterates its condemnation, in the strongest terms,
of all acts of sexual misconduct by all categories of personnel in United
Nations Peacekeeping Missions. The Council urges the Secretary-General and
troop-contributing countries to ensure the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping operations
(A/60/19). In this connection, the Council expresses its support for further
efforts by the United Nations to fully implement codes of conduct and
disciplinary procedures to prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and
abuse, and enhance monitoring and enforcement mechanisms based on a zerotolerance policy.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to include in his
reporting to the Security Council, progress in gender mainstreaming
throughout United Nations peacekeeping missions as well as on other aspects
relating specifically to women and girls. The Council emphasizes the need for
the inclusion of gender components in peacekeeping operations. The Council
further encourages Member States and the Secretary-General to increase, the
participation of women in all areas and all levels of peacekeeping operations,
civilian, police and military, where possible.
“The Security Council reiterates its call to Member States to continue to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), including through the development and
implementation of national action plans or other national level strategies.
“The Security Council recognizes the important contribution of civil
society to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and encourages
Member States to continue to collaborate with civil society, in particular with

2

06-58865

S/PRST/2006/42

local women’s
implementation.

networks

and

organizations,

in

order

to

strengthen

“The Security Council looks forward to the report of the High-Level
Panel on the United Nations System-wide Coherence in the Areas of
Development, Humanitarian Assistance and the Environment and hopes this
will play a role in ensuring a coordinated UN approach to Women and Peace
and Security.
“The Security Council welcomes the first follow-up report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/770) on the United Nations System-wide Action
Plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) across
the United Nations system. The Council requests the Secretary-General to
continue to update, monitor and review the implementation and integration of
the Action Plan and report to the Security Council as stipulated in the
Statement by the President of the Security Council of 27 October 2005
(S/PRST/2005/52).”

06-58865

3
