S/PV.6974

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6974th meeting

Wednesday, 5 June 2013, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Bo Shen
Mr. Briens
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Maes
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Ms. Sohn Sung-Youn
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

13-35452 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1335452*

S/PV.6974

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

My Office shares the concern of the Council that
business relations with the Sudan, if not monitored
carefully, could have the effect of facilitating,
funding and supporting crimes against civilians. The
normalization of relations with the Sudan should not
come at such a high price to victims.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Sudan to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: It is with a deep sense of frustration,
even despair, that my Office presents its seventeenth
briefing to the Council on the situation in Darfur, the
Sudan, since the Council referred this situation to my
Office in 2005, in accordance with resolution 1593
(2005). Regrettably, each briefing has been followed
by inaction and paralysis within the Council while the
plight of victims of crimes committed in Darfur has
gone from bad to worse.
My Office’s deep sense of disappointment should
come as no surprise to the Council, given the serious
concerns shared within the United Nations about the
situation in Darfur. In particular, my Office shares the
concerns of the head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Valerie Amos, that 300,000
people were displaced in the first five months of 2013
alone — more than were displaced in the past two years.
Her warning that the international community cannot
let Darfur slip off the radar must be seriously heeded.
As set out in resolution 2091 (2013), adopted
14 February 2013, the ongoing aerial bombardments
in Darfur, which can be attributed to only one party
in the conflict; the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war; the deliberate imposition of restrictions on the
delivery of humanitarian aid even in the face of an
urgent humanitarian crisis; and the ongoing impunity
for those crimes are major problems for Darfur and for
all of us who care about what happens to the Darfuri
victims who suffer the brunt of those crimes.

2

I have noted in particular the Council’s concern
about the actions of some individuals affiliated with
the Government of the Sudan and armed groups, who
continue to commit violence against civilians, impede
the peace process and disregard the demands of the
Council. I believe that the link between those different
actions is critical. I would submit that those individuals
who commit crimes are inherently uninterested in the
peace process or the demands of this Council. They do
not put the true interests of the Sudan first, and as long
as they enjoy impunity for the crimes they commit,
they will continue to represent a threat to international
peace and security. It is for this reason that the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in order to address individual
criminal responsibility for the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community, with a view to
ending impunity.
We have done our part, and it is up to the Council to
live up to the legitimate expectations of Darfur’s victims
that individuals alleged to be responsible for their daily
sufferings shall be brought to justice. Those individuals
are just a few among a population of millions who
continue to endure untold daily suffering at the hands
of those few. We cannot ignore the disproportionate
effects of their actions, which is why my Office is
providing a briefing again today.
I echo the concerns of the African Union Peace
and Security Council, which were publicized in March
2013, that the Government of the Sudan must end
impunity in Darfur by bringing all criminals to justice,
must arrest and try those suspected of crimes against
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, and must facilitate the work of humanitarian
organizations and the delivery of aid by cancelling visa
restrictions for staff, which has been described as a
federal Government responsibility.
I encourage both the United Nations and the African
Union to work together with my Office to monitor actual
progress in this regard. We have repeated this call too
many times without effect. We cannot simply repeat
history in having these discussions. My Office has

13-35452

S/PV.6974

taken note of some reports of the prosecution of rebels
under the Government of the Sudan’s Anti-Terrorism
Act, but of no real prosecutions of systematic crimes
committed by Government forces. This cannot be
allowed to continue.
In my previous report, I expressed my commitment
to working with regional organizations endeavouring
to contribute to a comprehensive solution. The
recommendations of the African Union High-level
Panel on Darfur on justice, if implemented, would go
a long way towards addressing the challenge of the
deliberate imposition and tolerance of impunity not
only in Darfur, but in the Sudan as a whole. I encourage
the African Union to take up this invitation for dialogue
on the justice recommendations of the High-level Panel
with enthusiasm and conviction.
I also note reports of the ongoing involvement of
ICC indictee Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al Rahman,
also known as Ali Kushayb, with the Sudanese Central
Reserve Police in clashes in Central Darfur in April
2013. According to recent reports, witnesses have
placed Kushayb at the centre of an attack on 8 April
on the town of Abu Jeradil, 30 kilometres south of
Urn Dukhun, riding in a Government vehicle, together
with units from the Central Reserve Police, border
intelligence and other Government-affiliated militia.
Reportedly, large numbers of heavily armed men, most
wearing khaki uniforms, arrived in two phases, first on
foot and then in vehicles. They shot indiscriminately,
burned homes and shops, stole livestock and looted
goods. More than 100 civilians were killed, with
scores more injured, and more than 30,000 people,
mostly women and children, were displaced into Chad.
Although most of the refugees are of Salamat ethnicity,
members of non-Arab ethnic groups such as Masalit,
Kajaksa, Fur, Dajo and Tama also fled the fighting. As
one witness said,
“They did not see any difference between
communities, they just wanted people to leave.
They stole our cows and burned our crops and took
our clothes from our house and burned the house
down. We saw them.”
Observers have suggested that the Government of
the Sudan wanted to appease members of the Misseriya
and Ta’isha tribes who participated in the Janjaweed
militia by helping them to seize the land of Salamat
people, considered by some to be Chadian nationals,
and forcibly displacing them in the process. My Office

has noted many other such incidents in the past. This is
part of an ongoing pattern.
My Office has also pointed with concern to the
ongoing involvement of the ICC indictees Ahmad
Harun and Abdel Raheem Hussein in alleged crimes
elsewhere in the Sudan. Those crimes are of concern
to the international community and require urgent and
concerted action. Again, this is a question of potential
individual criminal responsibility, not of group or
organizational responsibility. The repeated travels of
President Al-Bashir, particularly to Chad, are also a
matter of concern that should receive the attention of
the Council. It is of great concern that the Council has
failed to act on any of the seven formal communications
from the Judges of the International Criminal Court on
these matters.
I note the visit to Khartoum from 20 to 23 May
of the Head of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Valerie Amos, which included
a meeting with ICC indictees Omar Al-Bashir, Abdel
Raheem Hussein and Ahmad Harun. My Office
appreciates the prior notification of the meeting that
it received from the United Nations and its assessment
that the meeting was considered strictly necessary
for carrying out essential United Nations-mandated
duties. I strongly encourage the United Nations to
conduct an ongoing critical analysis of such contacts
in order to assess whether they have indeed contributed
to the successful conduct of such duties. We must
ask ourselves whether what the United Nations gains
from them is worth their cost. We must be careful not
to embolden fugitives from justice into thinking that
they will be rewarded for manipulating their way into
positions of indispensability even as they continue to
commit crimes.
I encourage the Security Council to find creative
ways to engage with all the relevant organizations
dealing with the Darfur situation, including the ICC,
to assess progress on shared goals, and particularly,
where the ICC is concerned, on the goal of bringing
to justice those alleged to have committed the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. Since the Guatemala initiative in October
and the informal interactive dialogue last month, the
relationship between the ICC and the Council has begun
to strengthen in a positive way, and one that is much
appreciated. More needs to be done, however, to unlock
the potential of our two institutions to prevent and
resolve conflicts and to stop the suffering of millions

13-354523

S/PV.6974

of victims of crimes committed during such conflicts.
We stand ready to continue doing our part, but the time
is long past due for the Council to act with courage and
conviction by adopting appropriate measures within its
mandate to ensure that Sudanese fugitives are brought
to justice sooner rather than later.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
In accordance with paragraph 29 of presidential
note S/2010/507 of July 2010, I encourage both Council
and non-Council members to keep their statements to
less than five minutes. I shall be closely monitoring this
aspect of the Council’s working methods during this
month. I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
detailed briefing and report on the situation in Darfur,
as well as for the investigation and proceedings
conducted by the Court. Since the Security Council
decided, with its adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
on 31 March 2005, to refer the situation in Darfur,
starting from 1 July 2002, to the Prosecutor of the ICC,
the Office of the Prosecutor has been transparent in
keeping the Council informed about its work, for which
we are very grateful. We hope that we will soon be
able to deepen the discussion in the framework of an
informal interactive dialogue with the Prosecutor such
as was held last month on the situation in Libya (see
S/PV.6962).
The Prosecutor’s semi-annual reports give the
Council an opportunity to assess the Court’s progress
in fighting impunity, along with the obstacles and
difficulties it encounters. Unfortunately, many of the
concerns that the Council has previously expressed
still exist. We therefore deplore the fact that the ICC’s
arrest warrants against Ahmad Harun, Ali Kushayb,
Omar Al-Bashir and Abdel Raheem Hussein have still
not been executed, despite the fact that they have been
indicted for war crimes, crimes against humanity and,
for one of them, genocide.
As Ms. Bensouda recalls in her report, the
Sudanese Government forces and armed militias
active in Darfur have continued in total impunity
with their indiscriminate attacks on the ground on
or affecting the civilian population and obstructing
humanitarian aid, as well as abductions of and attacks

4

on humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers from the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We are also concerned about the
continuing restrictions that the Sudanese authorities
are imposing on UNAMID’s work and movement. They
regularly prevent UNAMID from accessing combat
scenes and in particular investigating reported cases of
sexual violence.
One particularly disturbing aspect that the
Prosecutor’s report brings up is the indiscriminate
aerial bombardments by the Sudanese Air Force, which
have resulted in numerous civilian victims, and the
resurgence of inter-community violence, which has
produced massive population displacements since the
beginning of the year. We condemn the acts of sexual
and gender-based violence referred to in the recent
report of the Secretary-General on sexual violence
in conflict (S/2013/149), as well as violence against
children. All those elements constitute violations of
resolution 1591 (2005) and other Security Council
resolutions on the Sudan, most recently resolution 2091
(2013), adopted on 14 February.
As Ms. Bensouda’s report points out, it is the
Government of the Sudan’s responsibility to comply
with Council resolutions, cooperate with the Court and
hand over indictees to it. So far, contrary to repeated
claims made by the Sudanese authorities, the Sudan
has launched no judicial proceedings at all. We must
therefore not waver in our determination to ensure that
the indictees are made accountable for their actions.
There will be no lasting peace in Darfur if we allow
crimes against civilians to go unpunished.
Essentially, we are asking all States, whether or
not they are parties to the Rome Statute, and every
regional and international organization concerned, to
cooperate fully with the ICC, as resolution 1593 (2005)
demands. In our view, we believe that the Council
should reflect on what it can do to help the ICC, in
particular in responding to cases of non-cooperation. In
that regard, we deplore Chad’s non-compliance with the
requests for cooperation addressed to it by the Court.
That non-compliance was the subject of a decision on
26 March by the Pre-Trial Chamber II of the Court,
which President Song transmitted to the Security
Council.
Although the Security Council must be consistent,
Member States and the Secretariat must also do the
same. That is especially true of contact with defendants.

13-35452

S/PV.6974

In that regard, we welcome the new guidelines issued
by the Secretary-General on 3 April concerning
non-essential contact on the part of members of the
Secretariat with individuals subject to ICC arrest
warrants. We call on all States to follow that example.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our thanks
to Ms. Bensouda and assure her of Luxembourg’s
full support for the resolute efforts that her Office
continues to make in the fight against impunity. The
entire international community must act together to
ensure justice for the victims of the conflict in Darfur.
Investigating the situation in Darfur has presented an
enormous challenge for the Office of the Prosecutor
and a huge sacrifice for the witnesses and the victims.
That sacrifice must not have been made in vain.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her
briefing. The United States welcomes the continued
role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the
fight against impunity for atrocities committed in
Darfur. We note the progress made in the proceedings
in the Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain and Saleh
Mohammed Jerbo Jamus case and we hope that trial
will be the first of several concerning the situation in
Darfur.
At the same time, it remains clear that the
Government of the Sudan is still not cooperating with
the ICC to execute the outstanding arrest warrants in the
Darfur cases, despite its obligations under resolution
1593 (2005). The subjects of those warrants remain at
large in the Sudan and continue to cross international
borders. The United States stands with the many States
that refuse to admit those individuals to their countries
and commends those who have spoken out against
President Al-Bashir’s continued travel. We oppose
invitations, facilitation or support for travel by those
subject to ICC arrest warrants in Darfur, and we urge
other States to do the same.
As the Prosecutor notes, there have been continued
instances of non-cooperation. On 26 March, the Court
issued a decision that the Republic of Chad had failed to
comply with its obligations when it welcomed President
Al-Bashir for a visit, his fourth visit to Chad since the
ICC issued a warrant for his arrest, on 4 March 2009.
Then, on 25 and 26 April, Chad hosted Minister of
Defence, Abdel Raheem Hussein and, on 11 May, Chad
again hosted President Al-Bashir without any attempt
to arrest him. The United States would welcome

discussion of follow-up on the ICC’s decision, which
was referred to the Council.
The Prosecutor’s report comes amid ongoing
developments related to Darfur that are of great concern
to the United States. The United Nations independent
expert on the situation of human rights in the Sudan
has noted that the Government of the Sudan has not
upheld its commitments in the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur to establish credible local justice and
accountability mechanisms, nor has it made the Special
Court for Darfur operational or requested international
observers from the African Union and the United
Nations for the Court.
Despite the conviction in February of six
Popular Defence Forces soldiers accused of killing a
community leader in Abu Zereiga, the latest report
(S/2013/225) of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) expresses serious concern about the lack
of accountability for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Darfur. Furthermore,
the United States is deeply concerned about the
increasing violence in Darfur, including reports of
aerial bombardments targeting or indiscriminately
affecting civilians, sexual and gender-based violence
and other crimes and continuing attacks on UNAMID
peacekeepers. As a result, the United States estimates
that 300,000 people have fled fighting in all of Darfur
in the first five months of this year, which is more
than the total number of people displaced in the past
two years together. Moreover, humanitarian access to
those large numbers of affected populations continues
to be problematic due to restrictions imposed by the
Government. On 19 April, one peacekeeper was killed
and two were injured in an attack on the UNAMID team
site in Muhajiriya by individuals wearing Sudanese
army uniforms. We condemn in the strongest terms
those continuing attacks on UNAMID peacekeepers
and the Sudan’s failure to prosecute those responsible.
The escalating violence and deteriorating human
rights and humanitarian situation in Darfur must be
reversed. Ensuring accountability for serious violations
of international law must be part of that effort.
Continued impunity for crimes in Darfur has sent a
message to Khartoum that there are no consequences
for violence against non-combatants, a lesson it has
applied tragically not only in Darfur but in the two
areas as well. The Banda and Jerbo case is an important
test, but the Government of the Sudan has much more

13-354525

S/PV.6974

to do. The Council must insist that the Sudan fulfil its
obligations.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing and for the presentation
the seventeenth report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, submitted to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Let me start by saying that Rwanda strongly
condemns the continued fighting in the Sudan. We
remain deeply concerned about the continued violations
of human rights in Darfur, particularly targeted attacks
against civilians and sexual and gender-based violence.
We acknowledge the efforts made by the Government
of the Sudan to improve the security situation in Darfur,
which include the establishment of several institutions
provided for in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
in particular the Darfur Regional Authority and its
associated parties.
The nomination of a special prosecutor by the
Government of the Sudan to investigate alleged war
crimes in Darfur and the establishment of branch
judicial offices in the five states of Darfur, as stipulated
in the Doha Document, is a significant step towards
justice and accountability in Darfur. However, while
recognizing the progress made, we believe that much
remains to be done. We encourage the Government of
the Sudan, including through the special prosecutor, to
make additional efforts towards the prosecution and
trial of the perpetrators of the most serious crimes in
Darfur.
Rwanda believes that only a political solution
through the Doha Document for Peace will bring
peace to Darfur. We therefore urge all the parties to
join that process. However, despite recent progress,
the Doha Document has yet to be fully implemented.
The progress against critical benchmarks — namely,
a comprehensive and inclusive settlement to the
conflict, the restoration of stable peace and a secure
environment, the strengthening of the rule of law and
human rights and the stabilization of the humanitarian
situation and facilitation of aid delivery — has been
hindered, and even set back, owing to the failure to
achieve, or commit to, a comprehensive and inclusive
ceasefire among the parties to the conflict.
In that light, we urge the Government of the Sudan and
all the signatories to commit to the full implementation
of the provisions of the Doha Document, particularly

6

the ceasefire and final security arrangements. We hope
that will encourage other armed groups to follow suit.
Allow me to stress our continued support for the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and the African Union
(AU) High-level Implementation Panel. The success
of the Doha Document will ultimately depend upon
the willingness of the signatory parties to abide by its
provisions.
Turning to the ICC, our position is well known.
Rwanda, like several other members of the Council, is
not a signatory to the Rome Statute. We have had an
opportunity in the Council to elaborate our position on
the Court; I hope we will have more opportunities to
further exchange views, including in the framework of
informal interactive dialogues with the Prosecutor.
Regarding the indictment issued against President
Omer Hassan A. Al-Bashir, we recall that, at seven
different Summits of the African Union, starting with
that of February 2009, African Heads of State adopted
decisions to request that the proceeding be deferred in
accordance with article 16 of the Rome Statute. As the
lates AU Summit stated, “The search for justice should
be pursued in a way that does not impede or jeopardize
efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace.”
In the same vein, we believe that all African
countries that have received President Al-Bashir since
his indictment were in conformity with the decisions
of the African Union Summits and were pursuing the
same goal of peace in the region. It would therefore be
unfortunate if they were sanctioned for their efforts
towards that end.
In that regard, let me once again underscore the
importance of genuine cooperation between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations.
That cooperation goes along with respect for decisions
taken by Heads of State of member States of those
regional organizations, particularly the African Union
and the League of Arab States, both of which are
organizations to which the Sudan belongs.
Let me conclude by stating that Rwanda, as a member
of the Security Council, a member State of the African
Union and the major troop- and police-contributing
country to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, will continue to work towards
sustainable peace, genuine reconciliation and
accountability for the most serious crimes in Darfur,
while promoting complementarity and the equal
sovereignty of nations.

13-35452

S/PV.6974

Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her seventeenth
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
As indicated in paragraph 2 of that resolution, the
Government of the Sudan and all the parties involved in
the situation in Darfur must cooperate to assist the Court
and its Prosecutor in their activities. On that binding
legal basis, investigations and judicial proceedings are
carried out in relation to investigations of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, pursuant to the
scope of the Statute of the Court.
We take note of the report that provides an update
of the activities and judicial proceedings under way,
particularly those related to preparations for the trials
of Banda and Jerbo and the investigations on alleged
attacks against civilian populations in Darfur. We
welcome the investigative work carried out by the
Office of the Prosecutor pursuant to the request made
through resolution 1593 (2005). That work contributes
to putting an end to impunity in the region of Darfur.
We are concerned at the description in the report of
multiple alleged aerial attacks by the Sudanese Armed
Forces, which are targeting the civilian population.
Likewise, indications that during recent periods the
tensions between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
rebel movements have been accentuated, which, taken
together with the inter-community confrontations in
disputes relating to natural resources, has contributed
to rising tensions in the already troubled region,
leading to an increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, which in the first five months of this
year alone reached the level of 300,000 people. Equally
alarming are the references to alleged incidents related
to sexual and gender-based violence, crimes and attacks
against human rights officials, humanitarian staff and
Blue Helmets. All such events deserve documented
investigations so that they do not go unpunished. All
of the alleged acts strike at the integrity of the civilian
population and thus affects the fragile peace process
based on the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
As a State party to the International Criminal
Court and consistent with our foreign policy of
adhering to international human rights instruments,
Guatemala cannot ignore the suffering caused to the
population, the serious acts committed in Darfur or the
investigations that recount actions that would result in
acts of genocide and crimes against humanity.

We reiterate our concern with regard to the
failure to execute the arrest warrants against the four
individuals identified in the report of the Prosecutor.
Although we understand the extraordinary sensitivity
that carrying out investigations and cooperating with
the ICC in this area represents for the Government of
the Sudan, the lack of cooperation by that Government
is unacceptable. We are also concerned that some States
parties to the Court are not cooperating in the execution
of requests for arrest, particularly when some of the
individuals subject to those requests have travelled to
their country.
Once again, we call upon the Government of
the Sudan and the parties involved in the judicial
investigations to cooperate effectively and responsibly
with the Court in order to guarantee accountability with
regard to crimes committed and judicial proceedings
under way.
We consider it fundamental to strengthen cooperation
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court, including through the effective followup of referrals from the Security Council. We hope that
the existing cooperation can be renewed, combining the
legal and political aspects of maintaining international
peace and security. That does not signify, of course,
any politicization of the Court or that the Council is
becoming more legalistic, but a combination of both
bodies, each acting in its respective fields of action
in order to meet their shared mandate to prevent
conflict and fight impunity. The effectiveness of
that cooperation, referred to in the Rome Statute
and reflected in resolution 1593 (2005), requires the
political will of all States.
The challenges in the current context are enormous,
particularly given the deterioration in the security
situation in Darfur, made worse by the prevailing
impunity. The international community must show
itself united when there is a lack of cooperation with
the Court. We welcome and conceptually support
the guidelines relating to non-essential contacts and
hope that they will be systematically applied, because
not only is that notion consistent with the agreement
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court but it is also appropriate.
Finally, we reiterate to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court the support and
cooperation of Guatemala as she strives to fulfil her
mandate.

13-354527

S/PV.6974

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to convey my gratitude to the Prosecutor for her
briefing. There are great many lessons to be learned
from the report.
As Ms. Bensouda has noted by referring to resolution
2091 (2013), adopted on 14 February, and to the recent
data published by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there is no disagreement within
the international community regarding the current
state of affairs. The fate of civilians in Darfur remains
unacceptable. The Government and the militia forces
that it has integrated within the security forces continue
to target civilians. Neither the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) nor
the humanitarian personnel present there enjoys the
necessary freedom of access to exercise their protection
mandate.
The Prosecutor has identified a number of areas
of concern, which we share. Despite the Government’s
attempts to dissimulate, the reports confirm aerial
bombardments by the Sudanese Air Force, which is
mostly affecting civilians. Sudanese security forces
are involved in attacks on civilians, which are hastily
represented as intertribal clashes. Sexual violence in
displaced persons camps is widespread. Human rights
defenders, international experts and humanitarian
workers are threatened. The work of humanitarian
workers and UNAMID is obstructed, keeping them
from preventing incidents and providing relief to
civilians.
Nearly nine years after the referral to the Court by
the Council, four individuals accused of war crimes
and crimes against humanity, including one accused of
genocide, continue to evade the Court, in full sight of
all, despite the arrest warrants issued against them by
the International Criminal Court. President Al-Bashir,
former militia leader Ali Kushayb, Defence Minister
Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein and current governor
of South Kordofan Ahmed Haroun are free. Those
four people, who are wanted for the massacre and
displacement of thousands of civilians or accused of
having committed genocide in ways they hoped would
be invisible, including through rape, persecution and
the intentional blocking of access to aid, are still in key
positions and able to order further abuses. As highlighted
in the Council, impunity has encouraged them to use the
same methods in South Kordofan as in Darfur. It is the
same crime, same perpetrators, same modus operandi
and, especially, same victims — civilians.

8

There is also no disagreement on how to break the
cycle of violence. All facets of the Peace Agreement
must be implemented in good faith and extended to
the rebel groups that continue to refuse to enter into
negotiations; civilians must be protected by allowing
UNAMID to implement its mandate; humanitarian
access must be ensured; and those responsible for
crimes must be prosecuted. The Council has said as
much, and the African Union does not say otherwise.
The Office of the Prosecutor and the Judges of the
Court have done their share of work through preliminary
analysis of crimes, investigations, the issuance of five
arrest warrants against four individuals and legal
proceedings against rebels who have decided to give
themselves up voluntarily. The first trial against the
rebel leaders is set for May 2014 for the attacks against
peacekeeping soldiers in Haskanita.
The Sudan, in turn, is not fulfilling its responsibilities.
Despite repeated announcements and the increase
in the number of special national courts meant to
prosecute serious crimes committed in Darfur, no legal
proceedings have been undertaken. Unlike Libya, which
is legally committed to the ICC, the Sudan has taken no
steps to try the persons who have been charged. The
Prosecutor’s Office has reviewed the work of all the
special courts established since 2005. They have done
nothing. Criminals have full immunity. That is also
the finding of the African Union High-level Panel on
Darfur.
Finally, I note that the implementation of the peace
process has serious gaps. Reconstruction is stalled,
the return of displaced persons and refugees has been
delayed, and the resurgence of fighting has increased
populations’ insecurity. Given this situation, what can
we do?
First, we must encourage cooperation by all. All
those who support the Court must be thanked. We know,
however, that two countries have refused to cooperate
over the past six months. We must respond to the letters
we have received from the Court through the SecretaryGeneral on issues of non-cooperation.
Secondly, we must isolate and punish the
criminals. We welcome in this respect the guidelines
issued by the Secretary-General on limiting contact
with persons wanted by the Court to what is essential
for the Organization. We must apply these guidelines
consistently. In particular, it would not seem to be
good policy to allow contact with the accused when the

13-35452

S/PV.6974

chance that that might improve the situation is minimal.
Another option, which has repeatedly discussed but not
yet undertaken, is to register individuals subject to an
arrest warrant on the list established by the Sanctions
Committee. I recall in this respect that paragraph
3 of resolution 1591 (2005) provides explicitly that
people who violate international humanitarian law
or international human rights law may be subject to
sanctions.
Thirdly and finally, the Council must once again
be united in exerting real pressure on the parties to
end the violations committed against civilians. We
regret, in this respect, that some refuse to recognize
the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation,
which is nevertheless ongoing and indisputable.
Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for the briefing and
for presenting her seventeenth report to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Azerbaijan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless, we
acknowledge the rights and obligations of the States
parties to the Statute. We take note of the efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor aimed at investigating
the violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law in Darfur. In this regard, we reiterate
our position that the activities of the Prosecutor
should strictly comply with the appropriate framework
established by resolution 1593 (2005).
It is obvious that there is no military solution to
the conflict in Darfur and that the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur constitutes the primary basis for
sustainable conflict resolution. In this context, those
movements that have not yet signed the Doha Document
must cease hostilities and join the peace process without
precondition.
We are concerned over the deterioration of the
security situation, which continues to adversely affect
the civilian population and restrict humanitarian
access to areas of confrontation. Intensified attacks by
non-signatory armed groups and heavy intercommunal
clashes have led to a significant increase in civilian
casualties and displacement in Darfur. Reports of
such violations — including killings, rape, looting,
hostage-taking and the destruction of property — should
be properly investigated in order to bring those

responsible to justice and prevent their recurrence in
the future.
We note that the Sudanese Government continues
its efforts to defuse intercommunal tensions and
promote reconciliation in Darfur. Unfortunately, the
international presence in Darfur, including United
Nations staff members, aid workers and peacekeepers,
have continued to face constant attacks during the
past six months. It is particularly distressing that the
personnel of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) have been targeted
in the violence. The attack on UNAMID of 19 April,
which left a Nigerian peacekeeper dead and two
others wounded, should be thoroughly investigated
and the perpetrators brought to justice. Criminality
and banditry in Darfur are among the most significant
threats to civilians and humanitarian workers.
In conclusion, we stress the need for the international
community’s further support for the implementation of
the Doha Document and the importance that the rebel
groups renounce violence as vital prerequisites for
ensuring durable peace in Darfur.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing on the seventeenth report of her Office,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). As we all know,
it was in that resolution that the Council referred the
situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the ICC, in the
conviction that it constituted a threat to international
peace and security. The Council recently reiterated that
conviction in resolution 2063 (2012).
Today’s briefing reflected the progress that has
been made and the ongoing gaps in the judiciary
activities, ongoing investigations and cooperation with
States in the fight against impunity undertaken by the
ICC with respect to the situation in Darfur. I wish to
address the three issues I have just mentioned, but
before I do I recall that Togo is not yet a party to the
ICC Rome Statute.
With regard to judicial activities, especially
concerning the Banda and Jerbo case, in its statement
last December in connection with the Prosecutor’s
sixteenth report (see S/PV.6887), Togo expressed the
hope that the outcome of pre-trial hearings would, on the
one hand, allow the parties to resolve their differences
and, on the other, make it possible for the pertinent
Pre-Trial Chamber to set without delay the date for the

13-354529

S/PV.6974

commencement of the trial, so as to guarantee the right
of the accused to be tried without undue delay and to
meet the expectations of victims to speedy justice.
Togo welcomes that that has in fact been the case
and that, as set out in paragraph 12 of the current
report, the date of the trial is set for 5 May 2014.
Moreover, Togo welcomes that the Prosecutor has met
the deadline of 2 May for communicating to accused
central elements in the cases against them, as well as
lists of witnesses to be called, so that the trial scheduled
to begin in June 2014 can take place in full respect for
the rights of defence.
As to cooperation among the United Nations, the
Security Council, Member States and the ICC, many
of the uncertainties and challenges mentioned in the
sixteenth report last December seem to persist. Others
had already been reported to the Council, as one can read
in the seventeenth report. As Togo also stated during the
wrap-up and assessment meeting held last week during
its presidency of the Council during the month of May
(see S/PV.6972), the Council could benefit greatly from
the way it handles its cooperation and communication
with the Court, if only by acknowledging receipt of the
notifications it receives.
In addition, Togo hopes that relations between
States and the ICC will strictly observe the principle
of complementarity, which, for the States concerned,
means having the primary obligation to prosecute and
try perpetrators. Togo therefore reiterates its regret
over the fact that there seems to have been no progress
since 2012 in connection with prosecuting suspects. My
country encourages the States concerned to give effect
to the principle of complementarity.
Also with regard to State cooperation, Togo would
like to point to paragraph 6 of the sixteenth report,
which refers to the difficulties encountered by the
defence in the Banda and Jerbo case, including gaining
access to exculpatory evidence and logistical support,
security concerns and securing entry into Darfur — as
a result of which the defence had to introduce a motion
to suspend the trial. Togo would like to believe that
the fact that the seventeenth report no longer mentions
those problems means that it is because solutions have
been found.
In the context of cooperation with the ICC, under
articles 86 and 87 of the Court’s Statute, States often
seem less generous to the defence. Togo would therefore
welcome any initiative that the various organs of the

10

Court and the Assembly of States Parties could take, in
accordance with the basic texts of the ICC, to facilitate
cooperation between States and the defence so as to
ensure fair trials.
In terms of ongoing investigations, Togo would
like to reiterate its call for a halt to the violence and
violations of human rights and humanitarian law that
seem to be continuing. Togo also encourages the Office
of the Prosecutor to continue its monitoring and to
advance the investigation of crimes that continue to
be committed — aerial bombardments; indiscriminate
attacks on the ground against civilians, including
women and children, even in camps for displaced
persons; widespread sexual violence and gender-based
attacks; attacks against human rights defenders and
members of civil society and community leaders; the
recruitment of child soldiers; and intentional acts aimed
at the total or partial destruction of ethnic groups.
Togo reiterates its deep concern about attacks
and kidnappings of aid workers and members of
peacekeeping forces — attacks that have claimed
the lives of many brave peacekeepers of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Togo hopes that prosecuting the murders of African
Union soldiers in 2007 will make it possible to clarify
the circumstances of those attacks and to identify the
perpetrators at all levels of responsibility in order that
they may answer for their acts.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for her report and her briefing today. The Russian
Federation supports the efforts of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate the situation in
Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We view the
Court’s efforts in that area as an important contribution
to combating impunity for the most serious crimes of
concern to the entire international community.
We are concerned by the deterioration in the
security situation in Darfur as a result of rebel combat
activity. The escalation of armed clashes between
various tribes, which is largely the result of heightened
competition for resources, is also a cause for alarm. We
take note of the authorities’ energetic efforts to prevent
an increase in inter-communal violence. The way to
resolve the dire humanitarian problems, including
those of refugees and internally displaced persons, is
to normalize the political and military situation, make

13-35452

S/PV.6974

progress in the peace process and ensure the social and
economic revival of Darfur.
An important element in that regard is the
practical implementation of the outcomes of the Doha
international conference on allocating resources
for the region’s development. Another aspect of key
importance in that connection is to make further
progress on a political settlement of the basis of the
Doha agreements. Parties with influence on the leaders
of the Sudan Revolutionary Front must induce them
to reject a destructive course of action and to join the
peace process.
With regard to the so-called “irreconcilables”, the
time is ripe to consider using sanctions against them
pursuant to the Council’s resolutions. One could begin
with the individuals guilty of killing leaders of the
Justice and Equality Movement faction who had signed
a peace agreement with the Government of the Sudan
last April. Of interest in that regard is the information
contained in the report of the Prosecutor concerning
the ongoing violence in Darfur with the participation
of both Government forces and rebel groups. In several
instances in that connection there may be grounds for
the Prosecutor to open new cases. We urge the Court to
carry out an objective assessment of illegal activities
carried out by all sides.
It is clear that the task of the International Criminal
Court as an independent organ of international criminal
justice is to carry out a strictly judicial function and to
punish the guilty. However, the actions of the Court in
carrying out its mandate to investigate events in Darfur
must not be divorced from overall efforts to normalize
the situation in that long-suffering Sudanese state. In
our view, the instinct of the current Prosecutor to strike
a delicate balance between reconciliation and criminal
justice as she carries out her activities is commendable.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s comments with
regard to the Government’s cooperation with the ICC
on the issue of Darfur. In that connection, the situation
once again illustrates just how important the support
of the Government is for the success of the Court’s
operation. In evaluating the level of compliance by
individual States with the relevant commitments in this
area, we should be mindful of the fact that the scope
of that support can vary. One should also bear in mind
the existing norms of international law concerning the
immunity of high-level State officials.

In our view, the Secretary-General’s issuance in
April of a manual to be used by United Nations staff
in their contacts with individuals subject to arrest
warrants was a step in the right direction. That brought
clarity to this complex and important issue of concern
to the mission of the United Nations.
We are carefully following the investigations into
the attack on African Union peacekeepers at Haskanita
in 2007. The events of recent months, which still need
clarifying, have brought proceedings on the actions of
the rebel group leaders to a halt. It is important that
those circumstances do not interrupt the momentum
achieved within the framework of those proceedings.
In conclusion, we would like to comment on the
proposals for follow-up action by the Security Council
in referring cases to the International Criminal Court.
We will review any ideas on this from the point of view
of their practical usefulness and keeping in mind the
prerogatives of the Council, the ICC’s mandate and
the international legal context as a whole. For now, we
see no added value in such measures. In this matter,
we proceed from the assumption that the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, lacking the
necessary mandate, is not a suitable format for deciding
the issue of the ICC.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
presentation of this report in accordance with resolution
1593 (2005). We should view the Prosecutor’s report
not with frustration but as a challenge to us to shoulder
the responsibility of acting in a coordinated fashion.
Argentina is deeply concerned about continuing
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. In February, the Council highlighted
in resolution 2091 (2013) the fact that the people
of Darfur are in an urgent humanitarian crisis, and
reiterated its request for an end to all serious violations
of human rights and human rights law. Argentina
commends the Office of the Prosecutor for its dedication
to monitoring current crimes, which include aerial
and ground bombardments, a high number of civilian
killings, forced displacement, sexual and genderbased violence — aggravated by the fact that children
are both victims and perpetrators, and by the serious
problem of rape and other abuses going unreported for
fear of reprisal — attacks on human rights defenders,
members of civil society, humanitarian workers and the

13-3545211

S/PV.6974

personnel of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), serious obstacles to
access to humanitarian assistance and to the ability
of UNAMID personnel not only to assist affected
civilians but also to investigate an alleged aerial attack.
Argentina encourages the Prosecutor to continue to
investigate those acts, which qualify as crimes under
the Rome Statute.
The description of the crimes currently being
committed occupies a long section of the Prosecutor’s
report. It is necessary for the Security Council to
understand that without justice impunity is not only
perpetuated, but also multiplies, becoming structural
by inspiring the commission of new crimes. Argentina
concurs with the evaluation made by the Panel of
Experts on Sudan, as prevailing impunity perpetuates
a status quo in while civilian victims become ever mre
numerous while the indictees remain at large. Argentina
therefore wishes to focus on cooperation with the Court.
The Government of the Sudan is bound under
resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate with the Court
and to provide it with all necessary assistance. States
parties to the Rome Statute are obligated to cooperate
under that instrument. The resolution also called on
all other Members of the United Nations and regional
organizations to cooperate with the ICC.
A crucial aspect of cooperation is the execution of
arrest warrants. At the moment, four arrest warrants
issued by the Court since 2007 for counts of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity remain unexecuted.
Argentina regrets the position of the Government of
the Sudan with regard to the Court, because those who
continue to fall victim to serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are its own
people. It is also regrettable that Chad, a State party to
the Rome Statute, has repeatedly flouted its obligation
to cooperate with the Court. We urge Chad to act in
accordance with the Rome Statute.
The Court is an institution founded on the
common lesson learned that serious crimes must not
go unpunished and that justice and punishment for
those responsible contribute to the prevention of such
crimes We therefore call on all Member States and
regional organizations, including the African Union,
to work together to ensure cooperation with the Court
and that impunity does not prevail. Both the Court
and the President of the Assembly of States Parties to
the Statute have sent letters to the Council regarding

12

non-cooperation with the Court with regard to the
situation in Darfur. Argentina is in favour of of the
Council addressing the consideration of these letters in
the appropriate forum, which in the view of my country
should be the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.
My country supports an effective follow-up by
the Council of the referrals made to the Court. The
commitment reflected in S/PRST/2013/2 must be put in
practice as a matter of urgency. Be it in the Working
Group on International Tribunals or in a specific
subsidiary organ for ICC referrals, the Council must
engage in such follow-up because it cannot shirk its
responsibility for the referrals it makes to the Court.
Moreover, Argentina thanks the Secretary-General
for issuing the guidelines on non-essential contacts
with persons subject to arrest warrants issued by the
ICC. We hope that they will be applied in a strict and
consistent manner.
I should like, as I do every time the Council refers
to the ICC, to make brief reference to two aspects that
are fundamental to Argentina’s position.
First is the exemption of the jurisdiction of the
Court of nationals of States non-parties to the Rome
Statute for acts or omissions derived from operations
established or authorized by the Council or related
to them. This clause, included for the first time in
resolution 1593 (2005), contradicts the Rome Statute
and can affect the credibility of the Security Council
and that of the Court itself.
Second is the clause — also included for the first
time in the Darfur referral — providing that the United
Nations shall not defray the costs of the referral. Not
only does this contradict the Rome Statute, but it also
and in practical terms reflects the failure of the United
Nations to address the financing of referrals, which
jeopardizes the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor
and the long-term viability of the Court.
Argentina wishes to commend the work of the
Prosecutor and her Office in performing their functions
regarding this referral ofthe Security Council, and
thanks her for the permanent disposition to dialogue
with the Council. I should like to reiterate that impunity
leads to more crimes and more victims, and in no way
contributes to peace. The Government and people of
Argentina urge the international community to put an
end to impunity, not only because we are signatories
to the International Criminal Court, but also because

13-35452

S/PV.6974

we have the moral right and authority to call on the
international community to fight impunity and
cooperate with the Court. For our country, the fight
against impunity is a State policy, and the perpetrators
of crimes against humanity must be brought to justice
in accordance with due process, tried and sentenced.
They must not enjoy amnesty.
Finally, I wish to once more reaffirm the firm
commitment of Argentina to the International Criminal
Court.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month, and thank Togo for its effective
presidency last month.
We thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
briefing. We have taken careful note of the seventeenth
note of the Prosecutor. We welcome the presence of the
Ambassador of the Sudan in the Council Chamber.
Pakistan is not a party to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. However, we
acknowledge the rights and obligations of States parties
to the ICC.
Pakistan supports a peaceful and viable resolution
of the situation in Darfur through an inclusive
political process that respects and upholds the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan. The
goal of durable peace in Darfur can be realized only
through a comprehensive multipronged strategy. Such
a strategy should provide impetus to encouraging a
peaceful solution through dialogue, promote justice and
reconciliation, establish an environment conducive to
security and address the human rights and humanitarian
aspects of the long-standing conflict in Darfur by
ending impunity.
We support the efforts of the African Union, in
particular those of its High-level Implementation
Panel, towards achieving peace, stability, justice and
reconciliation in Darfur. The advice of the League of
Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
should also be given due weight.
We welcome the several important steps taken by
the signatories to implement the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, including the transfer of funds to
the Darfur Regional Authority and the holding of the
international donors conference for reconstruction
and development in Darfur. Those steps would help

to address the underlying issues of development and
governance in the region. We urge the signatories
to implement their commitments under the Doha
Document. It is important that progress be made on the
provisions relating to land and property.
The attacks against peacekeepers in Darfur remain
a serious concern. Those attacks should be swiftly
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.
The destabilizing activities of Darfuri armed rebel
movements under the Sudan Revolutionary Front
umbrella, as well as their attacks against civilians
and humanitarian workers, should be thoroughly
investigated. Sanctions should be imposed against all
armed movements that continue to obstruct the peace
process in Darfur, and against all those who flagrantly
violate humanitarian and human rights law.
The Secretary-General’s guidelines of 3 April on
contacts between United Nations officials and persons
who are subject to ICC arrest warrants and summonses
highlight that the United Nations and the ICC are
separate organizations, each with its own mandate.
They also underline the operational nature of the
decision on the requirement of contact with various
individuals in carrying out United Nations-mandated
activities. That is a new document and we should give it
some time to be tested in the field.
Durable peace and stability in the Sudan is a strong
aspiration of the Sudanese people and an imperative
for regional peace and security. Achieving that
objective requires the support and understanding of the
international community. The situation in Darfur, in
particular the suffering of its people, has been a matter
of concern for several years. We must do more to help
to resolve that complex problem in a holistic manner.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for
her presentation of the seventeenth report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in accordance
with resolution 1593 (2005). Since her last report, the
situation in Darfur has developed in various ways. At
the political level, progress should be commended and
should be encouraged, in particular the consolidation
of institutions established by the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, such as the Darfur Regional Authority.
In that regard, we welcome the convening of the donors
conference for Darfur, which was held in Doha on
7 April, and we hope that the donations that will be

13-3545213

S/PV.6974

collected will enable us to finance development in
Darfur.
However, development in Darfur cannot begin
without first restoring peace and ensuring the security
of its population. The agreement between the Justice
and Equality Movement and the Government of the
Sudan was welcome, but the recent assassination of its
leader will undoubtedly have a significant impact on
the continuation of the peace process and on the actions
of the other groups that have not yet joined the process.
Furthermore, the resurgence of violence among the
rebels of the Sudan Revolutionary Front, together with
violent intertribal clashes, have severely deteriorated
the security situation and led to the displacement of a
great number of civilians. The international community
must bear all of those factors in mind.
For its part, Morocco has always advocated a
political settlement among all the parties involved
in order to attenuate the suffering of the civilian
population, and reaffirms its commitment to the
principles of international humanitarian law and
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan.
Morocco welcomed the signing of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and the launch of
the process for implementing its provisions. The
agreement, which covers all of the issues underlying the
conflict — such as the measures aimed at the equitable
redistribution of power and resources, compensation,
the return of displaced persons, reconciliation and the
maintenance of dialogue — in our view remains the
only possible way out of the conflict in Darfur, and
therefore must supported.
The Sudan’s history stretches back to ancient times
and is intimately entwined with that of the African
continent. The current situation of the country is worthy
of the full support of the international community so as
to enable peace and stability to be restored.
The Sudan has sacrificed a great deal within the
framework of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, as well
as with the recent signature of a number of agreements
with South Sudan and rebel groups. The decision of the
ICC to indict President Al-Bashir has never enjoyed
international consensus. The Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the League of Arab States have
questioned the basis of such an approach.

14

In conclusion, we are convinced that the lengthy
process that will allow peace and stability to be restored
in Darfur cannot be successful without effective and
coordinated cooperation among all the parties to the
conflict, regional organizations and the mediation
mechanisms involved.
Ms. Sohn Sung-Youn (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing on the recent
developments in the Darfur situation.
The overall situation in Darfur continues to
deteriorate. Since the clashes in Jebel Amir last January,
hostilities involving numerous rebel groups have
increased throughout the Darfur region and beyond.
Serious violations of human rights law, including
violence against civilians, arbitrary detention, torture
and sexual assaults continue to be reported in Darfur.
The alleged involvement of the Sudanese National
Intelligence and Security Services in some of those
cases deserves our attention. In order to achieve stability
in the Darfur region, all such allegations need to be
clarified and violators of human rights and international
humanitarian law must be held accountable.
With regard to the recent judicial activities of the
ICC, we welcome progress in the Banda and Jerbo
case, specifically Trial Chamber IV’s decision that
the trial against rebels, Mr. Banda and Mr. Jerbo,
should commence on 5 May 2014 for the attacks on
peacekeeping troops in Haskanita.
Concerning its ongoing investigations, we
appreciate the Office of the Prosecutor’s efforts to
investigate allegations of criminal activity, as well
as crimes being committed in Darfur. We remain
concerned about the mounting violence in Darfur and
about reports describing the deliberate targeting of
civilians, sexual and gender-based violence, attacks
on peacekeepers and other crimes. We hope that the
Prosecutor’s ongoing investigations can corroborate the
allegations and that any resulting new criminal cases
will render justice to the victims of such serious crimes.
On the issue of non-cooperation by the Sudan
and other parties, it is incumbent upon the Sudan to
cooperate fully with the ICC and its investigations,
in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), which
was adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. We take full note of the fact that the
Prosecutor has called on the Security Council to ensure
the Sudan’s compliance with that resolution. We believe

13-35452

S/PV.6974

that the Council should consider what actions it can
take to assist the ICC in that regard. We also note that
the Prosecutor has called upon ICC States parties to
take the necessary actions to promote cooperation on
the arrest of individuals wanted by the Court in relation
to the Darfur situation.
In conclusion, we look forward to a full investigation
of allegations of all serious crimes committed in
Darfur. We encourage the Prosecutor to continue her
investigative efforts. The Korean Government stands
ready to strongly support the ICC and its activities. We
also believe that the Security Council should continue
to closely monitor the Darfur situation, which it has
referred to the ICC.
Mr. Bo Shen (China) (spoke in Chinese): I have
listened attentively to the briefing by Prosecutor
Bensouda.
The question of Darfur is a complex one, as it
involves many areas, including the political process,
security and stability, humanitarian assistance,
development, reconstruction and justice. The political
process is key among those elements. Only by promoting
sustained progress in the political process can lasting
peace at last be achieved in Darfur and the foundations
for justice and other efforts be laid.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur has
set out the approach for a comprehensive and proper
settlement of the Darfur issue. It forms the basis for
peace in the region. Its signatories, in particular the
parties in Darfur, should fully implement the Doha
Document. The armed rebel groups in question should
stop all forms of violence and sign peace agreements
on the basis of the Doha Document. All steps taken by
the international community on Darfur should serve to
promote the political process there and help achieve the
goals tho which I have referred. We hope that the ICC
will play a positive and constructive role to that end.
China’s position on the ICC’s involvement in the
question of Darfur remains unchanged. We hope that
the Council will attach due importance to that question
and pay heed to the views of such regional organizations
as the African Union and the League of Arab States.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing. We
are pleased to learn that the Office of the Prosecutor
is continuing its work in relation to the situation in
Darfur, despite the significant challenges it faces.

We continue to be deeply concerned by violence in
Darfur. Inter-tribal hostilities have increased this year,
including over resources, and large numbers of Darfuris
have been displaced both internally and across borders.
Those displaced face severe food and water shortages.
Against that background of violence, displacement
and humanitarian needs, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) faces
access restrictions that continue to hamper its ability
to implement its mandate. We continue to call for
UNAMID to be allowed to access all areas of Darfur,
including places where clashes have occurred. The
19 April attack on UNAMID peacekeepers in which one
was killed and two were injured must be condemned
in the strongest terms and the perpetrators must be
brought to justice.
It is important that the Council provide strong
support to political reconciliation efforts underpinned
by the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. But
recent violent incidents demonstrate the risks posed to
those embracing the path of dialogue, as well as the
importance of a commitment to ensuring that those
who disrupt that path with violence are held to account.
Without a commitment to justice and accountability, it
will be difficult to achieve and sustain peace.
Indeed, the current climate of impunity in Darfur
sends a dangerous message of tolerance to would-be
perpetrators of serious international crimes and other
violations of international law. In that context, we
commend the Office of the Prosecutor for its continued
monitoring of possible crimes under the Rome Statute.
We are deeply concerned by the references in the
Prosecutor’s report to attacks on civilians, sexual
and gender-based violence, attacks on those trying to
help the people of the Sudan, including peacekeepers,
and the denial of humanitarian access. The Council’s
condemnation of such crimes was set out clearly in
resolution 2091 (2013).
In particular, reports of alleged aerial bombardments
by the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF), resulting in
civilian casualties, must be properly investigated.
That has been impossible due to restrictions on
access to affected areas, meaning that the provision of
humanitarian assistance was also prevented at critical
times. It is unacceptable that UNAMID personnel
were denied access to investigate an alleged aerial
bombardment carried out by the SAF; it is equally
unacceptable that UNAMID personnel have been

13-3545215

S/PV.6974

prevented from investigating alleged reports of sexual
violence.
It is against that background, and with deep regret,
that we note also the Prosecutor’s unambiguous account
of the Government of the Sudan’s non-cooperation with
the Court, in disregard of resolution 1593 (2005). The
Council needs to do more to support the Court and to
secure the Sudan’s cooperation, so that we can meet our
commitment to bringing to justice those responsible for
serious international crimes.
We are also deeply disappointed at the failure of
some ICC States parties to arrest and surrender the
four Sudanese individuals subject to outstanding ICC
arrest warrants. We commend the Prosecutor on the
outreach efforts she has made to remind States of the
importance of meeting their obligations to cooperate
with the Court. We look forward to consulting with
other Council members as to what the Council can do
to assist the Court in that regard.
There are steps that can be taken to underscore the
international community’s commitment to ensuring
that those accused of serious international crimes are
held to account. We have previously expressed the view
that the Council’s Sanctions Committees should give
consideration to ICC arrest warrants and summonses
to appear, with a view to ensuring greater consistency
between sanctions lists and ICC indictments.
Other steps are outlined in the useful document
produced by the ICC Office of the Prosecutor that
maps the instances of outstanding arrest warrants. It
highlights the need to intensify efforts to isolate ICC
fugitives in a coordinated way, as well as the importance
of making collaborative efforts to plan for and execute
arrest warrants. The Secretary-General’s guidance for
the Secretariat on contact with those subject to ICC
arrest warrants is also helpful in that context.
In conclusion, we note the recent debate about the
role of the International Criminal Court. Australia
remains firmly of the view that the ICC can play an
important role in ending impunity in conflict and postconflict situations. But it is also important to recall that
all States fulfil their obligations under international
law — whether those obligations derive from being a
party to the Rome Statute or from resolutions of the
Council.
The Council must also strongly support the Court
in its efforts to conduct its work, and Darfur is no

16

exception. We need to continue to think about ways
by which the Council can assist the Court in ending
impunity for crimes in Darfur and achieve at least a
measure of justice for victims.
We look forward to further updates from the
Prosecutor and would be pleased to have an opportunity
to participate in an informal interactive dialogue with
her on the situation in Darfur.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing today. We
share the sense of frustration that she expressed in her
statement.
The situation in Darfur remaines very serious.
There has been a further deterioration in the security
situation, resulting in an estimated 300,000 Darfuris
becoming displaced, which is more than the total
number in the past two years.
We welcome the initial steps to implement the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, but it remains way
behind schedule. The Government of the Sudan and the
Darfur Regional Authority must make a renewed effort
and clearly signal their commitment to delivering peace
in Darfur.
We welcome the commitment of the Justice and
Equality Movement-Bashar to support the Doha
Document. We strongly condemn the attack that resulted
in the deaths of Mohamed Bashar and 10 members of this
movement. Attacks against those willing to lay down
arms and negotiate are unacceptable and detrimental to
the peace process. We call on all sides involved in the
fighting to cease hostilities immediately and to engage
in a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur plays a crucial role in building
peace and stability for the people of the region. It is
unacceptable that it continues to face access restrictions
across Darfur, despite the clear demands of the Council.
The commitment made by the Government of the
Sudan to removing all obstacles to development in
Darfur must now be put into practice.
I thank the Prosecutor for her update on the trials
of Abdullah Banda and Saleh Jerbo. It remains deeply
concerning that the Government of the Sudan continues
to obstruct the pursuit of justice for the people of Darfur
and has failed to cooperate over the four outstanding

13-35452

S/PV.6974

arrest warrants. Reports of one of those indicted being
present in the area of current conflict are particularly
alarming.
As laid down by the Council in resolution 1593
(2005), the Government of the Sudan has an obligation
to cooperate with the ICC, and we continue to urge it
to do so. We also call on all States to cooperate with
the ICC to end impunity and to deliver much-needed
accountability, and we regret the fact that some ICC
States parties have failed in their duty under the Rome
Statute. The Council, for its part, must now consider
urgently what more it can and should do to assist the
Court in delivering the mandate we entrusted it with in
referring the situation in Darfur.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to place on record that our participation in this
meeting does not in any way indicate our recognition
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) or its work.
The Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute, and I am
addressing this statement to the Security Council alone.
Today’s briefing was fraught with false claims and
illogical demands. We therefore believe it appropriate
to address the Council in order to clarify the situation
and provide the correct information. We reiterate that
this entire issue has been based on a faulty assumption,
as confirmed by eminent international personalities
whose testimony refutes the charge of ethnic cleansing
and genocide, as previously stated.
The Prosecutor’s demand that we implement
the arrest warrants issued against President Omer
Hassan A. Al-Bashir and other Sudanese officials is
unacceptable because it is based on faulty logic. What
is based on wrong is of necessity wrong itself.
The conflict in Darfur is an internal conflict
that has not overspilled our national borders and has
been wrongly described as a threat to international
peace and security. It is incorrect to cite a lack of
willingness or effectiveness on the part of the Sudanese
judiciary to ensure justice and uphold national and
international criminal law. I reiterate the efficiency
and professionalism of the Sudanese judiciary and its
ability to uphold justice in accordance with our national
legislation and international criminal law. In that
context, we wish to reiterate our oft-repeated assertion

that our initial objective is to render justice through the
national judiciary, and that the ICC has a role to play
only when the national judiciary is unable or unwilling
to do so.
We also note the erroneous approach adopted by the
Office of the Prosecutor in addressing issues of concern
to African countries. It entirely disregards Africa’s
legal heritage and the independence, professionalism
and abilities of its judiciary. This faulty approach has
been rejected by Africa and led to the call, issued at the
African summit held in Addis Ababa in May, to refer
all issues of concern to the continent to the African
judiciary.
The Sudanese Government is strongly convinced
of and deeply committed to combating impunity, and
to that end has established a special court in charge
of investigating serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law in Darfur. It has
appointed a Prosecutor to the Court, in implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. He is
assisted by 12 legal advisors, who act with complete
independence in the five states of Darfur.
I would also note that the Prosecutor has received
more than 53 criminal complaints. Thirty of these cases
come from Northern Darfur, where 17 accused have
been sentenced to death, and 14 from Southern Darfur,
where 11 have been sentenced to death. Six cases in
Western Darfur are still under investigation, while
in one case in Eastern Darfur three people have been
sentenced to death. There has been only one criminal
case in Central Darfur, which remains pending. All
of this legal activity bears witness to the willingness
and capacity of the Sudanese judiciary to prosecute
criminals in Darfur.
References to aerial bombardment are also
unacceptable. The Sudanese Government exercises its
sovereign right to defend the security and territorial
integrity of the country. References to the humanitarian
situation and sexual violence are equally unacceptable,
since the perpetrators are rebels of the so-called Sudan
Revolutionary Front, who assassinated Commander
Mohamed Bashar and his Deputy Suleiman Dahiya.
This group kills anyone who has chosen the path of
peace, which in itself speaks clearly to its terrorist
leanings. It has also attacked cities in Northern and
Southern Kordofan, Umm Ruwaba and Abu Karshola,
committed crimes against humanity, violated human
rights, plundered homes and displaced populations,

13-3545217

S/PV.6974

including vulnerable groups. In spite of these atrocities,
however, the Security Council has not lifted a finger.
The statement concerning sexual violence is
based on media reports and is truly bewildering. How
could any judicial entity rely on media reports in its
prosecutions? In one Council meeting, Mr. President,
you personally rejected any reliance on media reports.
Other claims that the Sudanese Government is not
making the required effort to cooperate are false. We
are cooperating in removing all obstacles facing the
Office of the Prosecutor. The visit of Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Emergency Relief Coordinator, to the Sudan in May is
proof of that cooperation.
Ms. Amos has shown herself to be an international
civil servant who embodies the principles of the
Charter and respects the immunities of high officials,
including Presidents. She has met with many officials
of the Sudanese Government, including the President
himself, and has led deliberations on the humanitarian
situation in Darfur. Following her visit, she reiterated
that the rebel movements under the banner of the Sudan
Revolutionary Front were indeed responsible for the
displacement of populations and the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile States.

18

In conclusion, in spite of the remaining pockets of
rebellion and limited internal conflicts over resources,
the situation in Darfur has greatly improved since 2003.
We have achieved great success in implementing the
Doha Document and the establishment of the Darfur
Regional Authority, which is led by numerous dedicated
sons and daughters of Darfur representing all tribes
that have set out on the path of peace. They are all
working in coherence and coordination with the federal
and state Governments in Darfur to pursue that path.
We therefore appeal to the Council to support all
efforts to establish peace and security, as well as to
call on the rebel groups that have to date refused to
take that path to do so in order to enable us all to turn
our efforts to reconstruction and development and the
achievement of reconciliation, so as to restore peace,
prosperity and stability for the Sudan in general and for
Darfur in particular.
I hope, Sir,that I have kept to the five-minute limit
set for interventions.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

13-35452
