S/2001/333

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 April 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 3 April 2001 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo,
covering the period 1 February to 28 February 2001.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-32455 (E) 060401

*0132455*

S/2001/333

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-28 February 2001) there were approximately
42,500 troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre, with no major changes in
deployment since the last report.
Security
2.
The overall security situation in Kosovo deteriorated during the reporting
period, with an increase in acts of ethnic violence and harassment throughout the
province. In two incidents, on 13 and 16 February, near Strpce and Livadice
respectively, bus convoys escorted by KFOR carrying Kosovo Serbs were attacked,
leaving a total of 8 dead and 45 injured. Subsequently, protests against the attacks
took place in the Kosovo Serb areas of Caglavica, Gracanica and Lipljian, which
eventually ended peacefully. In Strpce, however, a crowd of about 500 Kosovo
Serbs gathered outside the UNMIK police building, blocked two roads and burned
two UNMIK police cars. The crowd eventually dispersed after the intervention of
KFOR. During the demonstration, a KFOR patrol was shot at while searching an
abandoned vehicle, and later detained five Kosovo Albanians.
3.
In other demonstrations on 18 February near Livadice and on 21 February in
Pasjane, the crowds became violent and threw stones at KFOR soldiers; in the latter
case, the crowd was subdued with the help of UNMIK police and five people were
detained. Tear gas was used to subdue another hostile crowd demonstrating in Zubin
Potok. Following the two attacks on the convoys, KFOR decided to increase security
in Kosovo Serb enclaves and when escorting convoys.
4.
Demonstrations involving different ethnic communities continued across the
province on a daily basis but were for the most part conducted peacefully.
5.
In Mitrovica, no significant incidents have been reported since the period of
civil unrest noted in the last report came to an end on 1 February. Since then, KFOR
has been implementing measures in three phases aimed at increasing confidence and
security. In incidents directed against KFOR, a KFOR soldier was hit and injured by
a stone on 3 February, and a crowd of 50 Kosovo Albanians threatened to kill two
Kosovo Serb interpreters accompanying a KFOR team on 9 February — the
interpreters had to be evacuated by KFOR. Four Kosovo Albanians were detained,
one of whom was a suspected ethnic Albanian armed group leader and three were
suspected of involvement with UCPMB (the “Liberation Army of Presevo,
Medvedja and Bujanovac”).
6.
Inter-ethnic intimidation continued during the reporting period, and included at
least 10 explosions or arson attacks on Kosovo Serb houses and other property,
mostly in the area of Vitina, but also in Orahovac and Cernica. In addition, there
were several arson, bomb or grenade attacks against Roma houses in Gnijlane and
Suva Reka. On 7 February, a Serb church was damaged in an explosion in
Multinational Brigade (MNB) (East), and in another incident near the Devic
monastery in MNB (North) a KFOR soldier was injured as he tried to defuse an
explosive device. On 8 and 15 February in Mahala, Gracko and Decane, there were

2

S/2001/333

three shootings from passing cars resulting in the death of one and injury to two
Kosovo Albanians and injury to two Kosovo Serbs.
7.
During the period, KFOR troops uncovered and confiscated weapons,
ammunition and explosives near Djakovica (MNB (West)), Stirnjle and Zlatare
(MNB (East)), and detained three Kosovo Albanians in the Zlatare incident.
Illegal border activity
8.
KFOR troops continued to provide appropriate control of Kosovo’s internal
boundaries and external borders and recognized crossing points. All but two of the
recognized crossing points within each MNB into the Ground Safety Zone remain
closed.
9.
Throughout the period, there have been daily incidents in the Presevo Valley
and in the Ground Safety Zone, involving exchanges of fire with small arms and
automatic and heavy weapons. There have been numerous reports of groups of
armed men in black battle dress moving around in the Ground Safety Zone. On 18
February near Lucane, just outside the Zone, the European Union Monitoring
Mission confirmed that a Ministry of Internal Affairs Special Police (MUP) jeep
struck a landmine, killing the three occupants. Later two UCPMB members were
killed in an exchange of fire. On 22 February, KFOR detained two UCPMB
members found shot and injured in the Ground Safety Zone. KFOR continued to
make use of the Joint Implementation Commission, set up under the Military
Technical Agreement, to encourage the two sides to avoid violence, and continued to
interdict suspected ethnic Albanian armed group members crossing from or into the
Ground Safety Zone. More than 20 Kosovo Albanians were detained during the
reporting period.
10. KFOR continued to take action to prevent the flow of supplies from inside
Kosovo, increased its monitoring of the boundary, and refused to allow ethnic
Albanian males of military age to cross into the Presevo Valley.
Resolution 1160 (1998)
11. Although KFOR operations continue to result in weapons seizures there have
been no reported violations of Security Council resolution 1160 (1998).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
12. Over the reporting period, there were four reported cases of non-compliance by
the Kosovo Protection Corps, mainly relating to the possession of illegal weapons.
Thirty-five new members were included in the Corps establishment during the
month of February, the total now being 4,663 members, with 144 from ethnic
minorities.
13. The engagement of the Kosovo Protection Corps in humanitarian work projects
continued, with up to 39,761 person workdays devoted so far to activities such as
house repair, road construction, school refurbishment and maintenance, and the
development, repair and cleaning of public areas. In addition, the Corps began an
environmental project at the end of January to remove abandoned vehicles from
streets and public land and had cleared 1,932 vehicles in the space of one month.

3

S/2001/333

14. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Army and security forces remain
generally compliant with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.
Cooperation with international organizations
15. KFOR continues to provide regular assistance on request to international
organizations and non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo on a daily
basis, and to provide framework security in support of UNMIK police operations
targeting organized crime, prostitution and smuggling. In addition, KFOR troops
continue to support safe conditions for minority returns. KFOR is advising and
assisting OSCE in its planning for the Kosovo-wide elections.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
16. The number of refugees and displaced persons returning to Kosovo decreased
significantly with the onset of winter and following the UNMIK appeal that returns
be postponed until the spring of 2001. So far in 2001 there have been 721 returns. In
January, there were small-scale returns of Kosovo Serbs to the south and west of the
province, to the mixed municipalities of Pristina, Lipljane, Kosovo Polje and Obilic.
Outlook
17. Although the security situation in the province deteriorated during the month
of February and the exchanges between the ethnic Albanian armed groups and
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces increased and became more violent in the
Presevo Valley and the Ground Safety Zone, it is expected that the political
initiatives being undertaken by the international community will lead to an easing of
tension.

4
