192

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

6. Calls once again upon all States to provide the
Secretary-General with their comments on this question;
7. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue the consideration of this subject at its thirty-eighth
session under the title ''Measures to be taken against all
totalitarian or other ideologies and practices, in particular
Nazi, Fascist and neo-Fascist, based on racial or ethnic
exclusiveness or intolerance, hatred, terror, systematic denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms. or which
have such consequences'';
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report.
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session in the light of the
discussion that would take place in the Commission on
Human Rights and on the basis of comments provided by
States and international organizations.
l Ol st plenary meeting
16 December /98/

36/163.

Question of involuntary or enforced
disappearances
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December I 978.
entitled "Disappeared persons'·, and its resolution 35/193
of 15 December 1980 on the question of involuntary or
enforced disappearances,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution
l 0 (XXXVII) of 26 February 1981 , 161 in which it was decided to extend for one year the term of the mandate of the
Working Group dealing with involuntary or enforced disappearances, and Economic and Social Council decision
1981/139 of 8 May 1981, by which the Council approved
the Commission's decision,
Convinced that the action taken, in consultation with the
Governments concerned, to promote the implementation of
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 33/173 and
other United Nations resolutions relevant to the plight of
missing or disappeared persons should be continued,
Expressing its emotion at the anguish and sorrow of the
families of victims of involuntary or enforced disappearances.
I. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on
Human Rights to extend for one year the term of the mandate
of the Working Group as laid down in Commission resolution 10 (XXXVII);
2. expresses its appreciation to the Working Group for
the work done and to those Governments that have cooperated with it;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to study this question as a matter of priority and to
take any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of the
task of the Working Group, when it considers the report to
be submitted by the Group at its thirty-eighth session;
4. Appeals to all Governments to provide the Working
Group and the Commission on Human Rights with the full
co-operation warranted by their strictly humanitarian objectives and their working methods based on discretion;
5. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Working Group with all necessary
assistance.
101st plenary meeting
16 December 198/
36/164. Missing persons in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question of the
missing persons in Cyprus.

Reaffirming the basic human need of families to be informed. without further delay. about the fate of their missing
relatives,
Having in mind that agreement was reached, on 19 May
1979, during the high-level meeting held at Nicosia under
the auspices of the Secretary-General,
Welcoming the agreement establishing the Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus, referred to in the report of the
Secretary-General of 27 May 1981. 162 including the oral
agreement of 26 March 1981 concerning the attendance of
representatives of the Committee of Relatives of Missing
Persons at the meetings of the Committee,
Regretting the fact that owing to procedural difficulties
no progress has been achieved towards the commencement
of the Committee's investigative work.
I. Urges that the Committee on Missing Persons in
Cyprus proceed, without any further delay, with its investigative work for the tracing of and accounting for missing
persons in Cyprus;
2. Calls upon the parties concerned to assist, in a spirit
of co-operation and goodwill. the Committee in carrying
out its investigative task;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide his good offices for the unhindered functioning of the
Committee.
JO 1st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/165.

Question of the international legal protection
of the human rights of individuals who are not
citizens of the country in which they live
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolutions
1790 (LIV) of 18 May 1973 and 1871 (L VI) of 17 May
1974 concerning the question of the international legal protection of the human rights of individuals who are not citizens of the country in which they live,
Noting Commission on Human Rights resolutions 8
(XXIX) of 21 March 1973, 163 11 (XXX) of 6 March
1974, 164 l6(XXXV)of 14March 1979, 165 and 19(XXXVI)
of 29 February 1980, 100 on the same subject,
Noting also resolution 9 (XXXI) of 13 September 1978
of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities, 167
Recalling that the Economic and Social Council, by its
resolution l 980/29 of 2 May I980, decided to transmit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session the text of
the draft declaration on the human rights of individuals who
are not citizens of the country in which they live, prepared
by the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the
Baroness Elles, and amended by the Sub-Commission, 168
together with the comments on the text received from Member States 169 in response to Council decision I 979/36 of I0
'"' Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-sixth Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1981. document S/14490, para. 46.
1
"' See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. Fiftyf<,urth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5265). chap. XX. sect. A.
'"" Ibid .. Fiftv-sixth Session. Supplemn1t No. 5 (E/5464). chap. XIX.
sect. A.
"'' See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1979.
Supplement No. 6 (E/1979136), chap. XXIV. sect. A.
'"" Ibid., 19110. Suppleme11t No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr. I). chap. XXVI,
sect. A.
7
'" See E/CN.4112%. chap. XVIL sect. A.
'"" EICN.4/1336.
100
EICN .4/1354 and Add. 1-6.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

May 1979, and recommended that the Assembly should
consider the adoption of a declaration on the subject,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 199 of 15 December 1980,
in which it decided to establish an open-ended working
group for the purpose of concluding the elaboration of the
draft declaration on the human rights of individuals who are
not citizens of the country in which they live,
Having considered the report of the Working Group, 170
1. Takes note of the report of the Working Group and
of the fact that, although the Working Group has done useful
work, it has not had sufficient time to conclude its task;
2. Decides to establish, at its thirty-seventh session, an
open-ended working group for the purpose of concluding
the elaboration of the draft declaration on the human rights
of individuals who are not citizens of the country in which
they live;
3. Expresses the hope that a draft declaration on the
human rights of individuals who are not citizens of the
country in which they live will be adopted by the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
JO I st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/166.

Exchange of information on banned hazardous
chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/173 of 17 December 1979, in
which it recognized the urgent need to take concrete measures to prevent adverse effects on health on a world-wide
basis,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 186 of 15 December 1980,
in which it invited Member States to provide information
on measures they had taken on the exchange of information
on hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products that have been banned in their territories and requested
the Secretary-General, in co-operation with the United
Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned, to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the experience of Member States and the United
Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned,
Conscious of the importance of the information system
on transnational corporations for the analysis of the activities
of these corporations in certain sectors of special social and
humanitarian interest to the countries in which operations
take place, particularly developing countries,
Taking into account that in resolution 35/186 it requested
the Commission on Transnational Corporations to study,
during its seventh session, ways and means within the information system on transnational corporations to improve
the exchange of information on those products with a view
to formulating appropriate recommendations,
Bearing in mind the importance of objective information
on banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical
products,
A ware that the production and export of banned or
severely restricted hazardous substances-including pharmaceuticals, pesticides and industrial chemicals-endanger
public health and the environment,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the exchange of information on banned hazardous chemicals
and unsafe pharmaceutical products; 171
2. Takes note also of the conclusions and recommendations in the report of the United Nations Centre on Trans110

171

AIC.3/36/1 I.
A/36/255.

193

national Corporations 17 -' which was submitted to the
Commission on Transnational Corporations at its seventh
sess10n;
3. Reiterates the need to intensify international cooperation in the search for the solution to problems arising
from the production and export of banned or severely restricted substances;
4. Urges Member States and other interested parties,
including transnational corporations, to co-operate more
fully in providing data on banned or severely restricted
substances to the appropriate organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system with responsibility for
information exchange in regard to such substances;
5. Calls upon the organs, organizations and other competent United Nations bodies involved in disseminating information on this subject to ensure that the documentation
they prepare is adequately suited to the needs of and clearly
understood by all those engaged in processing, handling,
dispensing or using all banned hazardous chemicals and
unsafe pharmaceutical products;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the organs, organizations and other competent United Nations bodies to
provide, within the available resources, the necessary technical assistance to the developing countries, at their request,
to help them establish an adequate system for monitoring
the import of unsafe pharmaceutical products of doubtful
therapeutic value and banned hazardous chemicals, on the
one hand, and to train scientific personnel to handle these
problems, on the other;
7. / nvite s Member States to deal with this subject
through appropriate means, including possible legislation
at the national level, where they do not yet exist;
8. Once again requests the Secretary-General to consult
Member States on the existing information systems on
banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical
products and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session through the Economic and Social Council.
IOI st plenary meetinR
16 December /98/

36/167.

Draft Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and Welfare
of Children, with Special Reference to Foster
Placement and Adoption Nationally and
Internationally

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /
18 of 6 May 198 J entitled ·•Draft declaration on social and
legal principles relating to adoption and foster placement
of children nationally and internationally", by which the
Council requested the General Assembly to consider at its
thirty-sixth session the draft Declaration annexed to that
resolution so that the further action proposed in Council
resolution 1979/28 of 9 May 1979 may proceed,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General 17 3 on
views of Member States on the text of the draft Declaration.
Convinced that the adoption of the draft Declaration will
promote the well-being of children with special needs,
I. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "'Draft Declaration
on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and
,,dfare of Children, with Special Reference to Foster Place-

172

EiC. I0190.

11

A/35/336.

'
