S/2014/812

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 November 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on
the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request contained in the
statement of the President of the Security Council dated 12 May 2014
(S/PRST/2014/8), in which the Council requested me to keep it informed on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and
on progress made in the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
(see S/2012/481, annex). The report provides an assessment of the major political
and security trends in the Central African subregion since my report dated 6 May
2014 (S/2014/319), an update on progress achieved in the implementation of the
UNOCA mandate and information on efforts made to implement the LRA strategy.

II. Major developments in the Central Africa subregion
2.
On 30 April, I announced my decision to appoint Abdoulaye Bathily (Senegal)
as my new Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of UNOCA to
replace Abou Moussa (Chad), whose mandate ended on 30 May. My new Special
Representative arrived in Libreville on 1 June and has since then met with leaders of
the region.
3.
Since my previous report, the crisis in the Central African Republic and its
multidimensional regional impact have continued to dominate the attention of
leaders of the subregion. Meanwhile, in the lead-up to the numerous elections
expected in 2015 and 2016, many Central African countries have taken measures to
address possible political tensions and increase political dialogue. The increased
challenges posed by Boko Haram’s activities in the region of the Lake Chad basin,
the persistence of maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, the continued activities
of armed groups, including LRA, the illicit cross-border movement and the illegal
trade in wildlife remained security concerns that threaten the stability of countries
of the subregion. The efforts of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC)
to promote regional integration and facilitate free movement have been severely

14-64283 (E)

171114

*1464283*

S/2014/812

hampered as a result of security-related concerns and amplified with the recent
outbreak of Ebola virus disease.

A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
Crisis in the Central African Republic
4.
During the reporting period, Central African States and subregional
organizations, particularly ECCAS, remained actively engaged in diplomatic efforts
to restore peace and State authority in the Central African Republic. The meeting of
ECCAS Heads of State on the situation in that country held in Malabo in June on
the margins of the twenty-third ordinary session of the Assembly of the African
Union and the fifth meeting of the International Contact Group on the Central
African Republic, which took place in Addis Ababa on 7 July, provided new
momentum to the political dialogue in the Central African Republic. As a result, an
international mediation initiative led by the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou
Nguesso, was established. On 23 July, a cessation-of-hostilities agreement was
signed at a forum on national reconciliation held in Brazzaville. The African Union
and the United Nations were called upon to support the international mediation
initiative and the implementation of the Brazzaville agreement. I subsequently
appointed my Special Representative for Central Africa as the United Nations
representative in that initiative. On 15 September, the transfer of authority between
the African-led International Support Mission in the Central African Republic
(MISCA) and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) took place.
5.
The long-awaited government reshuffle in the Central African Republic and
the appointment by the Head of State of the Transition, Catherine Samba-Panza, of a
new prime minister were criticized by many national stakeholders, who claimed that
Ms. Samba-Panza had not undertaken sufficient consultations and needed to
demonstrate her commitment to an inclusive political process. Many individuals,
including anti-balaka and ex-Séléka representatives, also called for the Head of
State of the Transition to resign. My Special Representative for Central Africa and
my Special Representative for the Central African Republic are continuously
engaging with the Central African transitional authorities and regional stakeholders,
urging them to take all steps necessary to ensure the implementation of the
Brazzaville agreement as a matter of priority, with the support of partners.
6.
The persistent instability in the Central African Republic, the absence of State
authority and regular incursions of armed groups into neighbouring countries,
including Cameroon and Chad, has become a source of concern that has prompted
those countries to temporarily close all or parts of their borders with the Central
African Republic. In Cameroon, at least nine civilians were abducted on
20 September by rebels of the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain to obtain
the release of their leader, General Abdoulaye Miskine, arrested in Yaoundé in
September 2013. That attack was followed by reports of violent fighting on
23 September between the Cameroonian army and unidentified armed elements who
were attempting to free some of their companions detained at the police station at
Ngaoui, near the border with the Central African Republic. Cameroon then closed
its border with the Central African Republic from 5 to 10 October. Since 12 May,
Chad has kept its borders with the Central African Republic closed owing to

2/18

14-64283

S/2014/812

security concerns but has agreed to open them temporarily for humanitarian
purposes.
7.
The sixth meeting of the International Contact Group on the Central African
Republic was held in Bangui on 11 November. Discussions focused on the country’s
security and humanitarian situation, the need to accelerate the political process and
preparations for elections, as well as the economic situation of the country and the
need for sustained international support in that regard.
Boko Haram
8.
In my previous report, I informed the Security Council of the expansion of
Boko Haram’s activities beyond north-eastern Nigeria into the Lake Chad basin
region, in particular into Cameroon. During the reporting period, this new disturbing
trend continued, with Boko Haram perpetrating an increasing number of attacks
along the Nigeria-Cameroon border and in the northern provinces of Cameroon,
leading to the killing of dozens of Cameroonian civilians, police officers and
soldiers. Hundreds of Boko Haram elements were reportedly killed by Cameroonian
forces during these raids. The number of abductions of civilians, including senior
officials and their families, increased dramatically in Cameroon during the reporting
period. Ten Chinese workers, the two sons of an influential Muslim spiritual leader
in Cameroon and the wife of the Vice-Prime Minister were among the people
abducted in a series of kidnappings that took place from 16 May to 10 August. On
11 October, the President of Cameroon, Paul Biya, announced the release of
27 hostages, including the wife of the Vice-Prime Minister and the 10 Chinese
workers. In Chad, a convoy of buses carrying 85 Nigerian nationals who had been
abducted by Boko Haram in the village of Doron Baga, Nigeria, and ferried across
Lake Chad into Chadian territory, was intercepted by Chadian troops on 17 August.
9.
The growing regional impact of Boko Haram’s activities and the rising threat
posed by terrorism and illicit activities in Central Africa have sparked a renewed
interest in strengthening bilateral, subregional and international cooperation to
address the security threats posed by terrorism and transborder illicit activities. On
7 October in Niamey, in a follow-up meeting to the Paris, London and Abuja
summits, the Presidents of Benin, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, as well as the
Minister for Defence of Cameroon, announced plans to address the Boko Haram
threat through the deployment of a multinational joint task force on 1 November;
the force’s headquarters would become operational by 20 November. Furthermore,
in September and October the Government of Chad facilitated talks in N’Djamena
between the Government of Nigeria and representatives of Boko Haram, with the
aim of reaching a ceasefire.
Piracy and armed robbery at sea
10. Piracy, armed robbery at sea, organized crime and illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing in the Gulf of Guinea still constitute a threat to the peace,
security and socioeconomic development of both coastal and landlocked States in
the Central and West African subregions. The Gulf of Guinea has become the region
of Africa most affected by piracy and armed robbery at sea. Since the beginning of
the year, 33 incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea have
been reported by the Global Integrated Shipping Information System of the
International Maritime Organization. During the reporting period, progress was

14-64283

3/18

S/2014/812

achieved in the implementation of the decisions taken at the Summit of Heads of
State and Government on Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held
in Yaoundé in June 2013, with the inauguration of the Interregional Coordination
Centre on Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea in Yaoundé on 11 September.
Poaching
11. Poaching remained a major concern for several Governments in Central Africa
because of its links to the financing of armed groups. During the reporting period,
Cameroonian authorities seized 187 elephant tusks hidden in a military car in
Nsimalen, a suburb of Yaoundé, which implies the slaughter of approximately 100
elephants. On 26 September, a high-level meeting on poaching and wildlife
trafficking co-organized by Gabon and Germany was held on the margins of the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
Elections and national dialogues
12. During the reporting period, local and parliamentary elections took place in
two countries in the subregion. In addition, steps were taken to establish or
strengthen national dialogue in four other countries.
13. In Chad, the Coalition des partis politiques pour la défense de la constitution,
the main Chadian opposition coalition, agreed in May to end its boycott of the
Cadre national pour le dialogue politique and to join this permanent framework
aimed at promoting dialogue between all Chadian stakeholders, ahead of upcoming
elections in the country. That decision came as a result of several meetings between
the Coalition and the Prime Minister of Chad, Kalzeube Payimi Deubet.
14. In Burundi, a legal and political framework for the elections was established, a
code of conduct for political parties, actors and independent candidates was adopted
by consensus in June and a new electoral code was promulgated in July. Despite
making remarkable progress in consolidating peace and stability over the years,
Burundi continues to experience considerable political tension, a worrisome
shrinking in the political space and an erosion of the spirit of consensus that
animated the peace consolidation process after the Arusha Accords.
15. In Gabon, 14 opposition political leaders held a rally in Libreville on 19 July,
at which they announced the creation of a new coalition of the opposition, the Front
de l’opposition pour l’alternance, in a bid to position themselves against the ruling
party in the legislative and presidential elections to be held in 2015 and 2016
respectively.
16. On 30 August, the President of Equatorial Guinea, Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo, called upon all political groups, including the opposition in exile, to
participate in a national dialogue in November in order to promote social cohesion
and inclusive governance. In addition, on 21 October, the President signed a general
amnesty decree pardoning all citizens who had either been convicted of political
offences or who were involved in a judicial process for such offences.
17. In the Congo, municipal and departmental elections took place on
28 September, resulting in a landslide win for the ruling Parti congolais du travail,
which now holds 820 of the 860 local representatives’ seats. Those early elections
took place following a decision taken by the Congolese National Assembly on
27 August to amend the country’s electoral law. The Union panafricaine pour la

4/18

14-64283

S/2014/812

démocratie sociale vigorously contested that amendment to the law and boycotted
the National Assembly’s session on the grounds that the proposed law would not
guarantee the independence of the national electoral commission and that it would
favour the majority in power. Newly elected local representatives took part in the
partial elections of the Senate on 12 October, which saw the Parti congolais du
travail keep control of 68 of the 72 seats in that chamber.
18. In Sao Tome and Principe, the parliamentary elections that took place on
12 October resulted in an outright majority for Independent Democratic Action, the
opposition party led by ex-Prime Minister Patrice Trovoada, who won 33 of
55 seats. The rival Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe came in
second, with 16 seats, while the Social Democratic Party took 5 seats and the Union
of Democrats for Citizenship and Development won 1 seat.
Regional integration
19. Efforts towards regional integration and the free movement of persons were
hampered owing to mounting security concerns and following the recent Ebola
outbreak in West Africa, which led to border closures and the suspension of flights
to and from West African capitals to prevent the spread of the virus. On
17 September, CEMAC experts met in Brazzaville to adopt an emergency plan to
address the epidemic. The plan consists of measures to monitor the epidemic,
coordinate cross-border activities and provide care for infected persons.
20. On 25 September, in Kinshasa, following a meeting held on 19 September
between the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila, and
the President of the Congo, Mr. Nguesso, a joint commission decided to cancel the
mutual requirement for nationals of the two countries to obtain entry visas. The
entry visa requirement had been introduced in the aftermath of the expulsion of
nationals of the Democratic Republic of the Congo from Brazzaville earlier in 2014.
21. In other developments, the fifteenth meeting of the Commission for Defence
and Security of the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX) was
held on 1 and 2 July in Pointe-Noire, the Congo. The Commission adopted a number
of recommendations, including on the establishment of mechanisms for bilateral and
multilateral cooperation between States, on the establishment of a common structure
comprising all the security services and on the firm commitment of ECCAS to play
a strong role in the prevention and resolution of crises throughout the subregion,
particularly in the area of preventive diplomacy and early warning. The findings of
the Commission were validated during the sixth extraordinary session of the
COPAX Council of Ministers, held in Pointe-Noire on 4 July.

B.

Humanitarian and human rights developments
22. During the period under review, the humanitarian and human rights situation
in the subregion remained of concern, owing in large part to sectarian violence, the
continued absence of State authority in the Central African Republic and the
resulting impact on the region.
23. The crisis in the Central African Republic has emerged as one of the central
humanitarian and human rights concerns in the subregion. As at 12 October, more
than 425,000 Central Africans remained displaced in neighbouring countries.

14-64283

5/18

S/2014/812

Cameroon is currently sheltering approximately 242,000 refugees from the Central
African Republic, while Chad is hosting 96,000 refugees. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Congo are sheltering 67,000 and 20,000 refugees respectively.
United Nations agencies and neighbouring countries continue to face difficulties in
providing the humanitarian assistance necessary to respond to the needs of the
displaced populations and overstretched host communities.
24. The activities of Boko Haram too continued to have adverse humanitarian
implications for Central Africa, with particularly serious consequences for northern
Cameroon. Boko Haram’s attacks in north-eastern Nigeria have forced an estimated
80,000 Nigerians to flee their homes into neighbouring Cameroon, Chad and the
Niger. Cameroon currently shelters 43,700 Nigerian refugees, 27,200 of whom have
been registered by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. On 16 September, Cameroon indicated that its capacities had been
exceeded and requested support from international aid agencies to provide refugees
with the required humanitarian assistance. Increased Boko Haram activities in
northern Cameroon are also creating difficult conditions for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
25. Human trafficking continued to be a source of concern for several countries in
Central Africa. Legislative gaps regarding the ratification of international
conventions against organized crime and, in particular, the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, still persist in Central African States. These challenges are compounded by a
lack of capacity to implement preventive measures to combat trafficking.
26. During the period under review, several positive steps were taken in support of
respect for human rights in the subregion. In response to recommendations made
under the universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council, Cameroon and
Chad extended a standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders. Gabon
ratified the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights. Angola acceded to the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol, including articles 6 and 7, which are on
the procedure for conducting an inquiry into alleged violations of the rights set forth
in the Convention. Chad abolished the death penalty in its new Penal Code and
Equatorial Guinea suspended the death penalty upon joining the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

C.

Socioeconomic trends
27. During the reporting period, the subregion experienced economic growth,
projected to reach 6.2 per cent by the end of 2014, that was essentially fuelled by an
expansion of the oil sector. Unemployment, especially among youth, and inequality
remain high in most countries, however, with a divide between rural and urban
areas, which hampers poverty reduction. This trend may be exacerbated by a
number of risks, notably those stemming primarily from a deterioration in the
security situation in the region and the expansion of the Ebola outbreak, which are
slowing trade and negatively affecting economic and social indicators.

6/18

14-64283

S/2014/812

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Supporting Member States and subregional organizations to
address cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace
and security
28. During the period under review, UNOCA remained engaged with key
stakeholders to help prevent violent conflicts and promote regional peace and
security. Upon assuming duty, my Special Representative for Central Africa and
Head of UNOCA began his visits in the subregion. On 10 June, in Libreville, he met
with the Secretary-General of ECCAS. On 19 June, in N’Djamena, he met with the
President of Chad, Idriss Déby Itno, in his capacity as the current Chair of ECCAS.
While in Chad, my Special Representative also visited a camp for displaced persons
on the outskirts of N’Djamena housing several thousand repatriated Chadians from
the Central African Republic who had been evacuated from Bangui in January 2014.
29. My Special Representative attended the twenty-third ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union, held in Malabo on 26 and 27 June, where he
engaged representatives of ECCAS member States and key partners in addressing
peace and security issues in Central Africa. He emphasized to his interlocutors the
importance of continued collaboration to enhance subregional integration and to
address security challenges.
Mediation, conflict prevention and peacebuilding
30. In line with its mandate, UNOCA continued to implement activities in the
areas of mediation, conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Encouraging increased
cross-border cooperation between ECCAS member States, UNOCA actively
engaged in a workshop organized by ECCAS on the identification, demarcation and
delimitation of borders in the ECCAS zone, held from 17 to 19 June in Libreville.
On 8 and 9 July, in Douala, Cameroon, UNOCA also participated in a workshop
organized by the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central
Africa on human rights capacity-building for penitentiary and law enforcement
personnel in the subregion. The recommendations of the workshop were presented
at the thirty-eighth ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa. UNOCA organized several
activities for youth on the occasion of the International Day of Peace
(20 September), during which my Special Representative called for reconciliation
and the restoration of peace in countries in crisis and the promotion of the values of
dialogue, tolerance and brotherhood. UNOCA also organized a training session, held
in Libreville from 5 to 7 November, to enhance basic knowledge and skills in the
area of mediation for ECCAS experts with the support of mediation experts
deployed by the Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat.
The objectives of the training were to strengthen the mediation capacity of staff and
to reinforce institutional collaboration between UNOCA and ECCAS. The training
focused on mediation principles and skills, process design, national dialogues,
international mediation and electoral mediation, in view of the numerous elections
that will take place in the subregion in 2015 and 2016.

14-64283

7/18

S/2014/812

Boko Haram
31. UNOCA, in close cooperation with the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA), the relevant United Nations country teams, the Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa and ECCAS, conducted a joint
mission to Cameroon and Chad from 19 to 31 October. The purpose of the mission
was to assess the impact of Boko Haram on Central Africa and to explore ways in
which the United Nations can support Governments and the relevant subregional
organizations in addressing the threat posed by the group. The assessment mission
travelled to regions directly affected by Boko Haram activity, namely north-eastern
Cameroon and south-western Chad. The mission concluded that there was an urgent
need to strengthen international cooperation and coordination to counter the threat
posed by Boko Haram in the Central African region.
Gender aspects and elections
32. UNOCA and ECCAS organized, in cooperation with the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the
Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa and the
International Organization of la Francophonie, a regional workshop on the
promotion of women’s political participation and its implications for advancing the
conduct of peaceful elections in the subregion, held in Douala, Cameroon, from
21 to 23 October. Deputies and civil society representatives from Central African
States participated in the workshop, which served to enhance subregional capacity
on the inclusion of women in political life in advance of the numerous elections
scheduled to be held in Central Africa in 2015 and 2016. The workshop also served
to advance a number of important recommendations arising from Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1889 (2009) and 2122 (2013) on women and peace and
security. More specifically, as a result of the workshop, a platform of Central
African women for the promotion of political participation was established and a set
of 20 recommendations were adopted.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
33. My Special Representative, in cooperation with UNOWA, continued to consult
with and mobilize relevant stakeholders in order to promote good maritime
governance mechanisms, including by holding meetings of the interregional
working group on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. On 15 May in Yaoundé,
the interregional working group finalized technical documents related to the
establishment of an interregional coordination centre. On 11 September, my Special
Representative attended the inauguration ceremony, in Yaoundé, of the Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, which
marked an important step in the implementation of decisions taken by Heads of
State and Government at a summit held in the Cameroonian capital on 25 June
2013.
Poaching
34. During the reporting period, my Special Representative continued to follow
the challenges posed by poaching and wildlife trafficking. On the margins of the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, he participated in a high-level working
luncheon co-hosted by Gabon and Germany, during which he encouraged the

8/18

14-64283

S/2014/812

relevant stakeholders to work towards an integrated regional approach and enhanced
cooperation among States of Central Africa, notably through the advancement of an
anti-poaching strategy for the ECCAS region.
United Nations cooperation
35. My Special Representative worked with resident coordinators in Central
Africa to support their efforts, particularly in the light of the regional impact of the
crisis in the Central African Republic and Boko Haram’s activities in the Lake Chad
basin region. During the reporting period, he also engaged with resident
coordinators to initiate preparations for their next meeting. He travelled to Dakar in
September to exchange views and strengthen cooperation with UNOWA on issues of
common interest, including maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea and Boko
Haram.

B.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding
International mediation initiative for the Central African Republic led by the
Economic Community of Central African States
36. On the margins of the twenty-third ordinary session of the Assembly of the
African Union, held in Malabo in June, ECCAS Heads of States resolved to expand
the international mediation initiative on the crisis in the Central African Republic
and invited my Special Representative for Central Africa to participate in the
meeting of the International Contact Group on the Central African Republic held in
Addis Ababa on 7 July. I subsequently designated my Special Representative to
collaborate with the ECCAS-appointed mediator, Mr. Sassou Nguesso, and the
African Union Special Envoy for the Central African Republic, Soumeylou Boubèye
Maïga, to support the ECCAS-led international mediation initiative for the Central
African Republic.
37. My Special Representative for Central Africa facilitated the signature, on
23 July in Brazzaville, of the cessation-of-hostilities agreement, working closely
with my Special Representative in the Central African Republic, the African Union
Special Envoy for the Central African Republic, the ECCAS Secretary-General and
others in the region. To that end, he engaged with leaders of the subregion and
participated in several high-level preparatory meetings in Brazzaville initiated by
Mr. Sassou Nguesso. In addition, together with the other participants in the
international mediation initiative, he conducted numerous visits to the Central
African Republic, where he met with authorities of the transition and representatives
of political parties, the anti-balaka, the ex-Séléka and civil society.
38. As a participant in the international mediation initiative, my Special
Representative has continued to engage with and support Central African
stakeholders towards the implementation of the Brazzaville agreement by
facilitating coordination and providing advice to the parties. In that regard,
following the appointment of Mahamat Kamoun as Prime Minister of the Central
African Republic on 10 August, my Special Representative encouraged a more
inclusive, transparent and concerted approach to decision-making by the transitional
authorities, including through the organization of a national reconciliation and
reconstruction forum in Bangui. He has continued to maintain contact with all
signatories to the agreement, including leaders of the ex-Séléka and the anti-balaka.

14-64283

9/18

S/2014/812

39. Following the violence that erupted in Bangui in mid-October, my Special
Representative travelled to Brazzaville and Bangui to confer with the President of
the Congo and other Central African stakeholders. In Bangui, my Special
Representative underlined the necessity for all parties to stand against violence,
work together constructively in the context of the transition and prepare for the
timely holding of elections. During that visit to Bangui, he reinforced the
aforementioned messages to the parties in the Central African Republic as
participant in the international mediation initiative. The mission contributed to a
decrease in tensions in Bangui and in a renewed commitment by all parties to the
Brazzaville process. It also helped secure commitments regarding the timely holding
of elections.
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
40. UNOCA, in its capacity as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, supported the
organization of that entity’s thirty-eighth ministerial meeting, held from 29 July to
4 August in Malabo. The Committee issued the Malabo Appeal on the Brazzaville
forum for national reconciliation and political dialogue in the Central African
Republic, in which Central African stakeholders were urged to respect their
commitments on the cessation of hostilities and violence (see A/69/361, annex II).
The experts at the meeting reviewed the overall geopolitical and security situation
in Central Africa and took stock of ongoing initiatives to address existing threats
and challenges. Given the upcoming elections in the subregion, a specific thematic
focus was the strengthening of election-related national capacities for the conduct of
credible and peaceful electoral processes. States members of the Committee
welcomed the initiative of Burundi to host the thirty-ninth ministerial meeting,
which is scheduled to be held in Bujumbura from 1 to 5 December.

IV. Lord’s Resistance Army
A.

Current situation
41. Although collective efforts have succeeded in weakening LRA, the group
continues to pose a threat to civilians in areas of the Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. LRA is currently thought to be composed of
approximately 150-200 armed elements, split into several highly mobile units.
According to defectors, LRA leader Joseph Kony continues to exert effective
command and control over most of the group’s elements.
42. During the period under review, the bulk of LRA moved from the Central
African Republic to the north-east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
it continues to loot the population, poach elephants in Garamba National Park for
the purposes of trafficking ivory, abduct civilians and ambush vehicles for the
purpose of transporting looted items. In both the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the areas where LRA operates lack
infrastructure and a strong State presence and are sparsely inhabited; the few people
who live in those areas are in scattered rural settlements, which provide an easy

10/18

14-64283

S/2014/812

target for armed groups. These factors pose serious challenges to civilian and
military efforts to track the group and to protect the civilian population.
43. The picture is further complicated by the fact that LRA also appears to have
reached non-aggression agreements or established alliances of convenience with
other armed groups that operate in the same areas, including with the ex-Séléka in
the Central African Republic. In addition, reports of continuing LRA poaching
activities in Garamba National Park are of serious concern, given that ivory
trafficking is suspected to provide LRA with the means to resupply and acquire
weapons. According to testimony from recent LRA returnees, Joseph Kony ordered
an LRA group in mid-2014 to go to Garamba National Park to poach elephants and
collect ivory. Additionally, reports from park rangers indicate that elephant poaching
has recently surged and that they believe that responsibility lies with LRA.
44. While international attention has focused largely on the violence that has
engulfed large parts of the Central African Republic, especially the north-western
and central regions, LRA has continued to carry out attacks against communities in
the east. The presence of the African Union Regional Task Force in the Province of
Haut-Mbomou has, however, prevented ex-Séléka elements from entering that part
of the country, thereby insulating it from the sectarian violence that has affected the
rest of the Central African Republic. In my previous report, I noted that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs had reported that the number of
persons displaced in LRA-affected areas of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan had decreased from 326,448
persons as at 31 December 2013 to 159,927 persons as at 31 March 2014. The latest
figures available from the Office show that the number of displaced persons in
LRA-affected areas in Orientale Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, now
stands at approximately 113,000. In the Central African Republic, the number of
displaced persons in LRA-affected areas stands at approximately 21,000.
45. LRA members are believed to be engaged in forms of opportunistic
cooperation with some ex-Séléka combatants and officers operating in the east of
the Central African Republic, particularly in areas around Nzako, Yalinga and Sam
Ouandja. This has been made possible by the continuing gravity of the national
crisis and the presence of elements of the ex-Séléka who continue to reorganize and
to rearm in areas outside the control of the Government or the international forces.
Such cooperation has reportedly taken different forms, including the holding of
regular meetings between LRA and ex-Séléka elements and the trade in minerals in
exchange for ammunition, food and other items used for military purposes.
Disturbing reports also indicate that LRA captives are forced to extract diamonds
that the group uses as a source of income.
46. No LRA incident was reported during the period under review in South Sudan,
although according to some State officials LRA elements purportedly intend to cross
over into South Sudanese territory at Ezo, near the border with the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
47. The presence of some senior LRA leaders in the disputed Kafia Kingi enclave,
on the border between the Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan,
continues to be reported. However, the Government of the Sudan has denied this: on
14 May, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Sudan issued a press release in which
it denied the allegations contained in my report of 6 May, condemned LRA

14-64283

11/18

S/2014/812

atrocities and invited the African Union Commission and the African Union Peace
and Security Council to verify the allegations.
48. Cooperation between the countries that participate in the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army
has continued with military support from the United States of America and financial
support from the European Union. Through military pressure, the Initiative has
significantly weakened LRA, which has released a substantial number of long-term
abductees over the past few months. At the same time, important challenges
continue to hinder the effectiveness of the African Union Regional Task Force,
including the ongoing crises in the Central African Republic and South Sudan and
the absence of political authorization by all countries participating in the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for cross-border military operations, particularly in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

B.

Coordination and resource mobilization
49. My Special Representative dispatched a UNOCA team to conduct assessment
missions to LRA-affected areas in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The missions, which took place in August and September,
contributed to gathering first-hand information about current LRA activity, affected
populations and the gaps and challenges related to the implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy.
50. My Special Representative and the newly appointed African Union Special
Envoy on the Lord’s Resistance Army, Jackson Kiprono Tuwei, co-chaired the
biannual meeting of LRA focal points held on 15 and 16 September in Entebbe,
Uganda. For the first time, civil society representatives from LRA-affected areas
took part in the meeting, which was also attended by focal points from United
Nations entities, the African Union, bilateral government partners and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Participants discussed collective efforts in
the context of the United Nations regional strategy and the African Union Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army, which
have resulted in a progressive weakening of LRA. A number of entities have
become actively engaged in a campaign designed to persuade LRA members to
defect and to encourage local communities to accept defectors and in initiatives
aimed at enhancing child protection, peacebuilding and the protection of civilians in
LRA-affected areas. On the military front, participants in the meeting highlighted
the significant contributions of the African Union Regional Task Force, which has
continued to exert pressure on LRA.
51. During the meeting, UNOCA facilitated the development of recommendations
in key areas to ensure and guide continued progress against the threat posed by
LRA. There was consensus among participants on the need for renewed momentum
for collective efforts, civilian and military, against LRA. On the civilian side,
participants emphasized the need for programmes to assist former LRA members in
reintegrating into civilian life. They also noted the need for humanitarian and longterm development assistance given the continuing threat posed to the civilian
population as well as the economic, governance and infrastructure deficits that exist
in areas where it is easy, because they are isolated, for LRA to operate. The African
Union also expressed its intention to convene a meeting of national focal points on

12/18

14-64283

S/2014/812

the rehabilitation needs of LRA-affected areas. The meeting, scheduled to take place
in Kinshasa, will bring together the authorities of the three affected countries, along
with the World Bank and other partners, to explore options to promote the recovery
and development of areas currently affected by LRA. There was also agreement to
consider convening the next meeting of the International Working Group on the
Lord’s Resistance Army.
52. My Special Representative and the African Union Special Envoy on the Lord’s
Resistance Army met in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, in October, during
the African Union retreat of special envoys and mediators, in order to discuss
preparations for their first joint diplomatic mission to engage the Governments of
countries participating in the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army in 2015.

C.

Implementation of the United Nations regional strategy

1.

Operationalization and full implementation of the African Union Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army
53. The military operations of the African Union Regional Task Force have
continued to result in steady progress in the fight against LRA, although some
challenges are hampering its full operationalization. Currently, the Regional Task
Force comprises 2,284 soldiers, 1,437 of whom are from Uganda, 447 from South
Sudan and 400 from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The current
configuration does not match the configuration that was originally envisioned. Not
only were 5,030 troops originally pledged, but not all of the soldiers currently on
the ground are operational or possess sufficient strength and capability to conduct
effective military operations against LRA. The redeployment of a substantial
number of South Sudanese and Ugandan troops due to the crisis in South Sudan
partially explains the decrease in military strength.
54. The United Nations Office to the African Union, based in Addis Ababa, has
continued to assist the African Union in its efforts to develop the Regional Task
Force. After consultations with the Force Commander and partners, the African
Union decided to restructure the headquarters of the Regional Task Force in
Yambio, South Sudan. Pursuant to that decision, the African Union deployed
12 military officers and 1 civilian staff to Yambio on 4 August. The United Nations
also supported the African Union in its efforts to secure additional funding for the
Regional Task Force. In June, the European Union extended the period during which
its contribution of 1,974,808 euros could be implemented to the end of 2014. Those
funds will mainly contribute to the restructuring of the headquarters of the Regional
Task Force and to the operational costs of the secretariat of the Joint Coordination
Mechanism of the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army. In addition, from 15 to 19 May, the
United Nations Office to the African Union supported the African Union in a
technical assessment mission to the Central African Republic to develop a
coordination mechanism between MISCA and the Regional Task Force. During the
mission, it was decided that both forces would exchange liaison officers. That
decision has been assimilated by the new United Nations peacekeeping mission in
the Central African Republic, MINUSCA, and forms the basis of ongoing efforts to

14-64283

13/18

S/2014/812

coordinate and exchange information concerning LRA in the Central African
Republic.
2.

Enhancement of efforts to promote the protection of civilians
55. United Nations entities, bilateral donors and NGOs continued to implement a
variety of programmes in LRA-affected areas to support the protection of civilians.
The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) is overseeing a number of projects
in LRA-affected areas on child protection and the reintegration of women and
children, to include continuing training on child protection for troops of the African
Union Regional Task Force. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic, UNICEF works with implementing partners to ensure
psychosocial, temporary host family and other forms of support for children who
had left LRA.
56. Also in the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, NGOs supported community resilience by furthering the expansion of an
early warning network based on the use of high-frequency radios and other means
that facilitate communication between communities regarding LRA attacks and
other forms of insecurity.
57. The United Nations Multidimensional Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) continued to be engaged in efforts to reassure
and protect the local population. MONUSCO actions in LRA-affected areas
included the regular deployment of joint patrols with the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo and the rehabilitation of roads. The DunguFaradje axis, the main supply road for businessmen, humanitarian actors and
MONUSCO staff, was completed with the construction of two bailey bridges — the
bridge in Nangume (67 km from Dungu) and the Dungu Moke Bridge (133 km from
Dungu). In addition, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
continued to facilitate strategic and operational coordination in the area in order to
promote protection, monitoring and reporting. The negative security and
psychological impacts of the LRA threat on local populations continued to be of
significant concern. Local civil society organizations continued to provide key
support to boost community resilience, including in the areas of gender
empowerment, psychosocial support for returnees and intercommunal
reconciliation.

3.

Expansion of current disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration activities to cover all areas affected by the Lord’s
Resistance Army
58. Military and civilian partners continued to implement programmes designed to
encourage defections from LRA. It has been reported that, since May, 81 individuals
who were LRA members for a long time have defected or been released, including
five Ugandan adult combatants.
59. MONUSCO has expanded its disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration operations in LRA-affected areas. Five different sites
in the area, including Dungu, have a permanent or rotating presence of staff
dedicated to related activities, which include FM radio broadcasts managed by
MONUSCO with messages that encourage defection. MONUSCO also manages a
transit camp in Dungu which provides care to minors who are released or have

14/18

14-64283

S/2014/812

escaped from LRA. The children are handed over to UNICEF and its partners for
family tracing and reunification.
60. In the Central African Republic, United States military advisers airdropped
leaflets and broadcast defection messages through loudspeakers mounted on
helicopters. In addition, NGOs provided capacity-building support for the
broadcasting of those defection messages, which often featured the testimonies of
former LRA members, by community radio stations.
61. United Nations entities, NGOs and civil society organizations worked in
partnership to encourage members of local communities to accept LRA returnees
peacefully and to refrain from engaging in acts of revenge or violence against them.
While those efforts were met with considerable success, a noticeable gap remained
in programming and strategies to address the broader economic, psychosocial and
educational needs of returnees. In that context, the Government of Norway and
UNICEF funded a research project on the broad set of challenges related to the
reintegration of LRA returnees.
4.

Promotion of a coordinated humanitarian and child protection response in all
areas affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army
62. Humanitarian organizations operating in LRA-affected areas have done
commendable work to assist the affected populations during the worst years of the
crisis and continue to operate in the health, education, protection, water, hygiene
and sanitation, non-food items, and food security sectors in LRA-affected areas. Yet,
insecurity, remoteness and minimal road infrastructure continue to hinder
humanitarian access.
63. Moreover, owing to the decrease in humanitarian needs in LRA-affected areas
compared to previous years and ongoing crises elsewhere in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, humanitarian funding in LRA-affected areas of that country
has diminished and, consequently, a large number of humanitarian NGOs have
recently withdrawn from Dungu and Ango, the hubs for most of the efforts against
LRA in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The withdrawal of some
humanitarian actors without the parallel arrival of development organizations to
implement early recovery and long-term development activities has contributed to a
feeling of abandonment, which members of the local population have expressed and
which reinforce a perception that the threat posed by LRA is becoming a forgotten
issue.
64. In south-eastern Central African Republic, a number of humanitarian
organizations have made significant efforts to continue to serve the affected
populations, despite many logistical and security challenges, although their presence
and programmes do not reach the totality of the population in need. Renewed efforts
are urgently needed to provide those affected populations, particularly the most
vulnerable members of the community, with the required humanitarian assistance.

5.

Provision of support to Governments affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army in
the fields of peacebuilding, human rights, the rule of law and development to
enable them to establish State authority throughout their territory
65. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United Nations agencies are
currently transitioning from purely humanitarian activities to activities aimed at

14-64283

15/18

S/2014/812

improving living conditions, strengthening resilience and advancing development in
parts of Orientale Province, including LRA-affected areas.
66. Also in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO has been
supporting a range of activities to facilitate the establishment of State authority in
LRA-affected areas, including by supporting the reopening and refurbishment of
State institutions such as police stations and tribunals. On 10 October, a tribunal in
Tumbu built with funding for MONUSCO quick-impact projects was inaugurated by
my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and handed
over to the administrator of Dungu territory. MONUSCO is also engaged in
capacity-building programmes for agents of the Congolese justice system, the police
forces and other local authorities.
67. In the Central African Republic, MINUSCA will endeavour, as part of its
mandate, to support the transitional Government to establish local government
offices, including in LRA-affected parts of the country.
68. Despite these initiatives, there is an overall lack of development-oriented
programmes in LRA-affected areas. In this respect, during the fourth ministerial
meeting of the Joint Coordination Mechanism of the African Union Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army, which
took place on 25 March, it was decided that the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan should appoint focal points to
participate in an upcoming joint meeting, to be held by the African Union, to
develop post-conflict reconstruction in LRA-affected areas. That decision was made
pursuant to an African Union-commissioned World Bank preliminary assessment on
the long-term stabilization needs of LRA-affected areas of the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan.

V. Observations and recommendations
69. The situation in the Central African Republic remains a matter of deep
concern, both because of its impact on the people of the country and because of its
implications for the entire region. Central African States and institutions play an
essential role in addressing the crisis, in collaboration with the United Nations and
the African Union. ECCAS and CEMAC have shown commitment to finding a
solution to the crisis in the interest of fostering peace and greater stability in the
subregion. I would like to acknowledge the role of the President of the Congo,
Mr. Sassou Nguesso, as ECCAS mediator, as well as of the African Union Special
Envoy for the Central African Republic, Mr. Boubèye Maïga, in the international
mediation effort and welcome their fruitful collaboration with my Special
Representative for Central Africa, Mr. Bathily, and my Special Representative for
the Central African Republic, Babacar Gaye, both of whom will continue to support
international mediation. In this context, I call upon all stakeholders in the Central
African Republic to respect the Brazzaville agreement, work constructively in the
context of the transition and actively prepare for the timely holding of elections.
70. I commend the efforts of the Governments of the subregion, United Nations
entities, national and international NGOs and other partners in addressing the
consequences of the crisis in the Central African Republic for neighbouring
countries. I reiterate my call for the international community to urgently provide the
financial support to the inter-agency Central African Republic regional response

16/18

14-64283

S/2014/812

plan required to assist the Governments concerned in addressing their growing
humanitarian needs.
71. I am deeply concerned about the ongoing activities of Boko Haram and their
increasing impact on the Central African region, in particular in northern Cameroon.
I welcome the ongoing mediation role played by the Government of Chad to
facilitate dialogue between the Government of Nigeria and representatives of Boko
Haram and to find a political solution. I urge the countries of the Lake Chad basin to
continue to work together to collectively address this scourge in a manner consistent
with international human rights standards and to bring an end to the violence
perpetrated by Boko Haram.
72. I also welcome the commitment of Governments in the subregion to advance
the road map for the development of an integrated strategy for Central Africa on
countering terrorism and controlling the flow of small arms and light weapons. I
strongly encourage those countries of the subregion that have not yet done so to
ratify the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for
Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly. UNOCA will continue to support these
efforts in collaboration with the relevant United Nations entities.
73. Maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea continues to affect States of Central
and West Africa. I commend the initiatives undertaken in support of regional
anti-piracy efforts and welcome the inauguration, in Yaoundé, of the Interregional
Coordination Centre on Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea. In that regard, I
strongly encourage the establishment of the two planned maritime operational
centres, one in West Africa and one in Central Africa, to complete the regional
information-sharing architecture. I call upon States and subregional organizations of
the Gulf of Guinea to redouble their efforts in implementing the decisions taken at
the summit held in Yaoundé on 25 June 2013. UNOCA, in collaboration with
UNOWA, will continue to provide assistance in the region and mobilize support in
order to achieve those objectives.
74. I am concerned by continuing reports of poaching and wildlife trafficking in
Central Africa and of links between that illicit trade and armed groups in the
subregion, including LRA. I strongly encourage Central African Governments and
ECCAS to put in place a subregional strategy to address this disturbing
phenomenon. UNOCA will continue to support the subregion to develop a coherent
and concerted approach to address this issue.
75. I welcome the continued progress made in addressing the threat posed by LRA
and acknowledge the fruitful cooperation between UNOCA and the African Union
in that regard. I also welcome the recent appointment of Mr. Kiprono Tuwei as the
new African Union Special Envoy on the Lord’s Resistance Army and I pay tribute
to the work done by his predecessor, Francisco Madeira. I also commend the
contributions made by LRA-affected countries, the United Nations system, NGOs
and partners in our collective endeavour to address the LRA issue. I recognize, in
particular, the critical support provided by the United States and the European
Union. I am especially grateful for the efforts of the African Union Regional Task
Force.
76. I am concerned about reports that the bulk of LRA has moved into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I call upon the affected States to enhance

14-64283

17/18

S/2014/812

cooperation to deny the group safe haven in their countries. I welcome the invitation
extended to the African Union by the Government of the Sudan to verify reports of
LRA presence in Kafia Kingi and encourage the African Union Commission and the
African Union Peace and Security Council to verify the allegations. Despite the
continuing decline in the group’s activity overall, LRA remains a serious threat and
its senior leadership is intact and has the potential to destabilize the subregion.
Furthermore, instability in the Central African Republic and South Sudan is
seriously undermining the progress achieved thus far. I call upon the countries
participating in the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army to renew their political commitment to
tackling the LRA issue and fulfil their troop pledges to the African Union Regional
Task Force. I reiterate that the United Nations regional strategy to address the threat
and impact of the LRA provides a comprehensive approach to addressing a range of
pressing needs in LRA-affected areas. I call upon the international community to
provide financial support for the activities detailed in the implementation plan
adopted by the Security Council in December 2012. Given the declining presence of
humanitarian actors in many LRA-affected areas, I draw particular attention to the
need for donors to support early-recovery activities in order to restore basic
livelihoods and essential services for affected communities in those areas.
77. I would like, once again, to express my appreciation to the Governments of
Central African countries, ECCAS, CEMAC, the African Union, the Commission of
the Gulf of Guinea, the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region and
other subregional and regional institutions for their continued collaboration with
UNOCA. I thank the various entities of the United Nations system working in
Central Africa, including the heads of United Nations peace operations, regional
offices, country teams and other relevant entities, for their support and cooperation
with UNOCA.
78. I pay tribute to my former Special Representative, Mr. Moussa, for his
leadership and efforts in the establishment of UNOCA and the implementation of its
mandate. I would also like to thank my new Special Representative, Mr. Bathily,
and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing efforts to advance the cause of peace
and security in Central Africa.

18/18

14-64283
