S/PV.8930

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8930th meeting

Tuesday, 14 December 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Ms. Nthoki
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Prince
Mr. Laouani
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 1 December 2021 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/992)
Twelfth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2021/995)
Letter dated 7 December 2021 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/1019)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39518 (E)
*2139518*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.8930

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. DiCarlo, His Excellency Mr. Skoog
and Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason, Permanent
Representative of Ireland, in her capacity as Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

Letter dated 1 December 2021 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/992)

Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the invitation to brief the Council on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution
2231 (2015).

Twelfth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2021/995)
Letter dated 7 December 2021 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/1019)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany
and the Islamic Republic of Iran to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and His Excellency Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2021/992, which contains
a letter dated 1 December 2021 from the Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/2021/995, which contains the twelfth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015); and
S/2021/1019, which contains a letter dated 7 December
2021 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
2/22

14/12/2021

On 29 November, diplomatic efforts on the JCPOA
resumed in Vienna. The status of the negotiations
indicate that the full restoration of the Plan and the
resolution will require additional effort and patience.
I recall that the JCPOA itself was the result of more
than a decade of determined diplomacy. The endeavour,
however, was worth it. The Plan, together with resolution
2231 (2015), is widely regarded as a cornerstone of
nuclear non-proliferation and an example of what
dialogue and diplomacy can achieve.
The Secretary-General hopes that in their current
negotiations, the United States and the Islamic Republic
of Iran will mobilize the same spirit and commitment
that resulted in the JCPOA. There is simply no viable
alternative to the full and effective implementation of
the Plan and the resolution.
In this regard, together with the Secretary-General,
I appeal to the United States to lift or waive its sanctions,
as outlined in the Plan, and extend the waivers
regarding the trade in oil with the Islamic Republic of
Iran. Also important is the extension of United States
waivers regarding certain civilian nuclear-related
activities taking place at the Bushehr nuclear power
plant, the Fordow facility and the Arak reactor. Waiver
extensions are also required for the transfer of enriched
uranium out of the Islamic Republic of Iran in exchange
for natural uranium.
We also call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to
reverse the steps it has taken that are not consistent
with its nuclear-related commitments under the Plan. In
this reporting period, the International Atomic Energy
Agency indicated that Iran has continued its research
and development activities related to uranium metal
production.
While the Agency has not been able to verify the
stockpile of enriched uranium in the Islamic Republic of
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

Iran, it estimates a total enriched uranium stockpile of
2,489.7 kilograms, including 113.8 kilograms enriched
up to 20 per cent and 17.7 kilograms enriched up to
60 per cent uranium-235, respectively. That exceeds the
limit agreed to in the JCPOA, which is a total enriched
uranium stockpile of 202.8 kilograms enriched up to
3.67 per cent uranium-235.
Moreover, on 1 December, the Agency reported that
the Islamic Republic of Iran had also begun uranium
enrichment using advanced centrifuges at the Fordow
fuel enrichment plant. Furthermore, the Agency has
reported that its verification and monitoring activities
have been seriously undermined as a result of Iran’s
decision to stop the implementation of its nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA, including the
Additional Protocol. Most recently, the Agency stressed
that in the absence of regular access to its verification
and monitoring equipment, as agreed to under the
Plan, it is now becoming a significant challenge for
the Agency to restore its continuity of knowledge
concerning Iran’s nuclear activities.
The Plan and resolution 2231 (2015) support our
common objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and
regional and international security. In that regard,
the bilateral and multilateral initiatives to improve
relationships with the Islamic Republic Iran are positive
developments. It is important for the Islamic Republic
of Iran to address concerns raised by participants in
the Plan and by other Member States in relation to
resolution 2231 (2015). We also call on Member States
and the private sector to engage in trade with the Islamic
Republic of Iran and to utilize available arrangements,
such as the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges,
the procurement channel provided for in resolution 2231
(2015) and the Swiss Humanitarian Trade Arrangement,
as appropriate.
I will now turn to the measures set out in annex B
to the resolution, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
twelfth report on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015)(S/2021/995).
First, on the nuclear-related provisions, no new
proposals have been submitted over the past six months
to the procurement channel. The Security Council,
however, has received eight notifications submitted
pursuant to paragraph 2 of annex B for certain nuclearrelated activities consistent with the Plan. During the
reporting period, the Secretariat received information
regarding the possible transfer of nuclear-related

S/PV. 8930

dual-use items to the Islamic Republic of Iran. In one
instance, the Secretariat confirmed that items exported
from Germany were not on the list of dual-use items
contained in resolution 2231 (2015) and therefore did
not require Council approval before their transfer. In
another instance, an individual was charged in Norway
with providing technical assistance to four researchers
from the Islamic Republic of Iran regarding an item
on the dual-use items list contained in resolution 2231
(2015). The trial in that case is pending and scheduled
for 2022.
Secondly, with regard to the ballistic-missile-related
provisions of the resolution, France, Germany, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom and the United States provided
information to the Secretary-General and the Security
Council concerning a ballistic missile launch in May
and two space-launch vehicle tests by the Islamic
Republic of Iran in June. The information provided
reflects divergent views among those Member States
as to whether those launches are inconsistent with
paragraph 3 of the resolution.
Thirdly, the Secretariat received information from
Saudi Arabia and Israel related to paragraph 4 of annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015), which pertains to the supply,
sale or transfer to or from the Islamic Republic of Iran of
all items, materials, equipment, goods and technology
set out in document S/2015/546. That document
includes ballistic missiles and unmanned aerial vehicle
systems (UAVs)with a range of 300 kilometres or more,
including target and reconnaissance drones, and cruise
missiles. The Secretariat has examined the debris of
six ballistic missiles, one cruise missile and several
UAVs used in various attacks against Saudi Arabia.
Saudi authorities believe that those weapons systems
had been transferred to Houthi fighters in Yemen in a
manner inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
The Secretariat also had the opportunity to
examine the debris of an alleged Iranian UAV that was
intercepted by the Israel Defense Forces as it entered
Israeli airspace via the Jordanian border. Israeli
authorities believe that this UAV was launched from
either Iraq or Syria. The Secretariat is still analysing
the information collected and will report back to the
Council on these issues in due course, as appropriate.
Finally, on the asset-freeze provisions, the
Secretariat received information from a Member
State regarding financial and commercial activities of

21-395183/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

two individuals and one entity on the list established
pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015), which may be
inconsistent with the asset freeze. The Secretariat is
currently analysing the information received and will
report back to the Council, as appropriate.
In recent days, both Iran and the United States
have again affirmed their seriousness in seeking to
return to the full implementation of the JCPOA. The
Secretary-General is encouraged by these pledges and
calls on both countries to expeditiously translate those
commitments into a mutually acceptable agreement. He
is grateful to the other Joint Commission participants
for their continued diplomatic efforts and urges them to
maintain an environment conducive to the continuation
and completion of the talks in Vienna.
In closing, I would like to thank Her Excellency
Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason, Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I would
also like to thank the Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission for his
continued cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I congratulate you, Mr. President,
as well as the Niger, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council, and I thank you for giving me
the floor.
It is again an honour to have this opportunity to
address the Security Council on behalf of the High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles,
in his capacity as Coordinator of the Joint Commission
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and his team in the Secretariat,
represented here by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, for their endless dedication and perseverance
in their work related to the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) and, in particular, for preparing the report on
its implementation (S/2021/995) for today’s discussion.
My second remark of gratitude goes to Her Excellency
Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason of Ireland in her role as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and for her work to keep members informed of
the current state of play.
4/22

14/12/2021

Allow me to briefly set the scene for the
developments since we last reported on this matter in
June (see S/PV.8811). As we all know, since April, all
JCPOA participants and the United States have engaged
in intense negotiations in Vienna to bring the JCPOA
back on track. The negotiations were paused on 20 June
and a new President and Government have since taken
office in Iran.
During the five months that followed, the High
Representative of the EU, in his capacity as Coordinator
of the JCPOA, dedicated significant efforts to
impress upon the Iranian side the need to resume the
negotiations based on the complex work undertaken
and the hard-won compromises already reached by the
summer. We have held several rounds of consultations
in Tehran and Brussels. We have continued close
coordination with other JCPOA participants and with
the United States.
We welcome the efforts of all the members of the
Council and our partners to support this endeavour and
hope to continue working hand-in-hand to restore the
JCPOA. Negotiations finally resumed on 29 November
in Vienna and the seventh round is ongoing as we
speak. Our aim remains to negotiate the return of the
United States to the agreement and the resumption of
JCPOA commitments by the United States and Iran.
We remain convinced that we are much better off with
the JCPOA in place. No better alternative exists for the
international community to be reassured in a verifiable
way that Iran’s nuclear programme is dedicated solely
to peaceful purposes and that, through the lifting of
sanctions, Iran can also reap economic benefits.
The EU remains fully committed to the full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA and we are
determined to continue working with the international
community for that purpose. But there is an
overwhelming sense of urgency, shared by most of the
delegations negotiating in Vienna that, in the light of
Iran’s continued acceleration of its nuclear programme,
there is not much time left for negotiations.
Over the past months, we have noted with great regret
and worry that Iran has continued to expand its nuclear
activities by accumulating more enriched uranium to
20 and 60 per cent uranium-235, respectively, installing
more advanced centrifuges, and producing uranium
metal. Those activities are not only inconsistent with
the nuclear-related provisions of the JCPOA, but also
raise serious non-proliferation concerns, particularly
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

since Iran decided to suspend the implementation of
the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement
and JCPOA transparency provisions as of 23 February,
which has substantially decreased the access of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
relevant information on Iran’s nuclear programme.
Furthermore, Iran’s continued lack of cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency is a source
of grave concern. As the only mandated international
body authorized to verify the Iranian nuclear
programme, it is in the interest of the entire international
community, including Iran, for the Agency to have
access and continue to receive and gather information
and knowledge so that it may verify the developments
in Iran, in line with the provisions of the JCPOA. IAEA
monitoring of Iranian commitments under the JCPOA
and ensuring continuity of knowledge of Iran’s nuclear
programme is also key for the negotiation process.
We welcome the new Iranian Government’s
confirmation of Iran’s stated position in the Vienna
negotiations that it would stand ready to return to
the full implementation of the JCPOA, provided that
conditions are in place for an effective normalization of
its economic and trade relations with the international
community. We recognize that Iran has faced very
serious negative economic consequences following
the United States withdrawal from the JCPOA and
the reimposition of previously lifted United States
unilateral sanctions, which we have deeply regretted.
That, together with the discontinuation of the granting of
nuclear waivers, has hampered the full implementation
of the deal.
We therefore welcomed the political commitment of
President Biden and the United States Administration
to engaging in serious negotiations with a view to
a possible return to the JCPOA and to Iran’s full
implementation of its nuclear commitments. We have
taken note of the United States position that it would
stand ready to return to mutual compliance with the
JCPOA and, in that context, would be prepared to lift all
of the JCPOA-related sanctions. Based on that and the
positions expressed by the existing JCPOA participants,
we call for all sides to be flexible and pragmatic and
step up their efforts to accelerate the process to put the
JCPOA back on the full implementation track. While
we acknowledge the strong sense of urgency, we need
to make sure to preserve sufficient space for the intense
ongoing diplomatic efforts.

S/PV. 8930

Let me also recall that the procurement channel
remains operational. As highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General, it remains a vital transparency and
confidence-building mechanism. It gives assurances to
Member States and private sector actors that transfers
of nuclear and dual-use goods and services are fully in
line with the resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA.
Furthermore, we urge all Members of the
Organization to refrain from actions and statements
that could increase regional and international tensions
and escalate a military build-up in the region and
beyond. The EU has repeatedly urged Iran to desist
from activities that could deepen mistrust and that
are inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015). The EU
remains fully committed to multilateral diplomacy,
which has been successful for several decades.
Similarly, let us not forget that the origins of the JCPOA
are firmly anchored in global non-proliferation and that
it is the outcome of effective multilateralism. We have a
common interest in making the JCPOA work. Let us do
this together, and let us do it swiftly. We do not see any
other viable option.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Skoog
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Byrne Nason.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I wish to again express
my appreciation to Security Council members for their
trust in appointing me as Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Over the course of this year, I have done my utmost to
support the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) in an impartial and transparent
manner. I have worked closely with all Council
members to meet our shared responsibility to ensure
the full and effective implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA, which it underpins. I continue
to maintain an active dialogue with Member States,
including the Islamic Republic of Iran, on issues related
to the implementation of the resolution.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
staff of the Secretariat for the invaluable advice and
strong support they have given me over the course of
this year in carrying out my duties as Facilitator.
The twelfth report of the Facilitator (see
S/2021/1019) was approved by Council members on
7 December. I would like to thank each of them for
their constructive engagement in that process in a spirit

21-395185/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

of compromise and flexibility. The report provides a
factual account of the activities that took place in the
2231 format of the Security Council, covering the
period from 25 June to 7 December 2021. It includes
relevant communications, summarized in my report, as
well as key aspects of the workings of the procurement
channel. Council members may refer to the report for
details, but I wish to mention three points in particular.
First, I would like to report that one meeting
of the Security Council in the 2231 format was held
during this reporting period, on 7 December, at which
representatives of the Security Council discussed the
findings and recommendations contained in the twelfth
report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/995) on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), prior to
its public release. Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
has already referred to some of those points in her
briefing. The 2231 format also held a discussion on the
resumption of talks in Vienna, on ballistic missile and
space vehicle launches by the Islamic Republic of Iran
and broader developments related to resolution 2231
(2015).
Secondly, during the reporting period a total of 20
notes were circulated in the 2231 format. In addition,
I sent 16 official communications to Member States
and the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission. I received a total of
15 communications from Member States and the
Coordinator. Among the communications circulated
were two regular quarterly reports issued by the
International Atomic Energy Agency in September
and November 2021, as well as eight updates across the
whole reporting period. I note that the impartial and
professional role played by the Agency in its verification
and monitoring activities in the Islamic Republic of
Iran, as requested under resolution 2231 (2015), is
essential, as it underpins international confidence in
the JCPOA itself.
Thirdly, no new proposals were submitted to the
Security Council through the procurement channel
during the reporting period. That channel represents a
key transparency and confidence-building mechanism
under the JCPOA. It remains operational and stands
ready to review proposals. I join the SecretaryGeneral’s encouragement of all participants in the
JCPOA, Member States and the private sector to fully
support and utilize that channel.
6/22

14/12/2021

The JCPOA is a major achievement in nuclear
non-proliferation and an example of how we can work
together to resolve protracted and difficult issues
through dialogue and diplomacy. It remains the best
way to guarantee the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. The resumption of talks
in Vienna offers the prospect a possible return of the
United States to the JCPOA and its full and effective
implementation by all sides. I hope that the talks will
build on the progress made in earlier rounds and can
move quickly to reach a positive conclusion. In turn,
we must continue to play our part in demonstrating that
resolution 2231 (2015), which endorses the JCPOA, is
working as it should.
In conclusion, I underline the call set out in
paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 (2015) to all
“Member States, regional organizations and
international organizations to take such actions as
may be appropriate to support the implementation of
the JCPOA, including ... by refraining from actions
that undermine implementation of commitments
under the JCPOA”.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Byrne Nason for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank all of today’s briefers for providing
updates on this critical issue.
The United States continues to pursue the path of
diplomacy to achieve a mutual return to full compliance
with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
and to address our full range of concerns with Iran.
President Biden has been clear that he is prepared
to return to United States compliance, and to stay in
compliance, so long as Iran does the same. We are fully
prepared to lift sanctions inconsistent with our JCPOA
commitments, which would allow Iran to receive the
economic benefits of the deal. And we are convinced
that, if Iran approaches talks in Vienna with urgency
and good faith, we can quickly reach and implement an
understanding on mutual return.
We cannot, however, allow Iran to accelerate
its nuclear programme and slow-walk its nuclear
diplomacy. I am sorry to report that that is exactly
what appears to be happening at the JCPOA talks in
Vienna. Iran greeted the resumption of talks with new
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

nuclear provocations and proceeded to stake out vague,
unrealistic, maximalist and unconstructive positions
on both nuclear and sanctions issues in the talks. We
made substantial progress over six rounds of talks this
spring, with all sides making difficult decisions. As
all five permanent members of the Security Council,
plus Germany (P5+1), agree, the outcome of these
negotiations is the only possible basis on which to reach
a conclusion. But now Iran is seeking to reopen those
compromises. The simple truth is that, as Secretary
of State Blinken has made clear, Iran is almost out
of runway.
There is a little time left, but Iran’s continued
nuclear advancements and its lack of urgency in the
talks are hollowing out the non-proliferation benefits
that would be achieved by a mutual return to full JCPOA
compliance. Iran’s continued nuclear escalations are
inconsistent with the stated goal of returning to mutual
compliance with the JCPOA. These escalations raise
questions about Iran’s intentions, particularly given
that the United States has made clear its willingness
to lift all sanctions inconsistent with the JCPOA in the
context of a mutual return to compliance. Let me be
clear: Iran’s actions will not provide it with any leverage
in negotiations and will only intensify our concerns
about Iran’s activities.
While diplomatic negotiations continue, we remind
Member States of the importance of the continued
implementation of the remaining sanctions measures
in annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). Restrictions
remain in place on transfers to and from Iran of
certain ballistic-missile and nuclear technology,
and individuals and entities on the list established
pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015) remain subject to an
assets freeze. We support the Secretariat’s continued
reporting on the implementation of those measures.
We appreciate in particular the Secretary-General’s
reporting on the use of uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs)
in the region. Iran’s continued proliferation of UAV and
ballistic missile technology to its partners and proxies
destabilizes Yemen, Iraq and maritime security around
the region. For example, Iran has enabled the Houthis
to launch increasingly sophisticated strikes deep into
Saudi Arabia and into densely-populated Yemeni cities.
We encourage the Secretariat to continue to investigate
those incidents for possible violations of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015).
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/995)
also finds that International Atomic Energy Agency

S/PV. 8930

(IAEA) inspectors have been harassed by Iran while
monitoring and verifying its implementation of its
Safeguards Agreement. That is in direct contravention
of their diplomatic privileges and immunities, as well
as simple decency. Iran must provide the required
cooperation to resolve the IAEA concerns related to
possible undeclared nuclear material and activities in
Iran without further delay. Iran must fully implement
the joint statement it negotiated with IAEA Director
General Grossi in Tehran on 12 September. Despite clear
calls from all the members of the P5+1, that is yet to be
done. The IAEA has our full support in carrying out its
critical verification and monitoring responsibilities in
Iran for both safeguards and JCPOA purposes.
The diplomatic process currently under way
remains the best approach to limit Iran’s nuclear
programme and to set us on a path to address the
full range of concerns that we and others have with
Iran’s activities in the region and beyond. The world
is prepared to support a mutual return to compliance.
But for the world to engage economically and expand
diplomatic cooperation with Iran, Iran must first show
seriousness at the table and come back to compliance
with the deal in short order, just as the United States
has made clear we are also prepared to do.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to begin by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s twelfth report
(S/2021/995) on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) and thank the Secretariat for its continued
professionalism and support. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Byrne Nason and her team for the work of
the Security Council Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and for her briefing. I also
thank His Excellency Mr. Olaf Skoog for his briefing.
The United Kingdom has consistently demonstrated
our commitment to implementing resolution 2231
(2015) and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). Our priority is to see the United States return
to the agreement and Iran to return to compliance, and
we are negotiating in Vienna towards that goal. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report, the latest
talks in Vienna resumed on 29 November, five months
after Iran broke them off. During those talks, Iran has
introduced new maximalist demands, many of which
go beyond the JCPOA. The process is not moving fast
enough, and time is running out.

21-395187/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

At the same time, Iran’s nuclear escalation is
undermining international peace and security and the
global non-proliferation system. Iran has continued
to develop a ballistic missile programme, which is
inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015). It is important
that the Security Council focus on the gravity of the
current situation. The Iranian nuclear programme
has never been more advanced than it is today. Iran’s
total stockpile contains enough fissile material that,
if enriched further, could produce several nuclear
weapons. Iran is producing highly-enriched uranium,
which is unprecedented for a State without a nuclearweapons programme, as well as uranium metal, which
provides weapons-applicable knowledge.
Moreover, since February, Iran has curtailed
monitoring by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), in violation of resolution 2231 (2015); and
since 2019, has failed to cooperate with the Agency
on safeguards investigations. Iran has also failed to
implement its bilateral agreement with the IAEA to
service cameras and allow access to the Karaj site.
We therefore call on Iran to restore fully all access
under resolution 2231 (2015) and to implement its
legal obligations and bilateral understanding with the
Agency without delay.
We have reached a fork in the road. We hope that
Iran will choose to conclude a fair and comprehensive
deal that would benefit the Iranian people and nation. If
Iran continues its current path of nuclear escalation, in
weeks, not months, it will be responsible for collapsing
the JCPOA and provoking a serious crisis, which would
require a robust response from the Council.

14/12/2021

effective implementation of, the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015).
The resumption of such negotiations in Vienna in
November and in recent days of December has reflected
the continued commitments and efforts of the parties
concerned to bridge differences and address challenges
on this matter after five months of delays. We call
on all parties to continue to engage in constructive
negotiations, in line of the Secretary-General’s call for
continued diplomatic engagement on this matter.
We note with concern the information contained in
the Secretary-General’s twelfth report (S/2021/995) and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board
of Governors’ reports on activities of non-compliance
with the implementation of the Plan and resolution 2231
(2015). We commend the IAEA’s efforts on verification
and monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran, despite
its significant challenges.
Viet Nam has consistently stressed the importance
of upholding international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations, international treaties and Security
Council resolutions. We reiterate our call for full
cooperation for monitoring purposes, as transparency
is a crucial element of the confidence-building aspect
of the JCPOA. We also call on the parties concerned
to spare no effort to resolve differences, exercise selfrestraint and refrain from any acts that may exacerbate
the situation, erode trust or escalate tensions in the
region. It is also crucial for the international community
and countries of the region to contribute to the ongoing
diplomatic efforts.

(spoke in English)

The JCPOA is the best way to ensure a comprehensive,
long-term and proper solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue and contribute to regional and international peace
and security. We share the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral that the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015)
remain a success of multilateral diplomacy and nuclear
non-proliferation and continue to enjoy the full support
of the broader international community.

I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Geraldine Byrne Nason, Security Council Facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
her able leadership, tireless efforts and her report
(see S/2021/1019). I welcome the participation of the
representatives of Iran and Germany in today’s meeting.

In the light of the upcoming Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, we wish to emphasize the importance
of the balanced implementation of its three pillars,
namely, nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

It is encouraging to witness the recent diplomatic
engagements between the parties concerned in the
negotiations over the return to, and the full and

As this is the last time that Viet Nam is speaking
on this issue as a member of the Security Council, I
sincerely hope that all parties will continue their efforts

Mr. Pham (Viet Nam) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and His Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Ambassador and
Head of the Delegation of the European Union, for their
comprehensive briefings.

8/22

21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

to strengthen dialogue and negotiations to resolve
differences and reaffirm their commitments to fully
and effectively implementing the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015).
Viet Nam was a member of the IAEA Board of
Governors when the JCPOA was concluded, during
which we witnessed the Vienna spirit at work and the
success of diplomacy. Viet Nam is now a member of
the Board again. We will continue to do our utmost to
support this process at all appropriate forums. Let the
Vienna spirit prevail again in the negotiations towards
a successful outcome that contributes to peace and
stability in the region and the world at large.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Ambassador Olof Skoog for their briefings. I also thank
Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason and her team for
her report (see S/2021/1019). I welcome the presence
of the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Germany.
As we have previously stated, since the adoption
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) in
2015, Mexico has supported the Plan in its belief that
it is a successful example of multilateral diplomacy
and a key component in ensuring the stability of the
international nuclear non-proliferation architecture.
The agreement in and of itself represented a major shift
in the way the Security Council would deal with the issue
of Iran’s nuclear programme by opting for an approach
of cooperation and trust over a sanctions regime.
Mexico stresses the importance of a return to the
JCPOA without preconditions, which would entail the
lifting of unilateral sanctions against Iran and that Iran
resume upholding all the commitments it made in 2015.
While we understand the position of those who believe
that addressing the broader security dynamics in the
region is a priority, my country believes that it would
be preferable to conduct a separate dialogue in that
regard so as to not further hinder the urgent return to
the JCPOA.
The reports of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have been
regularly documenting worrisome activities, including
Iran’s high level of uranium enrichment, increasingly
advanced research into metal production and the use
of modern and centrifuges. In addition, the restriction
of access by IAEA monitors to facilities and sites not

S/PV. 8930

declared under the Additional Protocol is also a source
of concern. While we are grateful to the IAEA Director
General for his efforts to achieve subsequent short-term
arrangements to maintain monitoring activities, those
arrangements are neither predictable nor sustainable.
And although transparency and cooperation are crucial
elements for the proper functioning of the Plan of Action,
we call on Iran to renew the temporary agreement with
the IAEA with a longer time frame in order to maintain
monitoring and verification.
With regard to missile-related activities, we must
note that recent launches generate mistrust.
Mexico is committed to achieving and maintaining
a world free from nuclear weapons through compliance
with the commitments and obligations under the various
legal instruments in the field of nuclear disarmament,
including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons. My country seeks the strengthening
and safeguarding of the non-proliferation regime and
nuclear disarmament, established by the NPT and, as
such, defends the right of all countries to benefit from
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. But it is clear
that this right goes hand in hand with the obligation
to comply with all commitments and obligations under
the NPT, in particular full cooperation with the IAEA.
The previous time we considered this issue in the
Security Council (see S/PV.8811), we were anticipating
results from Vienna. However, half a year later, there is
still uncertainty. Despite that, my country trusts that it
will be possible to reach an agreement that will enable
a return to full compliance with the JCPOA.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo;
the Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations, Ambassador Olof Skoog; and
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the Permanent Representative
of Ireland, Ambassador Geraldine Byrne Nason, for
their briefings. I also welcome the presence of the
representatives of Iran and Germany at this meeting. I
will be brief in my remarks.
India supports the full and effective implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
resolution 2231 (2015). India also supports the peaceful
resolution of the relevant issues through dialogue
and diplomacy.

21-395189/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

We value the efforts of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
implement the Agency’s verification and monitoring
activities in Iran.
We urge Iran to continue to cooperate with the
IAEA in the effective discharge of the Agency’s
functions and to address the unresolved issues relating
to its nuclear activities.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Ambassador Skoog and Ambassador Byrne Nason, in
her capacity as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for their briefings.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains
committed to the full implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). And we continue to support the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The
JCPOA remains a central pillar of the global nuclear
non-proliferation architecture, and it is unquestionably
a triumph of multilateral diplomacy. Its preservation
and revival are therefore critical to safeguard peace and
stability in the Middle East and, indeed, the wider world.
We deeply regret the United States May 2018
withdrawal from the agreement and its subsequent
decisions to reimpose sanctions and to terminate
waivers. Those actions ran counter to the requirements
and objectives of resolution 2231 (2015) and the
JCPOA. Furthermore, such actions do not encourage
an environment conducive to constructive diplomatic
engagement. We therefore continue to urge the United
States to rejoin the agreement, and we appeal for the
immediate lifting of all unilateral coercive measures.
This appeal has become even more urgent as these
sanctions have considerably limited Iran’s ability to
effectively respond to the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We also regret Iran’s decision to cease performing
several of its nuclear-related commitments under
the JCPOA. We take note that Iran has indicated that
those steps are reversible, having undertaken them
subsequent to the United States withdrawal from the
agreement. We urge Iran to return to full compliance to
fulfil the totality of its obligations.
The JCPOA remains the only viable path to ensure
a peaceful, comprehensive and long-term solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue. We therefore support the ongoing
diplomatic process in Vienna, and we encourage the
parties to build on the progress made thus far by fully
10/22

14/12/2021

engaging in a spirit of mutual respect and compromise.
Parties should remain mindful of the purpose of
the agreement in an effort to find common ground.
Furthermore, members of the international community
should refrain from provocative actions that could
inflame tensions and deter positive engagement.
We support the mandate of the International
Atomic Energy Agency as it works towards ensuring
the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology.
The importance of the Agency’s verification and
monitoring role cannot be overstated, and as such it is
critical that it be granted regular access to effectively
carry out its activities. We encourage the parties to
engage constructively on this issue.
Resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA were not
only conceived to guarantee the peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme but are also intended to
nurture an environment that promotes and facilitates
the development of normal trade and economic relations
with the country. In that regard, the continued effective
functioning of the procurement channel as well as the
Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges is essential.
The international community must continue
to support the JCPOA and all similar multilateral
instruments aimed at promoting the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. For its part, as a member of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States zone of peace and a party to the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
reaffirms its commitment to achieving a world free of
nuclear weapon. We remain steadfast in our commitment
to disarmament, a goal which is inextricably linked to
non-proliferation
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland welcomes the
reports of the Secretary-General (S/2021/995) and the
Joint Commission (see S/2021/992 and S/2021/1019) and
has taken note of their findings. I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Ambassador
Skoog for their informative briefings.
Ireland is strongly committed to preserving the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). As the
three reports before us today make clear, the JCPOA
is an important achievement in multilateral diplomacy
and remains the best way to guarantee the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

We welcome the resumption of talks in Vienna,
after five months, under the framework of the Joint
Commission. It is important that the talks move forward
quickly. With the necessary collective political will by
all sides, a swift conclusion to the talks and a return to
the full implementation of the agreement by all sides is
within our reach.
It is imperative that the United States fully meet its
commitments under the JCPOA, including the lifting of
sanctions, and take all the necessary steps to facilitate
the full and proper implementation of the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015). It is important that the Iranian
people see the real and tangible benefits that are an
essential part of the Plan.
It is equally imperative that Iran return fully to the
implementation of its commitments under the JCPOA.
We are deeply concerned by actions including uranium
enrichment up to 60 per cent, further fabrication,
installation and use of advanced centrifuges and
uranium metal production. Those activities carry the
real risk of seriously undermining the JCPOA and the
broader nuclear non-proliferation regime.
The IAEA’s monitoring and verification role
is crucial in giving confidence to the international
community on the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. For that reason, we continue
to be concerned about Iran’s decision to suspend the
implementation of transparency measures under the
JCPOA. The Agency’s ability to restore continuity
of knowledge at all locations in Iran is critical to its
monitoring and verification role. We call on Iran
to fully cooperate with the IAEA to ensure all the
necessary access to that end. Ireland strongly supports
and values the integrity and professionalism of the
IAEA in carrying out that vital work.
We hope that an agreement can quickly be reached
on a return to the full implementation of the JCPOA.
Ireland supports the Secretary-General’s call on all
States, including those of the region, to support the
implementation of the Plan.
Finally, it is important that here in New York we
demonstrate that resolution 2231 (2015) is working as
it should. Ireland will continue to support all efforts to
that end.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Ambassador
Skoog and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for their
updates. I also warmly thank Ambassador Byrne

S/PV. 8930

Nason as the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Let me start by reaffirming Norway’s full support
for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
resolution 2231 (2015). As the Secretary-General has
noted, the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) continue
to enjoy broad international support. An effective and
fully implemented JCPOA strengthens global nuclear
non-proliferation and is important for regional and
international stability and security.
We remain of the view that the full and effective
implementation of the JCPOA is the best available
opportunity to help build international confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. As also noted by the Secretary-General,
that confidence may be undermined by delays and
lack of diplomatic progress in putting the JCPOA back
on track.
Norway joins other speakers in commending the
efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) as it strives to continue its verification and
monitoring activities in Iran. At our previous meeting
in June (see S/PV.8811), several Council members
rightfully expressed their concern about the restrictions
of access placed on the Agency. We deeply regret the
further decline in, and lack of, access at one facility.
Transparency measures are a vital component of the
JCPOA, and the current situation seriously undermines
the Agency’s ability to restore continuity of knowledge.
Norway expressed its regret at the decision of
the United States to withdraw from the JCPOA in
2018 and unilaterally reimpose sanctions. We also
deeply regret that Iran has taken a series of steps to
reduce its nuclear-related commitments. The Director
General of the IAEA has made clear in his reports
submitted to the Council that Iran continues to advance
its nuclear programme. Moreover, we express deep
concern over Iran’s deliberate steps towards nuclear
escalation. That presents a serious challenge to the
international community and complicates the return to
a functioning JCPOA.
We urge Iran to return to full compliance with the
JCPOA and resume full cooperation with the IAEA
without delay. On the issue of ballistic missile-related
provisions, we also share the concerns raised previously
and encourage Iran to address them.

21-3951811/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

14/12/2021

The situation surrounding the JCPOA remains
tense and unpredictable. Norway remains a steadfast
supporter of constructive diplomatic dialogue to
decrease tensions and increase trust and cooperation.
We repeat our call on all stakeholders to show restraint
and avoid actions that may contribute to escalation.

the JCPOA, while, at the same time, backtracking on
compromises that had been reached after long weeks of
difficult discussions. Despite Iran’s change of tone in
recent days, we are far from any progress in the nuclear
talks. The talks are not going in the right direction and
are not progressing fast enough.

Finally, we welcome the resumption of discussions
in Vienna, and we echo the call of other colleagues in
encouraging Iran to engage in serious negotiations.
Norway shares the ambition of an efficient return to
the full and effective implementation of the JCPOA that
restores and delivers the benefits of the agreement for
all. We hope that all sides act on the urgent need to put
the Plan back on track.

Time is of the essence. We are nearing the point
where Iran’s nuclear escalation will have rendered
the JCPOA meaningless. For the past two years and
until now, including during the Vienna talks, Tehran
has continued and accelerated the development of
its most problematic nuclear activities without any
credible civilian justification, in particular the rapid
accumulation of uranium enriched to 20 per cent and
60 per cent, as well as activities related to the production
of uranium metal, which provide key know-how for the
manufacture of a nuclear device. As a result, Iran’s
nuclear programme has never been as advanced as it
is today.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, the
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union (EU) for their briefings.
Since 2015, France and its three European partners
have demonstrated a steady commitment to the full
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015) by, first,
lifting EU sanctions in line with the agreed timetable
and facilitating access for our companies to the Iranian
market; secondly, clearly opposing the previous
United States Administration’s withdrawal from the
agreement; and, finally, warning about the progress of
the Iranian nuclear programme beyond the limits set by
the agreement.
Together with all the participants in the JCPOA,
during six negotiating sessions last spring we made
significant progress towards bringing all parties back
to the agreement. At Iran’s request, those talks were
interrupted on 20 June, the day after its presidential
elections. Since then, Iran has repeatedly delayed in
returning to the negotiating table for five months.
We had high hopes for the resumption of the
JCPOA negotiations in Vienna. However, today, two
weeks after the resumption of the talks, in which we
have engaged seriously and constructively, it has to be
said that the survival of the Iranian nuclear agreement
is threatened now more than ever. The Security Council
cannot ignore the gravity of the situation.
We are both disappointed and concerned about the
position of the new Iranian negotiating team. Iran has
made maximal demands, many of which go beyond
12/22

Those developments are all the more alarming
given that, at the same time, there is a serious lack
of cooperation by Iran with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA).
We all know the details of those failures from the
IAEA reports, and we reiterate our full support for
the Agency’s work. The IAEA is now indicating that
it may not be able to continue to have full knowledge
about Iran’s nuclear programme, which is key to
ensuring a return to compliance with the JCPOA and its
verification. That is particularly true with regard to the
advanced centrifuge production activities at the Karaj
site. We call on Iran to resume full cooperation with
the Agency.
In that context, France is concerned about Iran’s
continued ballistic activities and transfers, which
have a destabilizing effect in the region. Iran cannot
be unaware that, under its obligations under resolution
2231 (2015), it is not to carry out any activities related to
ballistic missiles designed to deliver nuclear weapons,
including launches using ballistic-missile technology.
We are at a crossroads. Iran has two paths before
it — either it continues its nuclear escalation in the
coming weeks, thus leading to the collapse of the
JCPOA and triggering a serious crisis, or it chooses to
urgently return to the path of a comprehensive and fair
agreement for the benefit of its people.
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

This second path is in everyone’s interest. The
diplomatic path remains resolutely open to Iran to
reach an agreement but, given the developments in its
nuclear programme, this is our last chance to restore
the JCPOA. That must happen in weeks, not months.
France therefore reaffirms its determination to pursue
active discussions in Vienna over the next few days
with all its E3+3 partners — Germany, Italy, China,
Russian and the United States — for a rapid return to
the JCPOA. It calls on Iran to negotiate in good faith
and to show the same determination to conclude an
agreement as soon as possible.
Mr. Laouani (Tunisia): I would like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ambassador Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations; and Ambassador Geraldine
Byrne Nason, Permanent Representative of Ireland and
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for their detailed briefings. I
also welcome the participation of the representatives of
Germany and Iran to this meeting.
Tunisia shares the view that the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) is an important addition to the
global non-proliferation architecture and that it remains
the best way to continue to guarantee the peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. We sincerely hope
that the ongoing discussions to revive the agreement
will soon conclude successfully, and we renew the
call for the full and effective implementation of this
agreement and of resolution 2231 (2015) by all parties.
We once again take note of the differences of
interpretation regarding the implementation of the
provisions of Annex B of resolution 2231 (2015),
in particular with regard to ballistic missile-related
activities. While reaffirming the importance of giving
due consideration to the concerns expressed, including
regarding regional security issues, we urge all parties
to refrain from all activities and rhetoric that could
deepen mistrust or aggravate tensions and to engage
in good faith in dialogue and negotiations to resolves
their differences.
In that regard, Tunisia welcomes the bilateral
meetings held between various countries of the region
during the previous months. We also appreciate all the
constructive initiatives aimed at promoting dialogue
and trust between the parties concerned, including
through the creation of new platforms and mechanisms.

S/PV. 8930

Finally, I would like to once again underline the
importance of establishing a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East given the key role it could play in
global disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, as
well as efforts to bring about regional peace, security
and stability.
The Second Session of the Conference on the
Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear
Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction,
aimed at elaborating a treaty establishing such a zone,
which concluded earlier this month and in which the
Arab countries and Iran participated constructively,
represents a positive step towards that goal and deserves
our full support.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo; Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations;
and Geraldine Byrne Nason, Permanent Representative
of Ireland and Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their
briefings. We also welcome the participation of our
Iranian colleagues in today’s meeting.
We approve the adoption of the twelfth report of
the Facilitator (see S/2021/1019) and welcome Ireland’s
efforts to agree on the text, in which our colleagues
demonstrated a truly professional and results-oriented
approach. We still have a number of criticisms
with regard to the text but, given the importance of
maintaining Council unity on this issue, we decided to
join the consensus.
The world’s attention is now focused on the
negotiations in Vienna. Our colleagues there have a very
challenging task ahead — to return the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) to
the initially agreed framework. We must help them, and
we can only do so by demonstrating strategic restraint
and not fuelling tensions. That applies to all parties
to the JCPOA, Security Council members and Iran’s
neighbours in the region. In the context of resolution
2231 (2015), what is urgently needed now is professional
diplomacy. We need to give it a chance to succeed. Its
success is in our shared interests.
Against that backdrop, I must frank say that I am
rather puzzled that some of our Western colleagues
today rushed to comment not only on the negotiation
process, but also on Iran’s position at the talks. As

21-3951813/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

14/12/2021

we understand it, that position is evolving and being
developed. That is why any blanket conclusions,
especially those pronounced here today in New York,
are wholly inappropriate.

2231 (2015)), without any deletions or additions. In
addition, we cannot agree with certain opinions that
the deal is supposedly no longer relevant owing to the
fact that the Vienna process is not moving fast enough.

We must bear in mind that the Vienna talks are
objectively not a quick or simple process. There is an
apt Russian proverb to describe this: “It is easier to tear
down than to build up.” As many have said today, it was
the United States that tore everything down in 2018,
when it withdrew from the JCPOA and did a great deal
of damage, including by blocking other parties from
implementing the agreement. The world then waited
six months for the Biden Administration to finally
determine its policy towards the JCPOA. Though not
often mentioned, that is one of the main reasons why
the return to the JCPOA is so difficult today. So let us
be objective and not forget that the source of today’s
problems is the policy of the United States, not Iran.
Now our American colleagues speak of their readiness
to return to the implementation of the JCPOA, but those
are just words that must be confirmed by action.

Currently, there is no alternative to the JCPOA.
Thanks to the mechanism of thorough verification
envisioned in the deal, Iran today is the most thoroughly
verified State in the world. No less important is the
fact that, from a political point of view, the JCPOA
has become a symbol of the possibility to strike a deal
despite differences in approaches to a very complex and
sensitive set of issues. In and of itself, the deal is first
and foremost the most significant confidence-building
measure on the international level. There will be no
trust without it, and no confidence. Those who believe
in a world without the JCPOA must clearly realize that
the world without the agreement would be a completely
different, much more unpredictable and dangerous
place than it is with the agreement.

It is regrettable that, despite the complexity of the
Vienna talks, the United States is pursuing its policy
of maximum pressure on Iran. In response, the Iranian
side has continued to freeze some of its obligations
under the JCPOA. Thus far, it has not been possible to
break this vicious cycle.
We believe that progress in terms of the United
States returning to the full implementation of the deal
will create the conditions for a positive reaction from
Iran, including the unfreezing of certain obligations
that had been suspended. Let me repeat: the steps
taken by Iran are a reaction to the destructive line that
the United States of America has taken. By the way,
these steps were postponed for a long time; they were
not some unilateral withdrawal by Tehran from its
obligations. That is precisely the context in which we
should consider the reporting by the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
without trying to present the situation as evidence
of some malicious intent by Tehran, as our Western
colleagues are doing.
We believe that it is dangerous and irresponsible to
make statements that the JCPOA is outdated or that it
needs to be renewed, expanded and so forth. The deal
contains a carefully negotiated balance of interests and
must be implemented exactly in the form in which it was
approved by the Security Council in 2015 (resolution
14/22

The Secretary-General’s support of the negotiations
in Vienna is of fundamental importance. We have
noted that this idea is reflected in the current report.
We also believe that the United Nations leadership’s
position sends an important message that issues that
have no relationship to the JCPOA should be dealt
with outside of efforts to restore the deal. We would
like to echo words of gratitude to the IAEA. We join
the appeal of the Secretary-General to States Members
of the United Nations to increase commercial and
economic cooperation with Iran, including by using the
Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges mechanism.
Unfortunately, a number of our traditional criticisms
about the biennial reports of the Secretary General on
implementing resolution 2231 (2015) continue not to be
taken into account, just as in the past. The current report
does not single out with sufficient clarity the reasons
for the current situation with respect to the JCPOA.
The unwillingness of United Nations leadership to call
a spade a spade looks like silent acquiescence in the
current situation. And yet, contraventions by the United
States of resolution 2231 (2015), including the JCPOA,
cannot be considered the norm and should be rectified.
We do not share the approach of the authors of
the report, who equate the lifting of illegal unilateral
sanctions by the United States and introducing
exemptions from those sanctions. By that, they
legitimize the practice of unilateral restrictions in
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

contravention to resolution 2231 (2015) and the letter
and spirit of the United Nations Charter.
We continue to be seriously concerned about the
illegitimate practice of the United Nations Secretariat to
conduct so-called investigations within the framework
of resolution 2231 (2015), bearing in mind the total
lack of a mandate to investigate and the expertise
necessary to do so. The United Nations Secretariat’s
mandate in this area is of a purely administrative and
technical character. It is enshrined in the Note by the
President of the Security Council dated 16 January of
2016 (S/2016/44). The entity established to facilitate
resolution 2231 (2015) is not a sanctions committee.
It has no right to collect or analyse information and
even less to conduct investigations. Nor does it have
any authority to send requests to Member States for
information, and particularly the kind of information
mentioned in paragraphs 9 and 11 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We will expect that any sections of
the report related to these illegitimate investigations
will not see any further elaboration in the SecretaryGeneral’s next report.
In conclusion, I would like to once again return
to Vienna. What is most important is that there is a
normal diplomatic process under way there. All of us
in this Chamber are professional diplomats. We all
know very well that agreeing on even a single sentence,
not to mention complex, multilayered agreements,
might take several days or more; this is something
that is completely normal. Let us not try to spur the
process forward or put pressure on its participants from
outside. I have no doubt that if the parties demonstrate a
pragmatic and constructive approach aimed at seeking
a balance of interests outcomes that satisfy everyone
will be found.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank the three briefers for their briefings, and I
welcome the presence of the representatives of Iran and
Germany to today’s meeting.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
an agreement that was 10 years in the making and
approved by the Security Council in resolution
2231 (2015), is a major outcome of multilateral
diplomacy. It forms a critical pillar in the international
non-proliferation regime and in peace and stability in
the Middle East. Three years ago, as a result of the
United States being hell bent on withdrawing from the
agreement, the Iranian nuclear issue took a nosedive

S/PV. 8930

for the worse, and the crisis has persisted to this day.
However, that being the case, since April this year,
the parties have started their negotiations on returning
to the agreement in Vienna and have made important
progress, ushering in new opportunities for the United
States and Iran to return to compliance with the JCPOA.
The international community attaches great
importance to the resumption of negotiations on the
Iranian nuclear issue, and it generally expects that
favourable results can be achieved, which in turn will
bring some positivity and new hope to a world that
is currently caught up in so much uncertainty and
instability. The parties must therefore persevere in
their commitment, seize opportunities, show mutual
understanding and accommodation, and meet each
other half way, with a view to moving the negotiations
forward along the right path and with the ultimate goal
of returning to compliance with JCPOA.
In this regard, China wishes to share the following
points. First, there has to be an early decision at the
political level. Dialogue and negotiations are the only
way forward to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. The
parties should remain committed to a political solution,
be engaged in the process with full sincerity, respect each
other’s legitimate rights and reasonable concerns, and
restore the balance between the rights and obligations
set forth in the JCPOA, so as to return to the agreement
in both letter and the spirit. The parties should properly
address the basic issues in relation to the negotiations
and aim for some early gains, which will help maintain
the negotiation process. Furthermore, as to outstanding
issues, it is important to look for and expand consensus
while playing down political differences, demonstrate
diplomatic wisdom, show flexibility and explore
innovative solutions. The parties must not shy away
from taking critical steps with a view to achieving early
results in the negotiations.
Secondly, illegal unilateral sanctions must be lifted.
Having unilaterally withdrawn from the agreement and
continuously applied maximum pressure on Iran, the
United States is the party that started the current Iran
nuclear crisis. It has been very vocal in advocating
the return of multilateralism and diplomacy. The
resumption of negotiations is a litmus test of its attitude.
It goes without saying that the United States should
first and foremost lift all illegal sanctions on Iran and
third parties, and, in return, Iran should resume full
compliance with the agreement.

21-3951815/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

The United States, while expressing his eagerness
to return to negotiations, announced just a day or so
ago, an escalation in its sanctions against Iran. This
move is in contravention of international law and the
basic norms of international relations. It shows a total
disregard for the call from the international community
and is not in any way conducive to advancing the
negotiation process, for which China expresses its
deep concern. We hope that the United States will take
concrete actions to earn the trust of the international
community by demonstrating more sincerity and
flexibility and working harder towards achieving a
timely consensus.
Thirdly, with regard to creating an environment
favourable for negotiations, repeatedly hyping
Iran’s missile launches, exerting pressure through
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
preaching at every turn a plan B in the event of a
failure in negotiations and going so far as to threaten
implementing the Council’ snapback mechanism
serve only to hinder the current negotiation process,
undermine parties’ efforts to preserve the JCPOA and
further complicate the situation involving the Iranian
nuclear issue. Parties must effectively dispense with the
obstacles just mentioned and ensure that negotiations
do not radically veer off into the wrong direction. In
turn, we expect Iran to understand the concerns about
the rapid development of its nuclear capability, maintain
constructive cooperation with the Agency and resolve
outstanding issues as soon as possible.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is the cornerstone of the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and has an important
role to play in preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The collaboration among the United
States, the United Kingdom and Australia on nuclear
submarines involving the transfer of weapons-grade
nuclear material constitutes a serious risk of nuclear
proliferation. It will also negatively affect finding a
political and diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. Such a move, characterized by double standards
that undermine the objectives and the purposes of the
NPT, must be rectified.
Fourthly, with regard to maintaining regional
peace and stability, as long as the Middle East
remains unstable, achieving peace in the world will
remain elusive. Iran’s nuclear issue has a bearing on
the situation in the Middle East. Maintaining the
JCPOA is in essence synonymous with maintaining
16/22

14/12/2021

regional peace and stability. The countries of the
region should subscribe to dialogue and negotiations
to resolve differences, while external countries should
provide constructive assistance in easing regional
tensions, rather than creating antagonism and fuelling
confrontations within the region, much less link issues
of regional security with negotiations on a return to
compliance with the agreement.
The five-point initiative for realizing peace and
stability in the Middle East proposed by Mr. Wang
Yi, State Councilor and Foreign Minister of China,
calls for mutual respect, equity and justice, nuclear
non-proliferation, collective security and accelerated
development cooperation. The proposal reflects China’s
sincere hope and a sense of responsibility for promoting
peace and calm in the Middle East. We stand ready to
continue to engage with the parties on that initiative
and on the regional situation.
The coronavirus disease pandemic continues to
wreak havoc throughout the world, as a result of the
compounded hardships of the pandemic and sanctions.
Iran’s economy and its people’s livelihood have
been seriously affected. In his report (S/2021/995),
the Secretary-General calls on countries to support
arrangements such as the Instrument in Support of
Trade Exchanges and the procurement channel to help
the country fight the pandemic. China shares that view
and has to the best of its ability provided supplies,
including vaccines, to Iran to combat the pandemic. We
will continue to take measures tailored to that end.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a party to the JCPOA, China has been committed
to preserving the effectiveness of the agreement,
maintaining the authority of the Council’s resolutions
and safeguarding the integrity of the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime. Since August,
President Xi Jinping of China has spoken by telephone
with the Heads of State of both Iran and the United
States, respectively, while Mr. Wang Yi, State Councilor
and Foreign Minister of China, has remained in contact
with those countries and has continued to coordinate on
this issue with the parties concerned.
China will continue to practice true multilateralism,
actively participate in the negotiations to return to
the JCPOA and play a constructive role in putting the
JCPOA back in the right direction, while promoting
a political and diplomatic solution to the issue and
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8930

maintaining the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime and peace and stability in the Middle East.

Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and ensure that it
continues unhampered on the ground.

Ms. Nthoki (Kenya): I also thank the
briefers — Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Ambassadors Olof Skoog and Byrne Nason — for their
overview of twelfth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
(S/2021/995), the report of the Joint Commission to
the Security Council on the status of the Procurement
Working Group’s decisions and on any implementation
issues (see S/2021/992) and the twelfth six-month report
of the Facilitator on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/2021/1019). I also
acknowledge the presence of the representatives of the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Germany at this meeting.

We commend bilateral and multilateral initiatives
by neighbouring countries in the region and urge
that they continue to engage constructively to foster
a conducive environment for diplomatic engagement
and the implementation of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015). We encourage Iran to implement fully the
Protocol Additional to the Agreement between Iran
and the IAEA for the Application of Safeguards and
voluntary transparency and implementation measures
with the IAEA as before. That includes Iran taking
ownership of, and committing to, the JCPOA provisions
through non-violation and refraining from further
acting on irreversible measures it has undertaken.

Kenya reaffirms that global nuclear disarmament
and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons constitute
the core guarantee against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons. We view the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015) as
critical multilateral achievements and mechanisms in
the area of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.

Let me reiterate that adherence to the provisions
of the JCPOA and agreed mechanisms by all parties is
a critical first step that will further enhance trust and
build confidence among all parties and neighbouring
States for the long-term stability of the Middle
East region.

The decision by the United States Government
to reaffirm the measures and provisions contained
in resolution 2231 (2015) early this year and the
engagement of both the United States and the Islamic
Republic of Iran in ongoing negotiations are all
important positive steps towards the full and effective
implementation of the Plan and the resolution. We
are closely following the renewed diplomatic talks in
Vienna, which are currently in their seventh-round.
We urge all participants to continue engaging with a
spirit of purpose and needed compromise to bring the
agreement back to life without further delay.
We are all hoping for an outcome that will further
enhance non-proliferation efforts in the Middle East
and an outcome that will: first, provide a clear and
practical road map within the current imperatives;
secondly, outline the steps needed for the United States
and the Islamic Republic of Iran to return to the full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015); thirdly, ensure that all parties adhere to
their commitments under the 2015 Iran nuclear deal,
including the lifting of additional sanctions and all
retaliatory measures, which are in violation of the
principles and procedures laid out in the JCPOA;
and, lastly, safeguard the equipment and important
verification and monitoring work of the International

Resolution 2231 (2015) notes that the political and
diplomatic efforts that went into the establishment of
the JCPOA were geared to, inter alia, ensuring the
economic and technological development of Iran in the
area of peaceful nuclear activities. We therefore urge that
the Joint Commission remain committed to upholding
the integrity, transparency and confidence-building
approach of the procurement channel to enable the
continuation of trade with the Islamic Republic of Iran
and relevant transfers within the JCPOA framework.
In conclusion, I urge that the Council’s engagement
with the non-proliferation agenda go hand in hand in
encouraging efforts in strengthening the peaceful
application of nuclear technology in industrial
development projects for the benefit of the Iranian
people and the holistic, political and economic stability
of the subregion.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Ambassadors Skoog
and Byrne Nason for their briefings.
Estonia remains strongly committed to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Its
full restoration and implementation remain the best
possible option to uphold the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon
and eventually bring greater security to the region and

21-3951817/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

the world. We therefore welcome the resumption of
dialogue and negotiations in Vienna towards restoring
and preserving the agreement. We very much hope
that the coming weeks will bring positive progress.
Any further delays or unconstructive engagement risk
undermining the viability of the JCPOA and its ability
to ensure that the Iranian nuclear programme remains
exclusively peaceful.
We echo the call of the Secretary-General to build
on the work already accomplished in previous rounds of
diplomatic engagements and avoid any further nuclear
provocations. Estonia is deeply concerned that, since
2019, Iran has continued to reduce the implementation
of its nuclear nuclear-related commitments under the
JCPOA. The level of uranium enrichment that Iran has
undertaken, together with its research and development
activities related to uranium metal production, has no
plausible civilian justification.
Some of those activities have permanently and
irreversibly improved Iran’s nuclear capabilities,
exposing the international community to significant
nuclear proliferation risks and undermining regional as
well as international peace and security. We call on Iran
to return to compliance with its nuclear commitments
under the JCPOA, without delay.
Estonia commends the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, its dedication and its efforts
to continue its monitoring and verification work in
Iran. We regret that already for nine months Iran has
suspended transparency and verification measures
under the JCPOA and under the Additional Protocol,
thereby considerably limiting the Agency’s ability to
fulfil its mandate under resolution 2231 (2015). Iran’s
failure to allow the Agency’s full monitoring activities
contributes to concerns that Iran could be using its
equipment for malign purposes. It further disrupts the
IAEA’s efforts to ensure the continuity of knowledge of
Iran’s nuclear programme.
Estonia remains gravely concerned by Iran’s
developing and testing of nuclear-capable ballistic
missiles and related technologies. Those activities are
inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution
2231 (2015) and are destabilizing for regional security.
Estonia further calls on Iran not to transfer any missiles
or missile components, missile technology or unmanned
aerial vehicle systems to non-State actors.
The prospect of restoring the JCPOA is still within
reach. We call on the parties to show strong political
18/22

14/12/2021

will and flexibility and to engage in good-faith efforts
to determine the steps necessary for both the United
States and Iran to return to compliance with the accord.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.
Allow me first and foremost to welcome the
convening of this briefing to consider the twelfth report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2021/995). I
wish to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs;
Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason, Permanent Representative
of Ireland, in her capacity as Facilitator; and Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, in his capacity as Coordinator of
the Joint Commission to the Security Council, for their
outstanding briefings. I also welcome the participation
of the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Germany in this meeting.
My delegation takes note of the conclusions and
recommendations contained in the twelfth report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) and calls on Member States and all parties
to the agreement to comply with the obligations that
they have undertaken. In that regard, the Niger reaffirms
its attachment to the full implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), by which the Council approved in 2015 the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the
Iranian nuclear programme. My delegation welcomes
the diplomatic efforts within and around the Joint
Commission that took place between April and June
as well as the resumption of diplomatic efforts from
29 November in Vienna that are aimed at ensuring
the return of the United States to the JCPOA, with a
view to revitalizing the agreement and ensuring its full
implementation by all parties in full transparency.
The procurement track continues to be an
essential mechanism for transparency and for
confidence-building, ensuring that the transfer of
dual-use nuclear materials and other related materials
to the Islamic Republic of Iran is in conformity with
resolution 2231 (2015) and the provisions and goals of
the JCPOA. That is why my delegation calls on the States
that are currently not parties to the JCPOA to refrain
from taking measures that would impede the capacity
of the remaining parties to fulfil their obligations. We
also call on all the parties to the JCPOA, Member States
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8930

and the relevant sectors to support and to fully use this
channel. It is important to stress the importance of the
full and effective implementation of the JCPOA by all
parties, as was reiterated at the ministerial meeting that
took place virtually on 21 December 2020 and that was
chaired by the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.

verifiable implementation of the JCPOA — no more,
no less. Attempts to link the implementation of the
JCPOA to extraneous issues or to raise ideas such as the
renegotiation of the JCPOA to expand its scope, extend
its timelines or make proposals along the lines of “more
for more” or “less for less” are totally unacceptable and
doomed to fail.

The expiration on 24 June of the temporary bilateral
technical understanding, concluded on 24 May between
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran,
and its non-renewal, are a source of anxiety and concern
and a setback for the mechanism of monitoring of the
Iranian nuclear programme activities. My delegation
would ask the authorities of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to consider the request for extension by the IAEA,
including regarding the collection and uninterrupted
storing of data by its control and surveillance equipment,
and to allow the Agency to continue its work.

Let us refresh our memory with a flashback to
the underlying causes of the current situation. The
JCPOA is founded on two pillars: Iran’s nuclear-related
commitments and the reciprocal commitments for the
lifting of sanctions by the United Nations, the European
Union and the United States of America against Iran,
as well as the promotion of normal economic and trade
relations with our country. All those commitments are
meticulously worded and explained in detail in the
JCPOA and in resolution 2231 (2015). In accordance
with the JCPOA, other parties are committed “to ensure
Iran’s access in areas of trade, technology, finance and
energy”. Specifically, the United States, in addition to
its obligation to lift sanctions against Iran, is explicitly
committed

In conclusion, my delegation remains concerned
about the current tensions in the Persian Gulf region and
reiterates the Secretary-General’s appeal for an easing,
on humanitarian grounds, of all unilateral economic
measures that could prevent Iran from mobilizing the
necessary resources to confront sanitary difficulties
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Such a
gesture of flexibility could have the additional benefit of
contributing to nudging along certain positions during
the negotiations under way. Establishing a climate of
trust among parties is essential for the continuation and
the successful conclusion of negotiations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
It is heartening that today the Council once again
is expressing its consistent position that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) must be
restored and implemented in full. That, however, can be
realized only if all necessary conditions are met in real
terms. Make no mistake — we are not imposing any
preconditions or new conditions. We are talking about
the same conditions that are embedded in the JPOA
and in resolution 2231 (2015), the same conditions that
form the very foundations of the JCPOA and the same
conditions that resulted in reciprocal commitments of the
parties to the JCPOA. Without full satisfaction of those
conditions, the accord is useless to the Iranian people.
We therefore call for the full, timely, unconditional and

“to make best efforts in good faith to sustain
this JCPOA and to prevent interference with
the realization of the full benefit by Iran of the
sanctions lifting”.
The fact is that we have been completely deprived
of our rights and benefits under the JCPOA for almost
four years. Now, certain States try to deceptively portray
our insistence on the full and verifiable restoration of
our rights as an unconstructive and inflexible position.
At the same time they are dead silent about the
unlawful and inhumane sanctions of the United States,
which by any measure represent an all-out economic
war against Iran, aimed at collectively punishing an
entire nation, targeting the most vulnerable people the
most, harming the poor more than the rich, the ill more
than the healthy, and infants and children more than
adults. Those acts are indeed equivalent to economic
terrorism. In that regard the Special Rapporteur on
the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on
the enjoyment of human rights calls the United States
sanctions unjust and harmful, destroying the economy
and currency of Iran, driving millions of people into
poverty and making imported goods unaffordable,
including urgently needed humanitarian goods.
The United States has committed multiple cases of
significant non-performance under the JCPOA and still

21-3951819/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

is in continuous, systematic material breach of its legal
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015), the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. It is also
in defiance of the unanimous order of the International
Court of Justice of 3 October 2018, requiring the
United States to remove impediments to humanitarian
trade with Iran. As a result of such gross violations of
international law, the scope and extent of the damage
to the Iranian people and economy are severe, resulting
in the loss of many lives, as well as vast and serious
disruption to our economy. The United States has also
exerted unprecedented pressures on other States to
either not implement their obligations under resolution
2231 (2015) or face punishment. That is unprecedented
in the Security Council’s history. While we have taken
certain remedial measures in accordance with the
JCPOA to re-establish some balance in the reciprocal
commitments and benefits under the accord, certain
States refer with much fanfare to Iran’s remedial
measures, as if to suggest that it was Iran that withdrew
from the JCPOA and introduced countless inhuman
sanctions with the publicly declared objective of
starving an entire nation.
They also make a hue and cry about all our current
peaceful nuclear activities, as if Iran had violated its
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Yet, those parties are silent
about the repeated terrorist attacks and disruptive
measures of the Israeli regime against our peaceful
nuclear programme. We reiterate once more that our
measures are remedial in nature and are taken in full
conformity with our obligations under the NPT and our
safeguards agreement. Moreover, they are in line with
our rights under paragraphs 26 and 36 of the JCPOA,
according to which, in case of
“a re-introduction or re-imposition of the sanctions
[…], or such an imposition of new nuclear-related
sanctions, [Iran will have the right] to cease
performing its commitments under this JCPOA in
whole or in part”.
More importantly, our steps are completely
reversible. We are continuing our remedial measures
concurrently with the Vienna talks because the
non-performance of obligations by other parties
continues. Sanctions are still in full force, a maximum
pressure policy is still being pursued, and the sufferings
of our people still persist. Nevertheless, as soon as
other parties implement all their obligations in a full,
20/22

14/12/2021

effective and verifiable manner, Iran will immediately
reverse its measures in full.
Conversely, the sufferings of our people due to the
non-performance by other parties of their obligations,
particularly those resulting from the re-imposition of
the illegal sanctions of the United States, are almost
absolutely irreversible. How can one restore the
precious lives lost because of the inhuman sanctions of
the United States? How can one bring back to life those
lost due to the weaponization of humanitarian goods?
How can one revive the lives of innocent children who
perish because the United States has opted to prevent
their access to the most essential medicines?
Bearing in mind those realities, we insist on the
effective removal of all sanctions at once and in a
verifiable manner. The way that the United States has
treated its international obligations has necessitated
such an approach because in international law, the
implementation of agreements is first and foremost
founded on the principle of pacta sunt servanda.
Its simple meaning is that the agreement must be
kept. That is the oldest universally agreed principle
of international law and is fundamental to all legal
systems. That principle has been flagrantly violated
with respect to the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
As a result, an entire nation has been subjected to the
most comprehensive and repressive coercive political,
economic and financial measures ever imposed on
a country.
When such a customary and fundamental principle
of international law is mocked, trampled upon and
violated, no nation trusts the culprit. Nor do we.
Therefore, the provision of verifiable and objective
guarantees that the delicate balance of commitments
will not be torpedoed any longer, that the obligations
will not be violated again, that sanctions will not be
re-imposed under other pretexts or designations — as
took place during the previous Administration of the
United States — and that the JCPOA mechanisms will
not be abused is absolutely necessary. Those are the
minimum requirements for relative certainty about the
sustainability of the deal.
We cannot and will not allow our economy and
the daily economic life of our people be taken hostage
through non-compliance by other parties to their
commitments once more. We entered into negotiations
and agreed the JCPOA’s conclusion with good will. We
implemented our commitments with good will. And, in
21-39518

14/12/2021

Non-proliferation

the aftermath of the withdrawal of the United States,
we provided enough time, with good will, for that
country to remain a JCPOA participant to shoulder its
responsibilities. Only after one year did we take certain
remedial measures even though, based on the JCPOA,
Iran was entitled to exercise such right immediately after
the unlawful withdrawal of the United States therefrom.
Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme has been under
the most robust and intrusive nuclear verification
monitoring and transparency measures ever conducted
in a country during the history of non-proliferation. Since
the establishment of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), no country has ever been inspected so
thoroughly. The implementation of our commitments
has been verified by the IAEA, as reflected in its 15
consecutive reports. After the withdrawal of the United
States, Iran exercised maximum restraint and paid a
heavy price to preserve the JCPOA. Therefore, asking
for objective and verifiable guarantees from the party
responsible for the whole mess before us is absolutely
warranted and necessary. Iran has done much more
than its fair share to preserve the JCPOA and those who
have violated their commitments under the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015) since implementation day quite
naturally bear more responsibility to revive it. They
cannot play victim and blame Iran. If the other sides
have the genuine political will to revive the JCPOA,
they must be courageous enough to accept full, effective
and verifiable implementation of all their obligations
agreed upon under the JCPOA in 2015.
Concerning paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution
2231 (2015), we once again reject attempts to make
arbitrary and distorted interpretations of that paragraph
to deceptively establish a link between it and the
launches by Iran of ballistic missiles and space-launch
vehicles. According to the detailed technical and
legal reasoning that we have made in our numerous
letters to the Council’s President, the launches of
ballistic missiles and space-launch vehicles by Iran are
completely outside of the purview of resolution 2231
(2015). Developing a conventional missile programme is
an inherent right under international law and is neither
prohibited nor limited by resolution 2231 (2015). We will
continue our activities related to ballistic missiles and
space-launched vehicles, both of which are necessary
to ensuring our security and socioeconomic interests.
Allow me to conclude by stressing that the current
Vienna talks can succeed, not by engaging in blame
games, not by setting artificial deadlines, not by

S/PV. 8930

introducing threats and intimidation, not by raising
unfounded accusations or disinformation campaigns,
and not by permitting sabotage, disruptive or terrorist
activities in Iran, but only by engaging in negotiations
with genuine political will and in good faith, and by
sticking to one principle: the full, effective and verifiable
implementation by all sides of all commitments under
the JCPOA — nothing more and nothing less. That is
the most pragmatic and easily achievable solution at the
earliest time. There is no magic solution.
Iran is determined to make every effort to restore
the JCPOA as is. To that end, our proposals put forward
in Vienna are in full conformity with the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015). We have demonstrated our
genuine political will, seriousness and constructive
engagement with our interlocutors to arrive at a good
agreement as soon as possible. Now, it is time for the
other side to prove that they are genuinely willing to
accept and implement, effectively and in good faith, all
the JCPOA commitments.
Our observations on the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/995) are contained in my letter dated
10 December to the Secretary-General, covering
our views on issues that I have not addressed in my
remarks today.
Lastly, I would like to say a few words about what
was said this afternoon concerning our region. Iran’s
foreign policy is based on full respect for international
law, mutual respect, good-neighbourliness, cooperation
and dialogue, as well as the maintenance of regional
peace and security through the active participation of
all regional States. We are determined to pursue this
policy in good faith. Our recent approach towards our
neighbourhood arises from our strong conviction that
the regional countries should join hands to resolve
their differences amicably, not allowing those who
have come to this region from thousands of miles away
only to sow the seeds of discord among the countries
of the region. An important source of insecurity and
instability in our region is the massive United States
military build-up, which has turned the region into the
highest concentration of foreign military installations in
the world. Our region’s other source of insecurity is the
massive United States arms export thereto. According
to the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, from 2016 to 2020 almost half of the arms
exports of the United States, the largest arms exporter
globally, went to the Middle East. The United States is
not the only culprit here. Certain European countries

21-3951821/22

S/PV.8930

Non-proliferation

also export deadly weapons to regional countries. That
policy of Western countries has turned our region into
a powder keg.
Furthermore, the terrorist acts of the United
States have created an atmosphere of instability and
insecurity in our region. A clear example is the heinous
assassination of Major General Qasem Soleimani and
his companions in Iraq in early 2020 in a terrorist
attack committed at the direct order of the United
States President. It is ironic that the United States and
some European countries are now accusing Iran of
destabilizing behaviour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Let me first echo
previous speakers by thanking all three briefers not only
for today’s interventions, but also for their continuing
support to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). We also welcome the support expressed by
the Secretary-General for the Vienna talks and for our
efforts to restore the JCPOA.
Despite all the difficulties encountered, we still
believe that restoring the JCPOA is both urgently
required and possible. Unfortunately, we have not been
able to move closer to this goal since the last Security
Council meeting on this issue, in June (see S/PV.8811).
On the contrary, during the past six months, Iran has
further escalated its nuclear programme by taking
extremely far-reaching steps that are incompatible
with its commitments under the JCPOA, some of
which also do not have plausible civilian use. Those
worrying steps include the development and use of
advanced centrifuges way beyond JCPOA limits,
uranium enrichment of up to 60 per cent, evergrowing stockpiles of enriched uranium, and ongoing
research and development activities on uranium metal
production, including enriched uranium metal.
Another point of great concern is lack of
transparency. The International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) plays a vital role in monitoring and
verifying Iran’s nuclear-related commitments. The
Agency’s mandate is enshrined in resolution 2231
(2015) and serves the goal of ensuring the continuity
of knowledge about the peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme. To our deep concern, Iran has

22/22

14/12/2021

curtailed monitoring activities by the Agency. We
strongly support the IAEA’s continued efforts to keep
up the continuity of knowledge, and we urge Iran to
fully cooperate with the IAEA and to restore JCPOA
monitoring and transparency measures in full.
I echo the sentiments expressed by my E3
colleagues. We are at a crossroads. If Iran engages
seriously in the diplomatic process, a good deal for Iran
and for all of us can be reached rapidly. If Iran does
not engage constructively, crisis will be inevitable and
will be costly for us all. We do not want this outcome,
which is no more in our interest or in the interest of
the international community than it is in the Iranian
interest. It is also entirely avoidable, but the window of
opportunity is closing rapidly.
Turning to annex B of the resolution, let me reiterate
our well-known position. We continue to consider
Iran’s development of ballistic missiles designed to
deliver a nuclear weapon, including launches using
such ballistic missile technology, as inconsistent with
paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015). We
are very concerned about Iran’s development of relevant
ballistic missile types and continued tests. Clearly, such
activities are not conducive to fostering stability and
security in the region. Moreover, we reaffirm the need
to ensure compliance by all States, in particular Iran,
with the prohibition of transfers of Missile Technology
Control Regime-listed items to and from Iran, as stated
in paragraph 4 of annex B. The delivery of missile
technology to non-State actors is destabilizing the
region and must end immediately.
Let me finish by noting the following. The Security
Council has again reached a level of unity rarely seen
on resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. Almost all of
us here have stressed again the huge importance of the
JCPOA as a key contribution to the non-proliferation
and security architecture in the region and beyond.
We will do everything in our power to see the JCPOA
talks in Vienna succeed, and we count on all parties to
return with a mandate suitable to putting that important
agreement fully back in place.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

21-39518
