V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commitke

the purpose of implementation and follow-up of the Substantial New Programme of Action, taking into account. in
particular, the mid-term global review:
11. Requests the Secretary-General to obtain extrabudgetary resources to ensure effective participation of the
representatives of the least developed countries, through
provision of necessary resources to finance travel expenses
of at least two representatives from each least developed
country to attend the high-level Meeting on the mid-term
global review of the implementation of the Substantial
New Programme of Action and one representative from
each least developed country to attend the meeting referred to in paragraph 6 above;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
high-level Meeting on the mid-term global review and on
the implementation of the present resolution.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December I 984

39/175. Immediate measures in favour of the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment ofa New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation,
Reaffirming its resolution 38/200 of 20 December 1983,
Gravely concerned that the immediate measures referred
to in resolution 38/200 are far from being implemented
fully and that the critical problems facing developing
countries in areas identified in that resolution still exist
and in many cases have worsened further, particularly in
Africa,
l. Calls upon all Governments, in particular those of
developed countries, to adopt and intensify measures
aimed at the full implementation of General Assembly resolution 38/200 and to fulfil, as a matter of urgency, the
existing international commitments in the areas identified
in that resolution;
2. Requests the relevant organs. organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to intensify their
efforts to develop specific proposals and expedite actions
for the implementation of resolution 38/200;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the heads of organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, to follow up on the actions taken
by the agencies and to submit a report on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/176. Development of the energy resources of
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
58See E/1983/91 and Corr.I. A138'5lc and A 1-9·4211 and (orr.1

13S

Order. contained in its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202
(S-Vl) of I May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States. contained in its resolution 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974. Its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September I 975 on development and international economic co-operation. and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980.
Recalling its resolutions 37/251 of 21 December 1982
and 3g: I 51 of 19 December 1983,
Considering that the principal impediments to the realization of the indigenous energy potential of the developing
countries are, in addition to inadequate exploration, the
scarcity of financial resources, insufficient exploration
data. inadequate access to technology and a shortage of
skills.
Reaffirming the principle of the full and permanent sovereignty of each State o~·er its natural resources,
Reaffirming also that effective and urgent measures need
to be taken by the international community to assist and
support the efforts of the developing countries, in particular the energy-deficient among them, for developing their
energy resources, in order to meet their needs through cooperation, assistance and investment in the field of conventional and of new and renewable sources of energy,
consistent with their national plans and priorities, as called
for in the International Development Strategy,
I. Reaffirms its resolution 381151 and calls for the
immediate and effective implementation of all its provis10 ns:

2. Requests the Secretary-General to improve further
and update the contents of his report on the development
of the energy resources of the developing countries 58 and,
in so doing, to consider all sources of energy, including
new and renewable sources of energy, in a balanced and
integrated manner and to submit a consolidated and comprehensive report to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session;
3. Urges, in this connection, early consideration of
possible avenues that would increase energy financing,
including, inter alia, the mechanisms being examined by
the World Bank, such as an energy affiliate, and calls upon
Member States to take appropriate measures to this end in
the relevant forums:
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the organs and organizations of the United Nations system. to promote international co-operation for the development of internal technological and other capabilities in
developing countries in order to achieve the development
of their energy resources:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its fortieth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution and to
include in that report the results of symposia and similar
undertakings in support of efforts by developing countries
for the exploration and development of their energy
resources.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December l 984
