S/PV.7582

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7582nd meeting

Tuesday, 15 December 2015, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power/Mr. Pressman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-42787 (E)
*1542787*

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: Each time I appear before the
Security Council to brief its members on judicial
developments at the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and to update its members on the activities of my
Office with respect to the situation in Darfur, I wish I
could declare that at last the victims of the protracted
and incessant conflict in Darfur will soon see justice
and that persons alleged to be responsible for Rome
Statute crimes in Darfur will soon be held accountable
before the Court. Unfortunately, the reality is that the
individuals against whom the ICC arrest warrants have
been issued remain at large.
Ten years have elapsed since the Council concluded
that the situation in Darfur, Sudan, constituted a threat
to international peace and security. It was on that basis
that the Council decided to refer the Darfur situation to
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court so that those
alleged to be responsible for Rome Statute crimes may
be investigated and prosecuted. As recently as 29 June,
in resolution 2228 (2015) the Council reiterated yet
again, as it has done in so many of its previous
resolutions, that the situation in the Sudan constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. Starting with
resolution 1593 (2005), each of the resolutions adopted
by the Council has represented the hope that the victims
of grave crimes allegedly committed in Darfur will not
be forgotten, that those responsible for their suffering
will be held accountable and that peace and tranquillity
will return to their lives, families and communities.

2/18

15/12/2015

I observe with great regret that the adoption of each
resolution has, in practical terms, amounted to no more
than an empty promise. Year after year, victims’ hopes
and aspirations for justice and a durable peace have been
dashed. Instead, the people of Darfur have continued to
endure desolation, alleged gross violations of human
rights, indiscriminate killings, mass rape and sexual
abuse, while the individuals against whom ICC arrest
warrants have been issued and who may be implicated
in those crimes continue to evade justice. Countless
victims have been demoralized. After all, who can
blame them when attaining justice appears so remote,
not least because of the absence of adequate follow-up
and support from the Council? Their frustration and
resignation in the face of inaction must weigh heavily
on our collective conscience.
My Office’s numerous reports to the Council over
the years must offer little, if any, solace to victims of
atrocity crimes in Darfur. Despite my repeated requests
for the Council to take action with respect to the Sudan’s
blatant disregard of its obligations, and in violation
of this Council’s resolutions, my appeals continue to
be unheeded. As my Office’s reports have indicated,
Mr. Al-Bashir is not only a fugitive from justice who
continues to travel across international borders, but he
also harbours other fugitives and refuses to facilitate
their surrender and transfer to the ICC to be tried.
My Office, and indeed the Court as a whole, do
not have powers of arrest. Those powers rest with
States. In the case of the Sudan, the Council, which
referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC, has
important responsibilities to ensure that States uphold
their obligations. I can only reiterate my appeals to
the Council to take appropriate measures within its
powers to ensure that all Darfur situation fugitives are
apprehended and brought to justice for the sake of the
victims.
Today, my message to the victims in Darfur is clear
and unequivocal — we shall not stop our work and we
shall not despair. My Office remains firmly committed
to its legal mandate with respect to Darfur, Sudan.
We will also continue our principled approach and
will repeatedly call upon the Council to more robustly
support our work. Victims of atrocity crimes in Darfur
should rest assured that the cases against the Sudan
suspects are far from over. Contrary to the misinformed
belief that investigations in Darfur have been closed,
a team of committed lawyers and investigators from
my Office is continuing with its work of interviewing

15-42787

15/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

witnesses, collecting documentary evidence and
seeking information from relevant sources. My team is
also continuously reviewing the evidence and following
leads. In short, notwithstanding the challenges present,
we are doing everything we can within our mandate and
means. Our resolve to fully meet our mandate vis-à-vis
Darfur remains unshaken. Let me be clear that the
arrest warrants against all Sudanese fugitives remain
in full force and effect, and my Office will continue its
efforts to do everything feasible within its powers to
press for their arrest and surrender.
The victims of Darfur will no longer find solace
in our words. They deserve tangible justice, and they
deserve to see that justice is being done. What is
required is concrete and joint action by the Council, the
States and the Court to achieve real progress. Without
arrest and surrender, the Council will not be able to
deliver on the promise to hold accountable those alleged
to be responsible for committing Rome Statute crimes
in Darfur, neither will it be able to facilitate sustainable
peace and security in the Sudan.
Whether it be in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda or
Sierra Leone, the Council has repeatedly demonstrated
that where there has been widespread commission of
atrocity crimes against thousands of victims, peace and
reconciliation cannot be fully achieved unless and until
those responsible for the crimes are held accountable.
The same rationale applies to Darfur. The criminal
justice process that commenced with the Court’s
issuance of arrest warrants against Mr. Al-Bashir and
other suspects in the situation must be adequately
supported.
I must also emphasize that my Office’s ability to
effectively and fully discharge the mandate the Council
entrusted to it is hampered by lack of resources. The
level of investigative activities in Darfur is necessarily
a function of capacity and resource constraints. I have
stressed similar concerns in various other contexts,
including in my most recent briefing (see S/PV.7549)
before the Council last month. I take this opportunity
to once again recall the provisions of article 115(b) of
the Rome Statute in accordance with which funds of
the Court may be provided by the United Nations, in
particular in relation to the expenses incurred due to
referrals by the Council. The situation in Darfur is one
such referral, and it is incumbent upon the Council to
help support and devise innovative ways of providing
the much needed resources for my Office’s investigative
activities.

S/PV.7582

Victims of Darfur have been let down for far too
long. If I may be so bold, the Council must do more
to demonstrate its commitment to Darfur, Sudan.
It must confidently play its part in facilitating the
arrest of suspects against whom the Court has issued
warrants of arrest. It must act concretely on the Court’s
non-compliance communications. In that regard, I
thank the Council members who are tirelessly working
to ensure that communications from the Court receive
the attention they deserve by the Council. Ultimately,
this body must recognize its crucial role vis-à-vis those
States, including the Sudan, that have been found to be
in non-compliance by the Court and fully assume its
responsibilities to advance the objectives of the Rome
Statute.
I conclude my remarks this morning by making
the following observation. The interplay between the
Court and the Council is entrenched in the founding
treaty of the ICC, and hence is here to stay. It is
reasonable to expect that with time and increased
inter-institutional interaction, the burgeoning relations
between those two important institutions will develop
further and evolve. I encourage regular exchanges
with the Council, independent of the situation-related
periodic briefings, so that we may jointly brainstorm
and address inter-institutional matters regarding how
to strengthen the support and working methods of the
Council in relation to the ICC, building on a similar
and most helpful initiative organized in October 2014
under the presidency of Argentina. More opportunities
for dialogue and exchange of views between the Court
and the Council will be conducive to generating ideas
and practical solutions, enabling the Council to more
effectively respond to ICC-related matters.
Ending impunity for the world’s most destabilizing
and gravest crimes is not the prerogative of one
single institution. It is a collective responsibility with
humankind as a whole as its beneficiary. The Council’s
tangible, consistent and principled support for the Court
will be an important factor for not only the maintenance
of international peace and security, but also the cause
of international criminal justice in this new century.
Indeed, the former is in many ways contingent on the
latter.
As detailed in my report, terrible crimes allegedly
continue to be perpetrated in Darfur. Only strong and
committed action by the Council and States will stop the
commission of grave crimes in Darfur and ensure that
the perpetrators of past crimes are held accountable.

15-427873/18

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

History will surely stand witness to the tenacity of our
will and ability to deliver on our respective obligations.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing and all her important work.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom thanks the Prosecutor for her twenty-second
report to the Security Council and for her briefing
today.
The United Kingdom shares the Prosecutor’s
concern regarding the situation in Darfur and calls on all
sides to reach a political solution. In June, in resolution
2228 (2015), the Council was deeply concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation,
but as the Prosecutor’s report notes, there are continued
reports of aerial bombardments, inter-tribal clashes,
widespread allegations of serious sexual violence
against women and gender-based crimes, forced
displacement and militant settlers. We are particularly
concerned by reports of attacks on civilians by the
Rapid Support Forces. Civilians are bearing the brunt
and we call on all parties to refrain from violence
against civilians and to end abuses and violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
The United Kingdom is also concerned by reports
of abductions and attacks on humanitarian and aid
workers and peacekeepers. Such attacks must cease and
the perpetrators be held to account. It is also essential
to ensure unfettered humanitarian access.
The United Kingdom regrets that the four persons
subject to arrest warrants not only remain at large in
the Sudan, but also continue to occupy high-ranking
positions in the Government of the Sudan. The United
Kingdom calls on the Government of the Sudan, which
bears primary responsibility for implementing the
warrants, to arrest and surrender those individuals to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), in accordance
with its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
The United Kingdom is also disappointed that
President Al-Bashir continues to travel regularly across
international borders to States both in Africa and
beyond. We call on all States, whether or not they are
ICC States parties, to cooperate fully with the Court in
respect to President Al-Bashir and all Sudanese persons
against whom arrest warrants are in force. States
parties, of course, have a legal operation to cooperate
under the Rome Statute. In that respect, we note the

4/18

15/12/2015

ongoing judicial proceedings in South Africa and the
Court regarding the events surrounding President
Al-Bashir’s attendance at the African Union summit
in June and the Pre-Trial Chamber’s request for South
Africa to submit its views for the purpose of the ICC
proceedings. But it is important that all States support
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).
The United Kingdom regrets the lack of response
from the Sudan on the execution of the arrest warrant
against Mr. Banda, and we note the subsequent
non-compliance decision, dated 19 November 2015,
which will be transmitted to the Council. The fact
that that is the eleventh finding of non-cooperation
communicated to the Council, and the fourth in respect
to the Sudan, is extremely concerning. We urge the
Council to take effective follow-up action in relation to
non-cooperation so as to ensure that the Court is able
to fulfil the mandate that we have given it to refer the
situation in Darfur.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Prosecutor’s
affirmation that, despite those difficulties, her Office
has not abandoned its investigations and continues to
expend all efforts to obtain the necessary assistance
from States to execute the outstanding warrants and
investigate alleged crimes committed in Darfur. We
welcome the various investigative steps taken by the
lawyers and investigators assigned to the Darfur
cases and the monitoring of allegations of ongoing
crimes. While recognizing the Court’s resource
constraints — which, in part, reflect the resource
constraints of States parties — the United Kingdom
urges the Court to continue its work in improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of judicial proceedings
in order to make the most of the resources available.
We fully support the efforts of the Prosecutor and her
Office to ensure that the perpetrators of those terrible
crimes are held to account and to end the climate of
impunity.
Mr. Delattre (France): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her twenty-second report and her
briefing. Ms. Bensouda reminds us again, more than
10 years after the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
that civilians in Darfur remain the targets of violence,
in particular at the hand of the Government, and that
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) is not fully able to exercise its
mandate to protect civilians.

15-42787

15/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We share the concerns highlighted once again in the
Prosecutor’s report, which reflect those expressed by
the Council in resolutions 2173 (2014) and 2228 (2015).
Those include the ongoing deterioration of the security
situation in Darfur; the ongoing aerial bombing carried
out by the Sudanese Air Force, resulting in direct and
indirect civilian casualties; the ongoing clashes among
tribes caused by obstructed access to natural resources;
the prosecution of the crimes of rape and sexual
violence in which the Government’s armed forces might
be involved; the ongoing forced displacement resulting
from the continued violence and military escalation;
the arrest of political opponents and threats and
attacks against humanitarian personnel; the numerous
obstacles to the delivery of assistance to civilians by
humanitarian organizations and to the implementation
of the UNAMID mandate; and lastly, the apparently new
factor of a mass influx of non-Sudanese populations.
As Ms. Bensouda has also recalled, the arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
over 10 years ago have still not been executed. Five
individuals have been indicted for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and, in one case, the crime of genocide,
and continue to evade the jurisdiction of the Court. For
the most part, they continue to occupy senior positions
in the State apparatus of the Sudan. Such a situation of
impunity only encourages the continuation of atrocities
and, as Ms. Bensouda reminds us, undermines the
credibility of international criminal justice.
The Council has long known how to respond to the
situation. Halting those numerous forms of violence
and crime involves, in particular, the following
five components. First, it involves concluding and
implementing a political solution that involves the
Government and the rebel groups. On that account,
we regret that the latest national pre-dialogue meeting,
held in Addis Ababa several weeks ago, did not lead
to substantial progress. Efforts must be pursued to end
the hostilities, which must facilitate a comprehensive
political solution, as envisaged by the African Union
Peace and Security Council. That is a precondition for
a lasting settlement to the crises in the Sudan.
Secondly, it involves the effective protection of
civilians and full cooperation on the part of the Sudanese
authorities in allowing UNAMID to implement its
mandate. The ongoing violence and absence of security
prevent any prospect of stabilization and long-term
reconstruction. The human consequences of the crisis
remain exceptionally serious, while the Sudan has more

S/PV.7582

than 2.6 million long-term internally displaced persons
and violence against civilians — especially against
women — and looting persist.
Thirdly, it requires unhindered humanitarian
access to civilian and displaced populations. In that
regard, we regret that UNAMID remains subject to
restrictions in its access and the ongoing target of
attacks and harassment. It is essential that it be ensured
free and unrestricted access throughout all of Darfur.
Fourthly, it involves prosecuting the perpetrators
of crimes and an effective campaign against impunity.
As the Prosecutor noted, the Sudan, which is bound
to cooperate with the Court and fight impunity, has
taken no action to prosecute the responsible parties
for crimes committed in Darfur. On 19 November, the
Court issued a new decision on non-cooperation on
the part of the Sudan with regard to the Banda case.
That is the eleventh time that the Court has noted a lack
of cooperation. It is also appropriate to recall that the
States parties to the Rome Statute have a key role to
play with regard to their obligation to cooperate with
the ICC and to execute its arrest warrants when the
individuals subject to them are within their territory.
Fifthly, it requies limited contacts between persons
subject to arrest warrants and those who are deemed
to be essential, in line with the Secretary-General’s
policy. France calls upon the United Nations as a whole
to apply those directives and implement the relevant
provisions of resolution 1593 (2005). In that context, the
Council must act on two fronts. First, it must encourage
parties to end all violence against civilians. That means
that all members of the Council must acknowledge the
ongoing deterioration of the situation of civilians, noted
once again in the Prosecutor’s report. It also requires
UNAMID to be fully able to carry out its mandate,
including by ensuring its complete and unhindered
freedom of movement.
We also need to make cooperation with the
International Criminal Court effective and ensure that
it is able to execute arrest warrants, which is necessary
in order for the Court to carry out its mandate. It is
the Council’s responsibility to respond to cases of
non-cooperation that the Court brings to its attention
and to that of the Assembly of States Parties, as
recalled in its resolution of 26 November. International
organizations must also remain mobilized with regard
to cases of non-cooperation with the International
Criminal Court.

15-427875/18

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, I welcome
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), and thank her for her briefing.
Nigeria takes due note of the twenty-second report
of the Prosecutor, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005),
and the judicial activities undertaken by the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor over the past six months.
According to the report, the Office of the Prosecutor
is currently monitoring several trends in Darfur that
could constitute crimes under the Rome Statute. Those
include alleged sexual crimes. We are appalled by the
widespread nature of the sexual crimes outlined in the
report. We condemn in the strongest terms all forms
of sexual violence against women and girls, including
underage girls. It is important that the perpetrators be
identified and brought to justice.
Humanitarian workers and peacekeepers continue
to face great challenges in the course of their work
in Darfur. Abductions and attacks are complicating
what is already a difficult operating environment.
We deplore all hostile acts against peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers. Some of those acts have,
unfortunately, resulted in loss of life. We offer our
deepest condolences to the families of peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers who have lost their lives in
Darfur. We look forward to seeing a determination as to
whether these hostile acts constitute crimes under the
Rome Statute.
The impact of intercommunal clashes on the lives of
the civilian population in Darfur is a matter of concern
to us. The fact that these clashes accounted for half of
the 760 deaths in the reporting period underscores the
urgent need for measures to prevent them. We are aware
of the efforts of the Government of the Sudan to contain
the effects of fighting between different ethnic groups.
We believe that more needs to be done to address the
root causes of the tensions, and by so doing facilitate
permanent reconciliation among the communities.
There can be no military solution to the conflict
in Darfur. The path to lasting peace, stability and
security in the region lies in dialogue and negotiation.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur provides
a viable framework for achieving this. We welcome
the efforts of His Excellency President Omar Hassan
Al-Bashir to seek a political solution to the conflict. His
recent announcement of the Sudanese Government’s
commitment to extending the cessation of hostilities
to a permanent ceasefire if the armed groups lay
down their arms and join the national dialogue is a
6/18

15/12/2015

clear demonstration of the President’s commitment in
that regard. We encourage the armed groups to stop
fighting and work with the Government of the Sudan,
the African Union and the international community to
end the conflict in the region.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We, too, thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
We are deeply concerned about the situation
in Darfur. At Ms. Bensouda’s most recent briefing
on this item (see S/PV.7478), New Zealand spoke at
some length about the gravity of the situation and
the need for accountability. While, as Ms. Bensouda
has reported, nothing has really changed, I will not
reiterate the statements I expressed in June. Instead I
want to focus on non-cooperation with the activities of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the Sudan.
That is the key issue before us today. It has been the key
issue before us at these briefings for more than 10 years.
As a State party to the Rome Statute, New Zealand
is concerned by all instances of non-cooperation,
whether they occur in relation to a Security Council
referral or otherwise. However, we are realistic and
we know there are non-States parties around this table
that may not share those concerns. As such, today
we will focus on a concern that every member of the
Council and every Member of the United Nations must
share — non-compliance with Chapter VII resolutions
of the Council.
The Sudan is required, under resolution 1593
(2005) and the Charter of the United Nations, to
cooperate with the ICC investigations in Darfur. The
Sudan’s non-cooperation with the Court amounts to
non-compliance with a Council resolution and its
obligations under the Charter. As the Prosecutor has
reminded us so clearly and uncomfortably today, the
Council has responded with deafening silence to the
situation. The Council’s inaction in the face of this
non-compliance with its own resolution undermines its
credibility. Indeed, it undermines the credibility of all
of its decisions. That is a serious issue. Sadly, it is a
regular issue.
The Secretary-General has relayed 11 findings of
non-cooperation to the Council. The most recent was
last Friday. That finding relates to Mr. Abdallah Banda,
an indictee from a rebel group who is alleged to be
responsible for a deadly attack against African Union
peacekeepers in South Darfur and Darfur in 2007. It
is alleged that Banda led a group which attacked an

15-42787

15/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) camp
with anti-aircraft guns, artillery guns and rocketpropelled grenade launchers, killing 12 peacekeepers
from Nigeria, Mali, Senegal and Botswana. The
Council unanimously adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2007/35, condemning this attack and
demanding that no effort be spared in identifying and
bringing to justice its perpetrators. The Prosecutor of
the ICC has taken up this call and is trying to pursue
Mr. Banda. She is, however, stymied in her efforts. The
Government of the Sudan refuses even to receive her
communications on the case, let alone cooperate in
any practical or tangible way. Mr. Banda, whom the
Council committed to bringing to justice, is at large in
the Sudan, and the Council has done nothing to support
the one institution seeking to bring him to justice.
In the face of that contradiction, New Zealand would
like to make two proposals. They are not a substitution
for or in contradiction to the proposals just outlined by
the Prosecutor, which we also fully endorse. Our first
proposal is simple. We propose that the Council be
more structured in its consideration of these findings
of non-cooperation. There is currently no consistent
practice. In most instances, despite these findings
being relayed by the Secretary-General in accordance
with the Relationship Agreement between the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court, the
Council does not even discuss them, and certainly not in
any fulsome way. In our view, when a non-cooperation
finding is received, the Council should discuss it. As
we would with other issues, we should consider all the
tools the Council has at its disposal, such as a resolution
or another product, even a press statement, a letter from
the Council or a meeting with the concerned country.
Then we should make an assessment on a case-by-case
basis about which, if any, of those tools we should use.
We accept that, as is often the case, the Council
may not agree on which tool to use or how to respond.
The fact that we may differ on how to respond should
not mean that the Council does not consider fully the
options before us. If the Council ignored every instance
where we did not agree, there would be many important
issues left off our agenda. This is an issue that goes to
the effectiveness of the Council and its decisions, and
needs to be addressed. To ignore these issues is neither
a productive nor a credible way forward.
Our second proposal goes to the deeper issue — the
Council’s relationship with the Government of the
Sudan. While it may seem obvious, it deserves repeating

S/PV.7582

that a crucial part of the Council’s ability to ensure the
implementation of its decision is its relationship with the
country concerned. As we have said before, including
when the Prosecutor was here in June, the current
Council approach to the Sudan is not working. There is
a clear need for the Council to build a new relationship
with Khartoum. There is an opening now. We should
capitalize on the appointment of the new Joint Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, Martin Uhomoibhi, as a moment
to revitalize the Council’s relationship with the Sudan.
Part of the Council’s building of this relationship and
a renewed approach should be a better understanding
of the situation on the ground. In that regard, New
Zealand would see a Council visit to the Sudan as a
good opportunity that should seriously be considered.
These two proposals are about getting the essentials
of our work right: credible working methods, effective
relationships and good information. While some steps
are simpler than others, continuing to do nothing is not
an option.
I would like to close by recognizing Chile’s
contribution as the focal point for States parties on the
Council to many of the matters I have raised today.
Ambassador Barros Melet’s leadership and that of his
team will be missed.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing and for her twenty-second
report on the situation in Darfur, submitted to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005),
in which the Council determined that the situation
in Darfur constituted a threat to international peace
and security and thereby referred the situation to the
International Criminal Court. Ten years have passed
since the decision was adopted, with the international
community remaining deeply concerned over the
situation in Darfur, which is characterized in the report
as an escalating conflict between Government forces
and rebel armed groups, intercommunal disputes, a rise
in criminality and banditry and widespread violence,
all of which have had an extremely negative impact on
the civilian population.
The Security Council, through resolution 2228
(2015), expressed serious concern at the continuing
deterioration of the security situation in Darfur, calling
into account those responsible for violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Faced with a

15-427877/18

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

lack of cooperation on the part of Sudanese Government
with the Court and the Government’s refusal to hand
over high-ranking officials indicted by the Court, the
Prosecutor in her report looks into measures adopted
by the Security Council to date to obtain the Sudan’s
compliance with its obligations arising from the Rome
Statute. The Office recalls that the Security Council
has seemingly not adopted any measures to enforce its
decision, undermining the Council’s credibility and the
mechanism and purpose of situation referrals by the
Council to the ICC.
The lesson to be learned from the referral of highranking officials of the Sudan to the ICC is that there is a
high risk of failure when attempts are made to politicize
the international criminal justice system by making it
a tool for reaching political ends, as typified by that
specific Security Council referral to the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, the Republic of Angola,
as a member of the African Union, supports the African
position concerning the case of the International
Criminal Court against Omar Al-Bashir of the Sudan,
an acting and elected President.
We wish to recall the decision taken at the
African Union Summit held in June, which, inter
alia, requested the suspension of all proceedings
against President Omar Al-Bashir, urging the Security
Council to withdraw the referral of the Sudan’s case
to the ICC. The refusal of the Security Council to act
on the request has compelled the African Union to
reserve its cooperation with the ICC. In that regard, we
support the decision of the Republic of South Africa
to respect the entitlements, privileges and immunities
due to the President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir,
during his stay in Johannesburg to attend the African
Union Summit. We note that other African countries
mentioned in the report — namely Mauritania, South
Sudan, Algeria and Ethiopia — have complied with the
African Union decision.
In that regard, we appeal to the Security Council
to consider the African Union request for a more
constructive relationship with the ICC, while Angola
will continue upholding the African Union’s stand
on that issue and advocating dialogue and peaceful
solutions to the disputes in Darfur, Sudan, and
elsewhere. We fully agree with the ICC Prosecutor that
the victims of Darfur deserve tangible justice and that
they deserve to see justice served. We are convinced
that the people of Darfur will receive justice only when
a just and lasting peace is attained in Darfur. We hope

8/18

15/12/2015

that the current initiatives of the Sudanese Government
will bear fruit conducive to peace, reconciliation and
justice.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Once
again, we welcome the presence of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
and thank her for introducing her twenty-second report
on Darfur, Sudan, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
As acknowledged by the Prosecutor in her powerful
report, it is unacceptable that 10 years after the referral
of that case to the Court, the humanitarian crisis in the
region remains highly alarming due, inter alia, to the
lack of adequate accountability and cooperation to that
end. My country reiterates its categorical condemnation
of the serious crimes against civilians cited in the
report, all of which are cited in various resolutions
of the Council. These include aerial bombardments,
sexual and gender-based crimes, and attacks on human
rights defenders, humanitarian workers and members
of the peacekeeping operation.
My country feels duty-bound to reiterate and
emphasize the call for full cooperation with the
International Criminal Court and its Prosecutor,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). Such cooperation is
required not only of States parties to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, but of all States
and relevant regional and international organizations,
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of
resolution 1593 (2005). Such cooperation should be
reflected in diverse aspects, particularly in the ongoing
investigations and the implementation of judicial orders
and rulings.
In point of fact, the responsibility of the Council
under the Charter of the United Nations must not be
circumvented.Therefore, justice for victims of crimes
committed in Darfur cannot be systematically denied,
which — in the light of the crimes committed and given
that a decade later not a single arrest warrant has been
executed — is at the very least inconsistent with the
purpose of referring such situations to the Court.
In that regard, my country welcomes the tireless
efforts of the Prosecutor to pursue her investigations
and the quest for accountability in the Sudan. We
commend the work undertaken day in day out by her
team. The provision of support and resources for the
cases referred by the Council is, in our view, a priority
and critical matter. As we stated on the occasion of
the submission of the tenth briefing of the Prosecutor

15-42787

15/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on the situation in Libya (see S/PV.7549), the Council
must consider the roll-out of complementary financing
mechanisms that would allow the Prosecutor to carry
out her investigations in an effective and efficient way.
Chile will continue to work to promote a closer
relationship between the Council and the International
Criminal Court, particularly with respect to the two
cases referred. Failure to address the lack of effective
follow-up to these cases represents a failure of our goal
to work for the maintenance of international peace and
security. We call for the adoption of tangible measures
to strengthen due cooperation and to implement the
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for coming
here this morning to brief the Council. I would like to
begin by welcoming the outstanding work undertaken
by the International Criminal Court and the Prosecutor
against very complex circumstances, particularly given
the lack of cooperation on the part of the Sudan and
other States, as well as the lack of support from the
Council.
The Sudan must cooperate. Not being a party to
the Rome Statute is not a valid reason not to cooperate,
especially when there are Security Council resolutions
that are legally binding and enforceable under the United
Nations Charter. Failing to abide by this obligation is
inexcusable. Resolution 1593 (2005) was the first such
resolution to refer an issue to the International Criminal
Court and constituted a milestone in the Council’s
commitment to the fight against impunity.
However, some 10 years and 22 reports later, nothing
has changed. None of the arrest warrants enacted for
the alleged commission of the most serious crimes
constituting genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes has been carried out. The Council continues not
to respond to the Court’s reports of non-cooperation.
That lack of response, as earlier speakers have noted, is
undermining the credibility of the Council and casting
doubt on the strength of our commitment to fighting
impunity.
This is not the only issue, however. Our failure
to act is also undermining the credibility of the Court
itself and is causing it to squander its limited resources
in pursuit of goals that are impossible to achieve.
I should like to ask two questions: what is the point
of adopting a referral resolution if there is no willingness

S/PV.7582

to implement it? What message are we sending to
those who believe themselves entitled to flout the most
fundamental norms of international humanitarian law
and to commit human rights violations, without fear of
the consequences and with complete impunity, not only
in Darfur but also in other parts of the world?
The humanitarian crisis and insecurity continue to
prevail in Darfur. The civilian population, the staff of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian workers continue
to be the target of all parties to the conflict. Impunity
continues to reign in Darfur. The obstacles faced by
UNAMID continue to put at risk its capacity to fully
discharge its mandate. It is key that the Mission be able
not only to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian
access but also to continue to document violations and
abuses.
We fully agree with the Prosecutor that the current
situation is unacceptable and cannot go on. The Security
Council, in adopting resolution 1593 (2005), made a
commitment to the victims and to the people of Darfur.
The time is ripe for us to honour that commitment. We
reiterate to all parties their ineluctable obligation to fully
comply with the norms of international humanitarian
and human rights law. We would also recall the
particular responsibility borne by the Government of
the Sudan to protect its people. There can be no military
solution to the conflict; it must be political and based
on an inclusive dialogue. We wish also to reiterate that
all States parties to the Rome Statute are obligated to
cooperate with and provide assistance to the Court, and
we call upon all others to work to implement resolution
1593 (2005).
We note once again that the cost of referrals
continues to be borne solely by the States parties to
the Rome Statute and that article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court remains unimplemented.
I should like to conclude by conveying our support
and gratitude to the personnel of UNAMID, to the
Prosecutor and to the Court, as well as to all those who,
in the midst of such difficulties, continue daily to make
every effort to collect information, gather evidence
and identify those in Darfur who believe that they can
operate outside the law. We trust that one day they will
be brought to justice.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish at the
outset to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the

15-427879/18

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

International Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting her
report and to commend her leadership.
Unfortunately, the security situation in Darfur,
despite a relative period of calm, remains characterized
by intercommunal violence, criminal acts and banditry,
resulting in ever more civilian victims and displaced
persons. Against a backdrop of war, insecurity and
instability, it is very difficult, nigh impossible, to
create the conditions for real justice so as to bring to
trial the alleged perpetrators of the crimes committed
in Darfur. That is why we have consistently recalled the
relevance of the approach of the African Union, which
involves addressing the issues of peace and justice
simultaneously.
Although the ongoing efforts of the Office of the
Prosecutor are deeply appreciated and welcomed, as
they seek to bring about justice in a context of war, to
date they have not, unfortunately, been fruitful. For
that reason, might it not be a good idea to integrate the
element of justice into the peace process, so as to put an
end to impunity?
Chad remains convinced that there can be no
military solution to the Darfur crisis and therefore
urges all members of the Council to support peace
initiatives such as the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and the mediation of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, with a view to promoting
peace and justice through dialogue.
From that standpoint, the Security Council and the
African Union must speak the same language. They
must pool their efforts in order to restore lasting peace
in Darfur and to enable justice to be implemented in all
its aspects. To that end, we commend the convening on
10 October by the Sudanese Government of the national
dialogue conference, which, for the first time, brought
together all segments of society and a large number of
the country’s political stakeholders, as well as three
Darfur armed factions.
We urge all Sudanese armed groups, without
distinction, to join the national dialogue process,
because a political solution open to all is crucial in
order to the restoration peace in the region, which has
been ravaged by war for more than a decade now.
Chad, which hosts many displaced persons from
Darfur, is being hit by the full force of the consequences
of the growing insecurity in that neighbouring area.
It therefore underscores the need to integrate efforts
to achieve justice into the overall approach aimed at
10/18

15/12/2015

bringing peace, good governance and democracy to the
Sudan. In that context, we deem it timely to undertake
a serious joint process of reflection between the
Council and the African Union on how best to support
the International Criminal Court in accomplishing its
mission, drawing lessons from the lengthy and fruitless
approach taken so far and taking due consideration of
the pertinent, realistic concerns of the African Union
on this issue.
Chad, which is a State party to the Rome Statute,
reiterates its full support for the ICC and urges it to
step up its interaction with regional organizations, in
particular with the African Union, in order to enhance
the effectiveness of its action, with a focus on results.
Ms. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing today.
We commend the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC for its continuing efforts to fulfil the mandate to
investigate the crimes under the Rome Statute committed
in Darfur. We have often reiterated our concern about
the situation in Darfur and Council referrals to the
Court. However, the ongoing security and humanitarian
crisis in Darfur continues to be marked by widespread
violence, impunity and displacement.
As highlighted in the report of the Prosecutor,
despite a decrease in the number of incidents, the
situation in Darfur is not improving. Restrictions of
movement impact humanitarian assistance. Civilians
continue to be the primary victims of indiscriminate
aerial bombardments. An intensification of alleged
inter-tribal fighting causes an immense loss of life.
Humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers are
subject to constant attacks. Widespread sexual and
gender-based violence remains a horrible feature of
this conflict. All those violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law
continue with absolute impunity. As the Prosecutor
states in her report, there are numerous allegations of
ongoing crimes that may fall under the jurisdiction of
the Court. We urge the Prosecutor’s Office to continue
to closely monitor various crimes allegedly committed
in Darfur.
The semi-annual briefings by the Prosecutor have
provided a consistent message. The ICC cannot fulfil
its mandate unless the Darfur suspects are arrested and
transferred to The Hague. Five individuals accused
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity

15-42787

15/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

continue to evade the Court’s jurisdiction. Most of
them even occupy the highest posts in the Government
of the Sudan. We are deeply concerned that the Sudan
has still not taken any meaningful steps to apprehend
those five individuals and that other States in a position
to do so have not acted either.
Just last week, the Security Council received from
the Court another formal finding of non-cooperation
against the Sudan. The latest decision of the Court on
non-compliance against the Republic of the Sudan is
a serious reminder that the Security Council needs to
follow-up on its referrals. However, despite the efforts
by many members of the Council to date, it has not
been possible to reach an agreement on any follow-up
mechanism.
The report of the Prosecutor also reminds us that
a lack of cooperation persists not only from the side
of the Government of the Sudan, but also from other
States. Regular travel by the indictee against whom
the arrest warrant is in force once again shows that
all States, not just parties to the Rome Statute, should
cooperate fully with the Court in order to strengthen
international efforts to fight impunity.
The lack of cooperation has also led to unfortunate
recent development in the Al-Bashir case, when eight
victims with participatory rights withdrew from the
case and from the Darfur situation generally, due to
perceived lack of progress. This situation proves that
victims cannot wait for justice forever. Despite our
concern about this development, we call on the Office
of the Prosecutor to continue its support for the victims
of the most serious crimes in Darfur.
Justice and accountability are integral parts of
peace and reconciliation efforts. If left unaddressed, a
lack of accountability encourages further and renewed
human rights violations and abuses. The Security
Council repeatedly calls on the Government of the
Sudan to ensure accountability and bring perpetrators
to justice. The Government of the Sudan should do more
to end attacks against civilians, ensure accountability
and guarantee justice for the victims.
In conclusion, as this is the last time that Lithuania
will have an opportunity to address the matter as
a member of the Council, I would like to reiterate
Lithuania’s full support to, and cooperation with, the
Court. I also wish to underscore that the International
Criminal Court is an institution born from a shared

S/PV.7582

understanding that injustice will be brought to light and
that serious crimes must not go unpunished.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join other speakers in
welcoming Prosecutor Bensouda to the Security Council
and in expressing our appreciation for her briefing,
which we have listened to intently. My delegation takes
note of the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor as
outlined in Ms. Bensouda’s twenty-second report to
the Council as well as the decision of the International
Criminal Court’s Trial Chamber IV on the Prosecutor’s
request for a finding of non-compliance in the case of
Prosecutor v. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain, dated
19 November 2015.
While noting that there has been a considerable
decrease in the number of clashes among Government
forces, militia and armed movements in Darfur, Malaysia
remains concerned that the security situation might yet
worsen with the onset of the dry season. Intercommunal
clashes, largely due to competition over resources,
have continued to have an impact on and displace the
civilian population. These confrontations — and the
ensuing human cost in terms of deaths, injuries and
displacement — have negatively impacted the overall
security situation in Darfur. We are concerned that an
escalation of such clashes may further destabilize the
Darfur region. Accordingly, there is an urgent need for
the Government of the Sudan to identify and effectively
address the root causes of the intercommunal conflicts.
The humanitarian situation in Darfur as a result of
the continued precarious security situation remains a
concern for us. The conflict has resulted in an increase of
more than 430,000 displaced persons since the beginning
of the year, in addition to the more than 2 million longterm internally displaced persons in Darfur. We call
on all parties to immediately cease all attacks on the
civilian population. All parties to the conflict must
abide by their obligations under international human
rights and international humanitarian law.
We are further concerned that insecurity in Darfur
has had a negative impact on the safety of United Nations
staff, particularly those of the African Union/United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and on
humanitarian personnel. We unequivocally condemn
attacks against UNAMID, which have resulted in the
deaths of peacekeepers and a national staff member.
We call on the Government of the Sudan to conduct
an investigation into those attacks and bring those
responsible to justice.

15-4278711/18

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The security situation in Darfur is also compromised
by the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and criminality in the area. In that regard, we are
encouraged to note that emergency security measures
have been introduced by the Governor of South Darfur
in an attempt to improve the security situation in his
jurisdiction. At the same time, we join other Council
members in calling on the Government of the Sudan
to discharge its primary responsibility to investigate
allegations of human rights violations and abuses,
including extrajudicial killings, abduction of civilians,
acts of sexual and gender-based violence, violations
and abuses against children and arbitrary arrests and
detentions in Darfur.
In conclusion, Malaysia remains convinced that
the conflict in Darfur cannot be resolved militarily.
In that regard, we call on all parties to remain guided
by the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and to
continue their constructive engagement towards fully
implementing the provisions of the Document. Malaysia
is of the view that efforts by the Government of the
Sudan to demonstrate its compliance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and its commitment
to hold accountable those responsible for violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law would contribute positively and go a
long way towards building trust and confidence.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Fatima Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing today and for presenting the twentysecond report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005), of which we take note.
Jordan reiterates the importance of the role played
by the Court in effectively supporting stability and
the maintenance of international peace and security
and upholding the rule of law. The Court is a major
pillar in strengthening criminal justice, prosecuting
the most serious crimes under international law, and
ending impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes,
which is a matter of concern for the entire international
community. Jordan also reiterates the importance of
cooperating with the ICC to implement its mandate and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Jordan remains concerned about the report’s
references to the prevailing humanitarian situation
in Darfur, the continued violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, and the repeated
attacks against civilians and humanitarian workers
12/18

15/12/2015

and peacekeepers. It is also necessary to stress the
importance of adopting a sustainable development plan
that addresses the real needs of the local population in
Darfur, allows them to meet the economic and social
challenges and guarantees the return of refugees to their
original territories, because justice and development
must be brought to the region if security and stability
are to be restored.
Finally, it is worth saying that sustainable peace
cannot be achieved without the cooperation and
coordination of all the relevant stakeholders.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened carefully to Prosecutor Bensouda’s briefing.
The current situation in Darfur is generally stable.
China welcomes the efforts of the Sudanese Government
and the relevant rebel groups to implement the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. We hope that the parties
concerned in the issue of Darfur will adhere to the
political settlement, take an active part in the national
dialogue and, through dialogue and consultation, seek
a comprehensive political solution to the issue. We
also hope that countries that have influence over the
rebel groups in Darfur will play a constructive role in
this process. We call on the international community
to work to create external conditions conducive to a
political solution to the Darfur issue.
China’s position on the involvement of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in the Darfur
issue remains unchanged. At the same time, we also
believe that the concerns of the African Union and the
countries concerned about the ICC’s involvement in
Darfur deserve serious attention.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her presentation of the twentysecond report on the investigation of the situation in
the Sudan. We also commend the work of the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Court in combating impunity
and promoting justice for victims of the crimes cited in
article 5 of the Rome Statute, to which Venezuela has
been an active party since its entry into force in 2002.
We believe that international cooperation is an
essential ingredient for the full achievement of the
Court’s objectives, a view endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 1593 (2005), which calls for the
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan and the
international community, with the goal of strengthening

15-42787

15/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the rule of law, protecting human rights and combating
impunity in the Darfur region. To that end, we believe
that cooperation between the Security Council, the
International Criminal Court and regional bodies
such as the African Union has a critical role to play in
ensuring that political agreements founded on mutual
respect and unwavering observance of international
law, aimed at achieving peace, stability, development
and justice, can be arrived at in the Sudan.
Venezuela considers the issue of accountability to
be particularly important, since we believe it makes a
major contribution to fostering a climate of trust in the
State institutions of the Sudan, as well as to breaking
the cycle of impunity, particularly in Darfur. In that
regard, we also believe that making accountability
a concrete reality is an important part of achieving a
lasting peace in the post-conflict phase.
In supporting the Prosecutor’s efforts to ensure
that justice and accountability are realized, we would
also like to urge the Court to be objective and impartial
in evaluating the situation. Its role in an impartial
investigation of the actions of all parties to the conflict
is crucial to strengthening its credibility. The ICC must
work in a balanced way to promote justice and the
achievement of a lasting, sustainable, comprehensive
and holistic peace. In that regard, we are concerned
some elements’ attempts to politicize the work of the
International Criminal Court, and thus undermine
the principles that govern it. They weaken the Court’s
institutional status, to the detriment of the spirit and
purpose of the Rome Statute.
Venezuela firmly and unreservedly condemns
armed attacks that target the civilian population,
which are a flagrant violation of international human
rights and humanitarian law, whoever perpetrates them
and for whatever reason. We are therefore extremely
concerned about the fact that the report continues to
describe a continuing complex situation of violence
and abuse in Darfur. We urge all parties to put an
end to such practices, which are unacceptable under
international law.
We would like to reiterate our support for the
position of regional bodies and joint political entities
such as the African Union, the Organization for
Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States and the
Non-Aligned Movement, among others, regarding the
defence of the principle that should govern the Sudan’s
entities and constitutional proceedings in order to ensure

S/PV.7582

their compliance with the International Criminal Court
regarding the necessity of complementarity for all the
bodies involved. For that reason, we call for improved
cooperation between the ICC and the Government
of the Sudan, as well as between the countries of the
region, in order to ensure accountability for violations
of international humanitarian and human rights
law. Such cooperation would also help in reaching a
solution to the conflict in Darfur aimed at achieving
peace and justice for the Sudanese people, in line with
international law.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have taken note of the twenty-second
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court on the Court’s investigation of the situation
in Darfur, and we thank Ms. Bensouda for her
participation in today’s meeting and her presentation of
the report. Unfortunately, the fact that it was distributed
to the Council so late — a day before our discussion,
basically — prevented us from studying it in detail.
We note the report’s conclusion about the decrease in
the number of security incidents in Darfur in the second
half of the year, owing to the significantly weakened
military capacity of the Darfur rebels who have no
real support among the population. The main source
in the region of violence and humanitarian problems,
including increasing numbers of displaced persons, is
intercommunal clashes resulting from centuries-old
struggles for natural resources. We greatly appreciate
the efforts of the Sudanese authorities to stabilize the
situation and promote reconciliation among warring
tribes.
We note that the Office of the Prosecutor has
continued to investigate crimes related to the Darfur
issue. In that regard, we focused on the assertion that
two thirds of the incidents involved Government forces
and groups loyal to the authorities, while the rest are
the work of unknown persons and other unnamed
entities. We believe we should call a spade a spade. The
Darfur rebels are guilty of serious violations of human
rights and the norms of international humanitarian law,
including the recruitment and use of child soldiers. It
is the rebels as well as the authorities who are creating
obstacles to the work of the United Nations bodies and
non-governmental organizations in Darfur.
We also focused on the information on air strikes
in the Jebel Marra area, according to which 50 civilians
were killed during the reporting period. We are not

15-4278713/18

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

about to assess the reliability of those numbers in
conditions where there is no access for United Nations
personnel. But it is clear that combat operations are
being conducted in those areas by an armed opposition
that does not shrink from using civilians as human
shields.
We note the Prosecutor’s comments regarding
States’ cooperation with the ICC on the problem of
Darfur. There can be no doubt that States’ support
plays an important role in helping the Court achieve
its goals. At the same time, however, it is clear that this
is a complex area and that the States themselves, as
well as the Court, have concerns about the situation.
We sympathize with the concerns voiced by African
States and the African Union regarding the ICC. We
would like to emphasize once again that States’ specific
obligations regarding cooperation with the ICC can
vary, including those relating to the immunity of senior
State officials in the light of international judicial
norms.
Regarding the proposals for so-called follow-up
action by the Security Council in referring cases to
the International Criminal Court, we have repeatedly
stated our position on the matter in the Council and it
is well known.
In conclusion, we would once again like to call on
the Court and the Prosecutor to take a comprehensive
and balanced approach to administering justice
and achieving peace, including with regard to the
investigation of the situation in Darfur.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States
of America, and I would like to thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.
The fact that the situation in Darfur today is stark
is not news to anyone in the Chamber; we have been
talking about it for over a decade. In 2005, the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court in the face of brutal attacks on
civilians, widespread rape and the destruction of entire
villages. Ten years later, the people of Darfur continue
to suffer. As the Prosecutor said, it should be and is
a source of concern that the situation remains dire.
But the intractability of the problem is not a reason to
accept the situation as it is. We cannot become inured to
impunity and atrocity and we cannot look away simply
because what has transpired, and is transpiring, is not

14/18

15/12/2015

news. Justice demands more, and so too do the people
of Darfur.
In the face of the Sudan’s continued non-cooperation,
which has systematically frustrated the Court’s
important work, we continue to call on all States
to demand that the Sudan fully cooperate with
the International Criminal Court. It should not be
that President Al-Bashir repeatedly travels across
international borders when the Court has issued two
warrants for his arrest and the victims of his alleged
crimes continue to wait for justice. We should not be
complacent. The United States will continue to urge
Governments, whether or not they are States parties
to the Rome Statute, not to invite, facilitate or support
travel by those who face arrest warrants for alleged
crimes committed in Darfur. The fact that such
individuals, including President Al-Bashir, remain
at large is an affront to the hundreds of thousands of
men, women and children in Darfur who have suffered
immeasurable losses and pain. The United States
strongly believes that the Court’s arrest warrants in the
Darfur situation should be carried out. We welcome
the Prosecutor’s affirmation that her Office has not
abandoned the victims of alleged Rome Statute crimes
committed in Darfur.
It is not just the people of Darfur who deserve
justice, but also the men and women who have
committed themselves to protecting the civilians. Let
us remember that one of the cases before the Court
involves attacks on African Union peacekeepers in
Darfur. That very case was the subject of the most
recent decision regarding the Sudan’s non-compliance
transmitted to the Security Council. Since 2007, when
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) was established, 218 mission
personnel have given their lives in fulfilment of its
mandate. Too many months bring news of one or more
such deaths or other casualties. Just over the past eight
months, UNAMID has seen one person killed in May,
one killed and four injured in September, and one killed
and one injured in October. The slow pattern is deadly
and steady and, at the very least, the Council should be
united in demanding accountability for violence against
peacekeepers, who have put themselves in harm’s way
in service to others.
Today, in Darfur, among other tasks, the nearly
21,000 person-strong UNAMID mission has been
working tirelessly to restore security conditions for the
safe provision of humanitarian assistance, facilitate

15-42787

15/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

full humanitarian access throughout Darfur, protect
civilians and promote respect for human rights.
The environment in which UNAMID operates is a
difficult and a dangerous one. Such difficulties are
compounded by a lack of full cooperation on the part
of the Government of the Sudan on issues such as the
timely processing of visas for UNAMID personnel, the
clearance of shipments, including food and specialized
military equipment belonging to troop-contributing
countries destined for the mission, and freedom
of movement of UNAMID personnel in fulfilment
of UNAMID’s mandate. We must demand that the
Government of the Sudan comply with its obligations
under the status of forces greement with the United
Nations and the African Union. We have a along way
to go when food for peacekeepers is used as a tool for
leverage.
Those are not distinct phenomena. While the
Government of the Sudan tries to impede UNAMID’s
work through obstruction and delay, it also tries to
impede the Court’s work by ignoring its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005) — all in the name of
avoiding the international scrutiny that is so needed,
such as, for instance, with regard to the reports of sexual
violence in Thabit, where credible investigative work
into alleged mass rapes remains incomplete, stymied
by the Sudan’s systematic denial of access to UNAMID
personnel. The stakes are simply too high for the status
quo to be acceptable. The Sudan’s compliance with the
Security Council resolutions and the work of the Court
are not just Sudanese issues. We must not forget that it
was the Council that referred the situation in Darfur to
the Court more than 10 years ago.
The need for peace and justice in Darfur is
important not just for the region but well beyond.
The Government of the Sudan must not be allowed to
conclude that it can continue to apply tactics similar
to those that prompted the Council to act on Darfur to
the two areas of Southern Kordofan and the Blue Nile.
We must recall that when the Government of the Sudan
conducts offensives, it has often been civilians who
bear the heavy cost.
In conclusion, to be clear, those who commit
heinous acts of violence and brutality in Darfur must
be held to account. Those who have flouted the law
and the Council must know that justice is patient. We
will not be lulled or distracted. The United States will
continue to work with the Security Council and the
international community to seek accountability for the

S/PV.7582

crimes committed in Darfur. We will not forget the
victims or the survivors nor will we cease to pursue the
justice they so deserve.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to address the Security Council as a
representative of a State Member of the United Nations
that is interested in participating with comments and
observations, as well as to underscore our national
position with regard to the subject matter before the
Council today.
It is important to make clear that I intend to do my
duty in this capacity before a major organ of the United
Nations, the Security Council, in accordance with the
imperatives of the national position of my country and
that of the African continent. That position is set out in
the relevant resolutions of the African Union, adopted
successively at the highest level since 2008 and until
2015, and in the synergetic positions of other political
entities to which the Sudan is party, issued in unison
and reflecting systematic aversion to the meddling and
false accusations of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). It is also consonant with our right under both
statutory and customary international law, particularly
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of
1969, which emphasizes the sovereign right of every
country whether to be or not be a party to any treaty or
international agreement. Therefore, in exercising that
right, the Republic of the Sudan has opted not to be
party to the Rome Statute. As mentioned, the Sudan
is not bound by the ICC, as a non-party to the Rome
Statute.
I would like to avail myself of the opportunity to
extend to the Secretary-General, to the President and
to members of the Security Council and all countries
of the world at large my congratulations on the success
of the Paris negotiations on curbing global warming,
which threatens the Earth’s very existence and the
survival of the human race. We are hopeful, in the Sudan
in particular, that that achievement will materialize
in the future, in the form of stopping desertification
in the Sahel region of West Africa, which was the
fundamental factor in the exacerbation of the internal
conflict in Darfur in 2003. We were pleased, in that
regard, to finally see the United Nations Environment

15-4278715/18

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

15/12/2015

Programme state, in its famous 2007 report, that
the causes of conflict in Darfur are attributed to
environmental degradation and desertification.

persons and the loss of property, not only in the Sudan
but in all other cases in which the Court has intervened
on the African continent.

I would like to reiterate what we have said
repeatedly — that the Sudan is committed, in
compliance with its constitutional, legal, moral and
cultural obligations, to prosecute the perpetrators
of all crimes and violations defined and agreed upon
under applicable provisions of international law. Such
provisions include, inter alia, the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
of 1948, the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their first and second Protocols and the various human
rights conventions and treaties, in accordance with its
commitment to fight impunity.

The Court concocted — through the actions of
its Prosecutor and thanks to vague and overly broad
powers granted by the Statute to the Prosecutor and the
Prosecutor’s Office, as well as by abusing the Prosecutor’s
authority and deploying that authority to serve the
interests of certain countries and non-governmental
organizations that are well known for their influence
on the Court’s process and, subsequently, on its
work, competencies and funding — an unwarranted
contradiction between the principles of justice and
peace. By creating that contradiction, it has encouraged
the ongoing killing and displacement of persons and
of all types of abuses and violations in countries and
regions where it has exercised jurisdiction, all of which
happen, by chance, to be African countries, which is in
fact no coincidence.

As the Council is aware, Protocol II to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 stipulates, in article 3, paragraph1,
that:
“Nothing in this Protocol shall be invoked
for the purpose of affecting the sovereignty of a
State or the responsibility of the government, by
all legitimate means, to maintain or re-establish
law and order in the State or to defend the national
unity and territorial integrity of the State.”
There are also examples of countries vigorously
pursuing and defending their national interests extraterritorially and striving to legitimize such actions, so
why do others deny us the right to defend our territorial
integrity and maintain law and order within our borders?
The report before the Council notes in several
parts and in a clearly selective way, which is typical
of the Court since its inception, the deterioration of
security conditions in Darfur, including abductions and
attacks on humanitarian workers and peacekeepers.
As expected, the report contains no reference to the
persons responsible for those violations, or the actual
perpetrators, to whom we have referred in detail in our
statement before the Council during its review of the
periodic report on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), on 28 October
(see S/PV.7545).
We are concerned about clearly emphasizing
the fact that the Prosecutor’s Office of the Court is
responsible — through its actions and by explicitly and
implicitly encouraging gun-toting rebels and armed
outlaws — for all lives lost in Darfur since 2005, and
for the human rights violations committed by those
outlaws and the suffering of the injured and displaced
16/18

I would like to refer to the policy paper issued
by the ICC Prosecutor’s Office in 2007, interpreting
article 53 of the Rome Statute, entitled “Policy Paper
on the Interests of Justice”, in which the concept
of the interests of justice does not include peace.
Such a policy not only undermines all future dispute
settlement efforts worldwide, local or international, but
also starkly contrasts with the core task of the Security
Council under Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, thereby posing serious questions regarding the
feasibility of submitting the report to the Council not
once but twice per year.
Resolution 1593 (2005), by which the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the Court, and
which we stress, with all due respect, is in violation of
international law as it concerns a State that is not party
to the Rome statute, emphasizes, in paragraph 5, “the
need to promote healing and reconciliation”.
The same was emphasized by the African Union
Peace and Security Council when it stressed, on 21 July
2008, that:
“The Council reaffirms its statement of 11 July
2008, in which it expressed its strong conviction
that the search for justice should be pursued in
a way that does not impede or jeopardize efforts
aimed at promoting lasting peace”.
Due to the conduct of the Office of the Prosecutor
and of the Chief Prosecutor, coupled with the policy
paper issued by her Office, which rendered article
15-42787

15/12/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

53 of the Statute ineffective and practically repealed,
together with the overall principle of complementarity,
it is due to such dispositions that the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of South Africa stated on 18 November, before
the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of
the ICC that,
“South Africa cannot and will not be silent in the
face of serious flaws in some of the practices of the
Court in the interpretation of the Statute.”
The Minister further asked:
“Has this Court become the universally accepted
institution for justice as initially hoped for when
we established it?”
It is therefore not surprising in the least that the
Court, as we have said, is directly responsible for all
of the violations of human rights that have occurred
in Darfur. The Court has transformed those outlaw
perpetrators into more daring hardcore criminals
capable of committing all sorts of crimes, including
attacks on peacekeepers, in pursuit of media coverage
for propaganda purposes, and the resulting instability
and confusion, an example of which is the attack by
an armed rebel movement on UNAMID peacekeepers
in Darfur in 2008, which was distorted by global
media entities, such as the The Washington Post, The
New York Times, Cable News Network and the British
Broadcasting Corporation, to implicate the Sudanese
Government as having instigated affiliate militias to
launch that attack. The Court has also discouraged
outlaws from responding to calls for peace and
invitations to join peace agreements, encouraging
them, on the contrary, to mount attacks and instigate
rebellion against legitimate national authorities.
In that context, and commensurate with its covert
objective to drive a wedge between justice and peace,
the Court strived to subvert the Abuja Peace Agreement
of 2006, which was welcomed by the Security Council,
and to divert attention from the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, of 2011, which was also welcomed by
the Security Council and which has been totally ignored
in the report, with a view to undermining it, as well.
In that regard, I would like to note some positive
developments that, fortunately, were overlooked in
the last UNAMID report (S/2015/729), which was
submitted to the Council on 25 September and includes
first, a decrease in the number of displaced persons;
secondly, the Government’s success in ending tribal
hostilities — in which regard the Court’s report seeks

S/PV.7582

to incite racial and ethnic division and fuel hostilities
by citing unfounded allegations of Arab settlement in
Darfur — and thirdly, the successful internal dialogue
in Darfur.
We consider the observations contained in this
report regarding the Republic of the Sudan, which was
among the first African countries privileged to join the
membership of the United Nations, and its President,
whose status is also enshrined in the 2005 Constitution
of the Republic of the Sudan, as a symbol of the
country’s sovereignty, and whom I have the honour
to represent here at the United Nations, as not being
worthy of the trouble to consider.
We also wish to refer to the Common African
Position enunciated since 2008 concerning established
international law on the immunity of Heads of State — a
concept that is being further bolstered and fortified by
the Sudan in its quest for peace and stability through
the cessation of bloodshed, for the sake of which we
have left no stone unturned. In so doing, African
leaders have stressed their rejection of the targeting
of African leaders and peoples under such pretexts as
feasibility and possibility, which were introduced in
the policy papers of the Prosecutor’s Office and which
make individuals criminally liable, not through proof
of guilt but by virtue of their nationality. In that regard,
the representative of India was right when he said, on
the occasion of at the adoption of the Rome Statute
in the summer of 1998, that its first victim would be
international law.
To date, the Court has received some 9,000
complaints through various channels, relating to
situations in 139 countries where crimes and violations
are being committed. Yet the Court and the Prosecutor’s
Office have shown interest in leveling charges and
opening proceedings and investigations only against
African States. So far, it has issued indictments against
39 Africans and no one else. They have been singled out
from among all humans on the vast planet with its five
continents. I leave it to the consciences and minds of
members of the Council to judge for themselves. By way
of comparison, in the aftermath of the Second World
War in Europe the Nuremberg Tribunal adjudicated
hundreds of cases in just a single year, whereas the
International Criminal Court has been unable to
process more than two or three cases since 2002, at a
cost of more than Є1 billion. Despite that huge waste
of resources drawn from the assessed contributions
of Member States and the voluntary contributions of

15-4278717/18

S/PV.7582

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the European Union, along with donations by Western
non-governmental organizations, the Court is now
requesting the United Nations to supply it with more
resources in order to pursue its mandate in Darfur.
We have before us testimonies from around the
world and from non-governmental organizations,
including in particular Human Rights Watch, according
to which the allegations of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court are lies. The only way to
protect the victims is by ending the conflict, and it is no
coincidence that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur have been
ignored by the Prosecutor’s Office. Frankly, when I
heard the statement made by the representative of the
United Kingdom, I could not believe her description of
the situation in Darfur, which we monitor consistently
and constantly. As the United Kingdom’s former Foreign
Secretary Robin Cook remarked, the Court was not
established to prosecute any British or other Western
official. That is what he said. Unfortunately, and in
response to what we have heard from some Council
members, this is our message to the conscience of the
international community. There can be no graver insult
than this position of the Court, which has persisted in
its practices from 2002 until today.
Finally, the Prosecutor’s report contains many gross
references and transgressions regarding the practice of
addressing the United Nations and the Security Council,
particularly in paragraphs 12 and 45, which refer to the
failure of the Council and its inability, inaction and loss
of credibility in its attempt to alienate my country. I
call on the Council to take whatever action it deems
appropriate in that regard.

18/18

15/12/2015

Members of the Council have also witnessed to
what we in the Permanent Mission of the Sudan have
gone through as the Prosector of the ICC has tried to
muzzle and threaten us with litigation. We are still
curious to know on what basis the Court could legally
evaluate what we are doing to defend the symbols of
our sovereignty, our unity and our territorial integrity
within the framework of multilateral diplomacy, in
which we have engaged in with a view to maintaining
peace and stability with the conclusion of agreements
aimed at restoring peace in our homeland, including
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2005, the
Abuja Agreement and the Doha Document, and all
that we have done to honour the letter and spirit of our
obligations under international law, in accordance with
the duties and rights stipulated therein.
The President: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I simply wish
to point out, in response to the statement made by the
representative of the Sudan, that the Court is in fact
carrying out a preliminary examination into the United
Kingdom’s activities in Iraq, and that the United
Kingdom is fully cooperating with the Court in relation
to that preliminary examination. We do not accept that
the Court is simply targeting African States. The Court
is not targeting States as such at all. It is carrying out
the mandate conferred on it by the Rome Statute and in
the case of referrals by the Council.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

15-42787
