A/62/PV.97

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

97

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 15 May 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hannesson
(Iceland), Vice-President, took the Chair.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 16

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Cyclone in Myanmar and earthquake in China
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
item on our agenda for this morning, I should like, on
behalf of the General Assembly, to extend our
condolences to the Government and the people of
Myanmar and to the Government and the people of the
People’s Republic of China on the tragic loss of life
and material damage that have resulted from the recent
cyclone in Myanmar and the earthquake in China.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/62/657/Add.7)
The Acting President: Also before turning to the
item on our agenda for this morning, I would like to
invite the attention of the General Assembly to
document A/62/657/Add.7, in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communications
contained in documents A/62/657 and addenda 1 to 6,
Benin has made the necessary payment to reduce its
arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the
Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in that
document?

Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security and
development
Draft resolution (A/62/L.45)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/62/L.45.
Mr. Alasania (Georgia): Today, Georgia presents
a draft resolution (A/62/L.45) that emphasizes the
right, necessity and urgency of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) from Abkhazia, Georgia, to
return to their homes and places of original residence,
despite the lack of positive developments in the
political settlement process.
The need for this draft resolution is obvious. For
more than 14 years, people who fled their homes have
been denied the essential right to live in dignity and to
not be subject to arbitrary exile. They have also been
denied the right to own property and not to be deprived
of it.
Today, more than 500,000 people of various
ethnic backgrounds are suffering from the
humanitarian disaster resulting from the conflict in
Abkhazia, Georgia. The overwhelming majority have
been subject to unbearable suffering and have been
deprived of their fundamental human rights and
freedoms. They have been forced to live in exile and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-34051 (E)

*0834051*

A/62/PV.97

have been denied access to their homes. Those who
have stayed are exposed to the constant fear of
insecurity and poverty. Clearly, the international
community should be more attentive to their needs and
their rights.
The introduction of this draft resolution to the
General Assembly complements efforts by the Security
Council in respect of a resolution of the conflict. The
draft resolution is designed to reinforce an ongoing
settlement process. Let me reiterate that Georgia
considers this draft resolution to be yet another
demonstration of its full commitment to the peaceful
political settlement of the conflict.
This draft resolution specifically underlines the
right of return of all IDPs and refugees, regardless of
their ethnicity. It also acknowledges that the beauty, the
charm and — most important — the strength of this
incredible region lie in its multi-ethnic, multicultural
composition, which was established during centuries of
peaceful coexistence.
The draft resolution addresses the concerns of
both sides in the conflict. Moreover, it guarantees the
protection of the rights of the Abkhaz population of the
region. It is imperative to clearly understand that the
protection of the rights of all residents who continue to
live in Abkhazia, Georgia, is of paramount value. It is
more important now than ever before to once again
affirm that the realization of the right of the IDPs and
refugees to return to their homes in safety and dignity
is at the top of the United Nations agenda.
History has taught us a bitter lesson of how
inexperienced political leadership, wrongly channelled
emotions and irresponsible decisions, backed by direct
external military interference, have led to the tragedy
of the complete ethnic cleansing of the Georgian
population from Abkhazia, Georgia.
The scale and the brutality of the atrocities were
incomprehensible. On 27 September 1993, almost all
the civilian leadership of Abkhazia, including the head
of the Government, Mr. Shartava, and the mayor of the
city of Sukhumi, Mr. Gabiskiria, were captured and
later executed at point-blank range by armed separatist
insurgents. Both Georgians and Abkhaz paid the
horrible price of more than 10,000 deaths and of
hundreds of thousands of expelled innocent civilians.
All of us who lived through that dreadful period have
experienced profound remorse and remain deeply hurt
by this reality.

2

Accordingly, the draft resolution recalls, inter
alia, the reports of ethnic cleansing condemned by the
Budapest, Lisbon and Istanbul summits of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and it concludes that such acts imply a criminal intent
and cannot be tolerated.
Although ethnic cleansing has been ruthlessly
conducted against Georgians, other nationalities were
also forced to flee the region. For more than 14 years
after the end of the atrocities, people who fled their
homes are still forced to live with this humanitarian
disaster.
The suffering and anxiety being experienced
today have been complicated by a growing sense of
hopelessness. Sadly, there are already generations of
children who have seen their home, Abkhazia, only on
television or in pictures.
The human suffering experienced in Georgia
during the conflict in 1992 and 1993 was significant,
but it has not been sufficiently assessed and addressed
by the broader international community. During the
final days of the conflict in Abkhazia, hundreds of
thousands of ethnic Georgians and people of other
ethnicities fled the region in fear of reprisals. These
internally displaced persons are settled throughout
Georgia in temporary housing facilities that
unfortunately have become permanent ones.
Since the end of the active phase of the conflict,
in 1993, IDPs have continued to be primary victims of
the conflict. Although my Government is doing
everything humanly possible to ease the economic and
social burden, IDPs remain among the most
disadvantaged people in Georgia, almost totally
dependent on the Government and on international
assistance.
Allow me to draw the Assembly’s attention to a
2006 report of the Secretary-General’s Representative
on the human rights of internally displaced persons:
“The sustainable return of persons to …
Abkhazia [, Georgia,] is obstructed by
administrative measures directed against returnees,
by attacks and harassment, as well as by widespread
impunity for perpetrators. Even if it has no
international significance, the so-called Law of
the Republic of Abkhazia ... discriminates against
persons of non-Abkhaz origin and may thus
create difficulties for returnees. ... Abkhaz

08-34051

A/62/PV.97

authorities have restricted the use of the Georgian
language in schools, with detrimental effects on
the provision of education.”
Unfortunately, the state of affairs has not improved
whatsoever since then; it is continuously deteriorating.
Here, I must stress that the proposed draft
resolution would by no means impede the ongoing
settlement process or its arrangements. The draft
resolution focuses on the undisputed right of every
individual to return to his or her home and to lead a
safe, secure and dignified life. In fact, this draft
resolution is designed to serve as a part of the ongoing
process that we are considering in combination with
other efforts as means for the full-scale political
resolution of the conflict.
Unfortunately, some have illegally acquired
private and public property on the territory of Georgia
in Abkhazia, and that process is still continuing. The
international community cannot abide these actions, for
they are without any legal standing. These illegal
actions should be condemned and dealt with
accordingly.
The past 14 years have not contributed to the
return process. Moreover, with every passing year, the
situation has progressively deteriorated. Consequently,
people who have waited hopelessly for results have
been losing their faith in the United Nations. The
General Assembly must hear their plea and show
attention and concern regarding these refugees and
internally displaced persons. We beseech members: the
time has come to restore their lost trust. Simply put,
these people have had enough of the suffering and
anguish imposed upon them, and they deserve to return
to their homes to lead a normal life, as they did before
the conflict.
A house divided against itself cannot stand, and
so unification has become the guiding principle of the
Georgian Government. Stating its full cooperation with
the United Nations and with the international
community as a whole, Georgia, by challenging the
status quo, is striving to create new ways to bring
about a lasting resolution of the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia. That is the desire and the expectation of our
people.
Let me outline a number of peace initiatives
recently proposed by the President of Georgia.
Specifically, our proposals include the following: the

08-34051

introduction of a new constitutional position of VicePresident of Georgia for the Abkhaz side; guaranteed
representation for Abkhazia in all bodies of the
Georgian central authorities, including the parliament
and ministries of Georgia; international guarantees
ensuring broad federalism and unprecedented
autonomy for Abkhazia; the right to veto any decision
related to Abkhazia’s constitutional status; the
preservation and further development of the Abkhaz
culture, language and ethnic identity; the establishment
of a joint free economic zone; the provision of security
guarantees; a gradual merger of law enforcement
agencies and of customs services; and an invitation to
the Russian Federation, along with the rest of the
international community, to act as mediator in this
process.
On 12 April this year, the President of Georgia
articulated a series of complementary proposals: to
create, within the ministries, thematic working groups
on legal, economic and political issues; to revitalize
direct political dialogue and contacts with the Abkhaz
side and involve the latter in the working groups; to
implement the package of confidence-building
measures agreed with the European Union; and to
come up with additional ideas and projects aimed at
extending Georgian-Abkhaz contacts and cooperation.
Those proposals have already been transmitted to the
Abkhaz side, along with the suggestion that talks on
their merits be started immediately. What is more, the
President’s proposals have been conveyed to the
Georgian ministries so that they can be translated into
practical actions, and Georgia’s Ministry of Finance
has already allocated funds for that purpose.
Let me elaborate on what we are doing to protect
the human rights of the Abkhaz population as part of
the ongoing peace process. I mentioned that the legal
innovations will give the people of Abkhazia, Georgia,
the maximum authority to govern their lives and will
ensure the preservation of their own language, culture
and traditions. Minorities frequently find majority rule
to be extremely threatening; the assumed danger is that
the majority will simply use its power to take away
rights. That is why effective mechanisms for protecting
minority rights are essential to the success of any effort
to resolve a dispute by democratic means.
In Georgia, we are fully committed to developing
mechanisms that will guarantee the following.
Constitutional protections for Abkhaz rights will
ensure respect for ethnic, cultural and religious

3

A/62/PV.97

differences. That includes the right to be educated in
one’s mother tongue and to display appropriate
symbols of cultural identity. Such mechanisms will
involve constitutional protections for the rights of all
citizens. As soon as the Abkhaz side accepts the basic
principles of the recent proposals, we can move ahead
in making the necessary changes to Georgian law.
Parliamentary protections will provide the Abkhaz
population with a high degree of autonomy in the
decision-making process regarding cultural matters
such as religious worship, education and language.
Only with such a level of confidence will the Abkhaz
people reconsider their demands for immediate
independence and accept a union with the central
Government in Tbilisi.
We believe that the General Assembly should
reaffirm the right of all refugees and internally
displaced persons to return safely to their homes,
without preconditions and with adequate security
guarantees. We also believe it is necessary that the
United Nations, together with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union and the Group of Friends of the SecretaryGeneral, establish a mechanism for initiating that
process.
We can no longer accept the current situation;
there are too many critical interests at stake. With that
in mind, we are convinced that delegations will not
find anything in this draft resolution that contradicts
our shared principles and values, and that they will
vote in favour of it.
The international community should finally come
to the recognition that a peaceful resolution to this
conflict would contribute to a more stable, unified
democratic Georgia. That in turn would lead to peace
and security throughout the broader region. We in
Georgia will do our part to ensure success.
What is most important is that we be honest with
ourselves. This conflict has solved no problems; in
fact, its consequences, both immediate and long-term,
have been negative and disastrous for all parties. It has
been morally subversive for the international
community and has been economically destructive and
socially degrading for the affected internally displaced
persons and for people throughout the region.
The conflict in Abkhazia illustrates that Georgia
has become an outstanding historical example of how
externally generated, meaningless conflicts in the

4

Caucasus have been kept in a frozen state in order to
subdue and control the people of Georgia. Here, I must
stress that, throughout the centuries, the Abkhaz have
played a significant role in creating strong and unified
Georgian statehood. History tells us of the sufferings of
the Abkhaz population as a result of colonial policies.
The atrocities of the nineteenth century serve as proof
that the Abkhaz, like the Georgians, have come very
close to complete extinction several times. Despite
threats and hardships, Georgian and Abkhaz people
stood strong and managed to nurture their identity and
their traditions through unity and understanding. As a
result, Abkhaz and Georgian people have a common
cultural and spiritual heritage. Nearly 40 per cent of
the families living in pre-conflict Abkhazia, Georgia,
were mixed Georgian-Abkhaz families.
The only lesson that we have learned is that war
and oppression only breeds a radical and violent
impulse to fight back. It only ensures the cycle of
revenge and retribution, which condemns everyone to a
poverty of expectations and promotes inhumanity and
suffering. Georgia has been directly affected by this
severe oppression too many times throughout its
turbulent history. We have learned that it is only direct,
sincere talks among the aggrieved parties, in which we
can all express our feelings without rancour, hostility
or bitterness, that can lead the opposing parties beyond
blame and accusations and towards peaceful
coexistence, hope and, finally, prosperity.
I urge the Assembly to help us today to begin
erasing the poverty of expectations that has condemned
so many for so long, for so little.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Recently we
discussed here the situation in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan (see A/62/PV.86). Today we are
discussing the situation in Georgia, in particular the
situation of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia. The discussion of two conflicts in the
GUAM area in such a short period proves our deep
concern and indicates the seriousness of the situation.
We have been warning the international community
about this situation for the last 15 years. Both cases
involve occupied territories, separatism, expulsion of
hundreds of thousands of people from their homes, and
outside supporters.
All these consequences of the conflicts represent
threats to the stability not only of the South Caucasus
but of the wider region. The persistence of the

08-34051

A/62/PV.97

protracted conflicts on the territories of the GUAM
States undermines international and regional peace and
security and prevents making full use of the potential
and ample opportunities. The conflicts have almost the
same origin, similarly developed scenarios and
dangerous consequences. They all started from the
manifestation of aggressive separatism and were aimed
from the very beginning at seizing the territories by
using force and at a fundamental change of the
demographic composition.
We are convinced that the only way to reach a
just and comprehensive settlement of the conflicts in
the territories of the GUAM States is an approach
based on full respect for the letter and spirit of
international law. The joint position of the GUAM
member States on the settlement of the conflicts is
based on respect for the territorial integrity of
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Moldova, returning forcibly
displaced persons to their lands, restoring the pre-war
demographic composition of the conflict-affected
territories and providing normal, secure and equal
living conditions for all communities of those
territories, which will enable the building of an
effective democratic system of self-governance within
the internationally recognized borders of the GUAM
States.
That position represents the only way to achieve
the peaceful resolution of the conflicts and has no
viable alternatives. To maintain otherwise would be
tantamount to accepting the consequences of ethnic
cleansing and other serious violations of the rule of law
and human rights — or in other words, the prevalence
of force over justice. The stalemate in the resolution of
those conflicts should be of particular concern not only
to the affected countries but also to the international
community at large. Therefore we pay the utmost
attention to the concerted efforts by the United Nations
and fully support the draft resolution submitted by
Georgia.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Today’s discussion once
again brings the attention of the international
community to the problem of protracted conflicts in the
territories of Azerbaijan, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, which are vital matters for our countries —
the Members of the United Nations. Those conflicts
remain major impediments to the democratic and
economic development of those States. It is crucially
important that the international community continue to
take practical steps to help to settle the protracted

08-34051

conflicts in the GUAM region based on the
unconditional recognition of the territorial integrity of
those States and the undoubted priorities of adherence
to human rights.
Some give us to understand that the recent
tensions around Abkhazia are a result of the decision
on the case of Kosovo. That is a dangerous insinuation.
In finding the way to settle the protracted conflicts, it
is very important to know their history and to
understand their nature. In our opinion, protracted
conflicts in the GUAM area have their common roots
in the criminal policy of the totalitarian regime of the
former Soviet Union, which tried to sow seeds of
enmity and establish an environment of mistrust among
nations. It is a pity that those notorious traditions are
still alive. In this context, the recent decisions of the
Russian Federation to upgrade the status of relations
with Abkhazia and South Ossetia are of particular
concern. Such steps violate peace and stability in the
GUAM region and undermine the peace process of the
settlement of the protracted conflicts.
Such circumstances clearly demonstrate an urgent
need to change the climate of the peace negotiations
process on protracted conflicts generally and on
Abkhazia in particular. The member States of GUAM
are ready to actively and constructively cooperate with
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union, as
well as with the States-mediators, towards the
settlement of those frozen conflicts. They are exporting
instability, criminality and insecurity to Europe, as well
as hindering further integration of the affected States
into the European architecture.
We believe that the international community
should call upon the Russian Federation to review its
policy in the GUAM area and to build bilateral
relations on a basis of the universally recognized
norms and principles of international law, including the
United Nations Charter, as well as to renew its role as a
constructive mediator. In their joint statement of
30 April 2008, the Presidents of Ukraine and Georgia
stressed:
“Ukraine and Georgia reaffirm that the resolution
of the Georgia-Abkhaz and Georgia-South
Ossetia conflicts is possible exclusively through
peaceful means in the framework of the
resolutions of the United Nations Security
Council, in particular the Security Council

5

A/62/PV.97

resolution 1808 of 15 April 2008. These
resolutions call on the United Nations Member
States to respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders.”
We are confident that the consideration of these
problems should be in the scope of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. It is significantly
important that the international community, in
particular the United Nations, continue to take practical
steps to settle the protracted conflicts in the territories
of Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Azerbaijan.
We call upon the Member States to support the draft
resolution submitted by the delegation of Georgia.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Georgia and understands Georgia’s concern about
the status of the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees in Abkhazia. On 15 April 2008 the
Security Council adopted resolution 1808 (2008),
which explicitly provides for the protection of the
rights of the IDPs and refugees in Abkhazia. Therefore
we believe all the parties concerned should make
efforts to promote a smooth implementation of
resolution 1808 (2008) so as to ensure that the rights
and interests of those IDPs and refugees are effectively
protected. We hope that all the parties concerned will
continue to make efforts to improve their mutual
confidence and strengthen cooperation with a view to
achieving progress on this issue and working together
for the maintenance of peace and stability in this
region.
Before concluding, the Chinese delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for the condolences and
sympathies extended to China on behalf of the General
Assembly. The Chinese delegation also wishes to thank
the relevant countries and international organizations
for their assistance and support to China. At present,
the Chinese Government and people are engaged in an
all-out effort for relief and rescue. We are confident
that with the support of the entire international
community we will surely overcome the difficulties
caused by this natural disaster.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/62/L.45.

6

Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to explain their votes before the voting.
Mr. Tashchian (Armenia): As the members of
this forum may recall, Armenia opposed the inclusion
of the item entitled “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM
area and their implications for international peace,
security and development” in the agenda of the General
Assembly. On many occasions, we have stated that the
rationale behind that agenda item was irrelevant and
unacceptable to us. Remaining consistent in our
position, we will not support the draft resolution.
At the same time, there are a number of other
valid arguments substantiating our position. We believe
that refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
constitute one of the most tragic outcomes of any
ethnic conflict. The existence of refugees and IDPs
under any circumstance is associated with pain and
suffering, but in the case of the Abkhazian IDPs, we
have a particular concern. Tens of thousands of ethnic
Armenians used to live in that part of Georgia as an
integral part of its multi-ethnic society. As a
consequence of the conflict, many of our compatriots,
unfortunately, left that region of Georgia.
With regard to the IDPs from Abkhazia, it is
important to recall the attempt made in the mid-1990s
to return them to the Gali region of Georgia. The
realities of that policy fell short of expectations;
moreover, they had a number of negative consequences
because the return of refugees was undertaken before
the core issues of the existing problems were
addressed.
The Armenian delegation believes that any
conflict should be addressed comprehensively. Single
issues, as significant as they may be, should not be
taken out of the general context of the conflict.
Attempts separately to address the different dimensions
of the conflict without resolving the fundamental
problems and eliminating their primary causes prove to
be counterproductive. Such an approach can even
endanger the entire process of conflict resolution.
The Armenian delegation believes that only a
comprehensive approach, through peace talks with the
involvement of all parties concerned, can bring a just

08-34051

A/62/PV.97

and lasting solution to the conflict. Thus, the Armenian
delegation will vote against the draft resolution before
us, since it contradicts our position on conflict
resolution.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation
regrets Georgia’s decision to submit for the General
Assembly’s consideration a draft resolution on the
status of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia, Georgia, although it does not affect
Russian-Georgian relations.
While purporting to address a sensitive
humanitarian problem, the draft actually serves an
entirely different purpose. It adopts a political
approach to the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict that the
Russian Federation cannot support. The document
forces upon us a distorted impression of the GeorgianAbkhaz conflict and is silent on its background. It
considers only certain consequences, neglecting the
root causes of the situation, which the Permanent
Representative of Georgia himself has called a
humanitarian catastrophe. Indeed, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has made
recommendations to the Government of Georgia that it
has not taken up.
It is clear that this initiative has been concocted
by the authors to put pressure on the Abkhaz side to
resolve political, rather than humanitarian issues. That
has indeed been reaffirmed by the statements that we
have heard today following the representative of
Georgia’s introduction of the draft resolution, which
referred only to political aspects of the settlement of
the conflict in the territory of the former Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, and said virtually nothing
about the problems of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs).
If adopted, the draft resolution would destabilize
the United Nations activities in the Georgian-Abkhaz
settlement, including the work of the Security Council
and the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General on
Georgia. While important, the problem of the return of
displaced persons is not the only one in the context of
achieving a comprehensive and long-term settlement of
the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict.
The draft text introduced by the Georgian side
effectively separates the issue of the return of refugees
and IDPs from an entire series of tasks towards
achieving peace in the region, and thereby severely

08-34051

complicates the search for a solution to the problem.
The draft resolution does not take into account the
rights and interests of Abkhaz, Ossetian and other
refugees and IDPs who were displaced and lost their
property during the course of the bloody conflict
unleashed by Tbilisi in the early 1990s against those
who sought to break from Georgia, Abkhazia and
South Ossetia and who, I stress, had a constitutional
right to do so. Thus, the adoption of such an essentially
selective draft resolution would further exacerbate
confrontation in Georgian-Abkhaz relations.
The draft presents the General Assembly with
selected provisions from distinct Security Council
resolutions, but it contains no provisions from those
resolutions that condemn the activities of the Georgian
authorities. Against that background, it comes as no
surprise that the Georgian delegation held no open
consultations on the draft resolution, the final version
of which appeared only yesterday, giving delegations
and foreign affairs offices in our capitals very little
time to analyse it carefully.
The draft starkly contradicts and duplicates the
work of the General Assembly, which has already
adopted a comprehensive and systematic thematic draft
resolution in the Third Committee on assistance to
IDPs, reflecting the basic priorities in that area. It is
revealing that a similar draft resolution on Abkhazia,
submitted by Georgia to the Third Committee in the
fall of 2007, was withdrawn because it did not receive
support from the majority of United Nations Members.
We are convinced that the draft resolution is
counterproductive and will lead not to a solution to the
problem of refugees and IDPs, but to increased
tensions in the region and the inclusion of yet another
politicized and destructive item on the General
Assembly’s agenda. In that connection, we have no
alternative but to request that the draft resolution be
put to the vote and to vote against it. We call on all
States interested in a just settlement of the GeorgianAbkhaz conflict and in the non-politicization of the
activities of the General Assembly also to vote against
the draft.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote. The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/62/L.45, entitled “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia”. A
recorded vote has been requested.

7

A/62/PV.97

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Azerbaijan, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, Sweden, Ukraine, United
States of America.
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Myanmar, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
Abstaining:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Swaziland, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Draft resolution A/62/L.45 was adopted by
14 votes to 11, with 105 abstentions (resolution
62/249).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Brazil advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote following the vote, may
I remind delegations that explanations of vote are

8

limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): Germany fully and
wholeheartedly supports the need for a swift return of
all internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees to
their homes and properties in Abkhazia, Georgia.
Germany, as the coordinator of the Group of Friends of
the Secretary-General on Georgia, has co-sponsored all
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, which
have made clear and urgent reference to the deplorable
situation of the IDPs and refugees in Georgia.
However, Germany abstained in the voting today, as
the resolution singles out the issue of internally
displaced persons and refugees. In our opinion, it does
not sufficiently reflect the many other important
aspects of the conflict, which remain of serious
concern for both sides and which must also be
addressed in order to achieve a comprehensive and
peaceful settlement.
Also in its capacity as coordinator of the Group
of Friends, Germany will pursue its efforts to resolve
the conflict on the basis of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Georgia, taking into consideration the
positions and views of all parties to the conflict. Steps
towards the ultimate objective of a peaceful resolution
of this conflict will have to be based on dialogue,
mutual trust and agreement between Tbilisi and
Sukumi.
Germany reiterates its firm commitment to
actively
participate
in
and
promote
the
Georgian/Abkhaz peace process. We share with
Georgia the goal of the swift return of IDPs and
refugees in dignity and safety.
Mr.
Mantovani
(Italy):
Recalling
the
declarations of 18 April and 2 May 2008 by the
presidency of the European Union on behalf of its
member countries, Italy reiterates its firm commitment
to the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders, as most recently affirmed in
Security Council resolution 1808 (2008), of 15 April.
Italy is concerned about recent developments in
the Georgian areas of conflict. We call on all parties
involved to refrain from any actions that might lead to
escalation in the region and urge them to engage
instead in a constructive dialogue conducive to a
peaceful settlement of the Abkhaz conflict. Italy
therefore continues to support the efforts of the United

08-34051

A/62/PV.97

Nations, as well as those of the European Union’s
Special Representative and the Commission of the
European Union, to implement a package of
confidence-building measures in support of conflict
resolution in Abkhazia, Georgia.
On the status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, Italy welcomes the
adoption of resolution 1808 (2008) and strongly
supports the specific provisions related to this matter.
However, Italy abstained in the voting on the
resolution on the status of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, because
the subject matter is under consideration by the
Security Council. The Council takes up the problem on
a regular basis in the context of a specific resolution.
We also believe that the General Assembly should
continue to deal with such issues in the comprehensive
framework of the resolution on the protection of, and
assistance to, IDPs.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I am taking the floor to
briefly explain our position with regard to the conflict
in Abkhazia, Georgia.
First of all, I would like to reiterate our firm
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. I also wish to reaffirm our support
for international efforts aimed at a peaceful settlement
of the Abkhaz conflict, in particular those of the United
Nations and the Special Representative in Georgia,
with the assistance of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General.
Having said that, we remain seriously concerned
about the recent series of events, which have raised
tensions between the two sides to the conflict, as well
as between Georgia and the Russian Federation. We
call on all sides to refrain from any steps that could
further aggravate the situation. Likewise, we strongly
appeal to them to take swift action to rebuild
confidence and resume dialogue with a view to finding
a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
For our part, we will continue to support any
package of confidence-building measures in support of
resolving the conflict. Indeed, as a close neighbour of
Georgia, with whom we enjoy excellent bilateral
relations, my country stands ready to contribute to the
peaceful resolution of this long-standing conflict. We
believe that steps in that direction will also enhance the

08-34051

stability and prosperity of the Caucasus region as a
whole.
Mr. Chatel (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to recall the commitment of France to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
France firmly supports the right of all refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to return to
Abkhazia. We also reaffirm the fact that their right to
their property is not at all affected by their absence.
I would like to recall the provisions of resolution
62/153, adopted by the General Assembly on
18 December 2007, concerning protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons. France is
committed to the implementation of the General
Assembly’s recommendations concerning that crucial
matter, which brings into play human rights and has a
very important humanitarian dimension.
I would also like to recall that the Security
Council is seized of the question of the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons from
Abkhazia, Georgia. Council resolution 1808 (2008),
unanimously adopted on 15 April, calls upon the
parties to fulfil, within a reliable time frame, the
conditions necessary for the safe, dignified and swift
return of refugees and internally displaced persons. By
adopting that resolution, the Security Council wanted
to indicate its wish for the parties to immediately
begin to mitigate the suffering of refugees and
internally displaced persons.
France believes that the commitment of the
parties to work together urgently on the fundamental
matter of refugees and internally displaced persons in
Abkhazia will contribute to establishing a climate of
confidence, which is necessary for the peaceful
settlement that we call for. We want that strong request
from the Security Council to be heard and implemented
as soon as possible and want the Council to remain
seized of this matter.
France abstained from voting on the draft
resolution submitted by Georgia on the status of
internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia because we do not believe that that initiative
would help to achieve the objectives that I have just
stated. However, I would like once again to reiterate
France’s strong commitment to those objectives.

9

A/62/PV.97

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Allow me to begin
by echoing your condolences, Mr. President, to the
peoples of China and of Burma/Myanmar with regard
to the sad events that have occurred in those countries.

Japan is strongly interested, in general, in issues
related to internally displaced persons (IDPs) and is
concerned about the plight of the refugees and IDPs in
that conflict and the hardships they face.

The United Kingdom abstained today on this
resolution, in line with our long-standing position. We
recall the annual General Assembly resolution on
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees,
which reaffirms the right of return of IDPs and their
property rights.

Mr. Soler Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Panama decided to abstain from voting on this
resolution and believes that it is appropriate to offer an
explanation of vote.

We take very seriously the plight of refugees and
IDPs in Georgia. We worked hard to reflect the
importance of the return of refugees and IDPs in
Security Council resolution 1808 (2008), which was
adopted unanimously by the Council on 15 April.
Creating the circumstances for the safe and dignified
return of refugees and IDPs to their homes in Georgia
is, as a number of speakers have said today, a
fundamental component of the peace process, and,
along with security guarantees, of an agreement on the
political status of the Abkhazia region of Georgia.
The United Kingdom reiterates its strong political
support for Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We are committed to supporting Georgia in
its search for a peaceful solution to this long-running
conflict. We welcome Georgia’s restraint in the face of
recent tensions and the readiness of President
Saakashvili to make new and constructive proposals to
the Abkhaz side. A solution to the conflict can be
reached only through dialogue. We hope that those
proposals will become the foundation for a new
dialogue between the sides.
Finally, the United Kingdom remains committed,
as a member of the Group of Friends of the SecretaryGeneral, to supporting that dialogue and to promoting
the building of confidence between the two sides.
Mr. Ashiki (Japan): Japan abstained in the voting
on this resolution in the light of the various possible
implications of adopting it under this particular agenda
item.
With regard to the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict,
Japan has steadfastly supported the principle of the
territorial integrity of Georgia within its borders and
the peaceful resolution of the conflict. Japan also
supports the ongoing efforts of the Group of Friends of
the Secretary-General.

10

Panama is a party to all conventions on the
protection of human rights and reaffirms its support of
the general principles on the protection of the human
rights of refugees and internally displaced persons, and
their right to return to their places of origin. We
reaffirm the need to put those principles into practice
in Abkhazia, Georgia. However, we are concerned that
this resolution favours one of the parties to the conflict
and, rather than contributing a solution, could in fact
aggravate tensions in the region.
Furthermore, we recall that Article 12 of the
Charter of the United Nations stipulates that while the
Security Council is considering a dispute or situation,
the General Assembly shall not make any
recommendation on it unless the Security Council so
requests. The situation in question is still being
addressed in the Council. The practice of the Assembly
has, in recent times, allowed for a very flexible
interpretation of Article 12. However, due to the
gravity and instability of the security situation in
Abkhazia, it would be appropriate for us to respect
both the letter and the spirit of that provision.
Mr. Pham Hai Anh (Viet Nam): Viet Nam
supports efforts by the parties concerned to settle their
dispute by peaceful means through existing
mechanisms, with a view to achieving a
comprehensive, lasting and reasonable solution to the
question of Abkhazia, thus contributing to peace and
stability in the region. In that spirit, Viet Nam calls
upon the parties concerned to exercise self-restraint,
refraining from steps that could increase tension The
resolution just adopted contains elements that could
potentially affect the process of negotiations among the
parties concerned. For those reasons, Viet Nam
abstained in the vote on this resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote. The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 16.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

08-34051
