52

General Assembly-Fifth Session

at their disposal information on the implementation
of the recommendations approved by both bodies in
matters relating to Chapters X[I and XIII of the
Charter,
Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare a list, classified by subjects, of such
resolutions, including in each case the text of the operative part of the document ;
( b) To report to the sixth session of the General
Assemlily on the measures taken by the :\drninistering
Authorities to implement such resolutions, using as
a source the reports of the Trusteeship Council :
( c) If there has been no action on tlw part of an
Administering Authority in respect of any particular
resolution, to set forth the reasons given concerning
that matter.
316th plenary meetin.r;,
2 December 1950.
437 (V).

Educational advancement
Territories

in

Trust

The General Assembly,
Considering that the promotion of educational advancement of the inhabitants of Trust Territories is
essential for their progressive development as early as
possible towards self-government or independence,
Reco.r;ni:::ing that, while notable progress has already
been achieved in the educational development of the
Trust Territories, considerable efforts are still re<Juired
in this field,
C onsidcring that the establishment, in so far as is
practic~ble, of comprehensive and long-range plans
to achieve such educational development is desirable,
1. Necommends that the Trusteeship Council continue to devote particular attention, in consultation with
the 1:-dministering Authorities and the specialized
agencies, to long-range programmes of educational development in the Trust Territories, with a view to
et;t.abling the inhabitants of those Territories to takr
over the responsibilities of complete self-government
at the earliest possible date;

. 2. Requests that the Trusteeship Council include in
its annual reports to the General Assembly its observations on the various long-range educational programmes undertaken in the Trust Territories, and the
progress made in respect thereof.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.
438 (V).

Rural economic development of the
Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the equitable distribution and the
proper utilization of the land togrther con,,tit11tf' 0ne
of the essential conditions in ensurinc:, maint:iini1w
and promoting the economic and social advancement
of inhabitants of Trust Territories,
Recognizing that all Trust Territories are among
the under-developed areas of the world,

1. Recommends the Trusteeship Council:
(a) To study the prevailing policies, Jaws and practices which in the Trust Territories relate to land, land
utilization and the alienation of land, taking into account the present and future needs of the indigenous
inhabitants from the standpoint of the basic objectives
of the I ntcrnational Trusteeship System, as set forth
in Article 76 of the Charter, and the future economic
requirements of the said Territories, as well as the
social and economic consequences of the transfer of
land to 11on-incligenous inhabitants;
( !, ) To make such recomnwnclations to the Administering 1\utl10ritics concerning the prevailing policies,
laws and practices referrrd to above as may hr conduci\e to thr economic and social developm~nt of the
indigenous inhabitants of the said Territories and as
the Council may see fit to make in the light of the
stndv undertaken in pursuance of sub-paragraph (a)
above:

2. Requests the Tmsteeship Council to report to the
next regular session of the General Assembly on the
work donr in this connrxion.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

439 (V).

Technical assistance for Trust
Territories

Thr (;nzcral Asscm/,fy,
Considering that, in pursuance of the objectives of the
Trusteeship System as set forth in the Charter, it is
indispensable that Trust Territories he developed in the
i 11tercst s of the indigenous inhabitants,
Noting that the development of the Trust Territories
might be improved by additional technical assistance,
Notiny that, under the expanded programme of technical assistance for economic development of underdeveloped countries ( resolution 222 (IX) of the Eco11m11ic and Social Council), the Trust Territories are
eligilile to receive technical assistance upon the request
of the i\d111i11istcring Authorities concrrned,

1. nrmt•s the attention of the Administering Authorities to the facilities available under the expanded programme of technical assistance, as well as to the regular
progra111111es of technical assistance of the United Nations and the specialized agencies for economic development, social welfare services and training for public
admi11istration;
2. Draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council, the specialized agrncies and the SecretaryCrneral to the nerd to extend to the Trust Territories
such technical assistance as they may be in a position to
render, in order to establish a sound basis for the progressive development of the inhabitants towards selfgovernment or independence;
3. Recommends that the Administering Authorities,
on behalf of the Trust Territories, make full use of these
sources of technical assistance and make appropriate
applications to the agencies involved ;
