s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

•

Distr •
GENERAL

S/ 196,6
lf> March
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL:

ARABIC, CHINES!•:, £,~NliLISli,
FRJ:!NCH, RUSSIAN AND SPAN l SU

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
At the 27YHth meeting of the security Council, held on 16 March l9ijij, 1n
connection with the consideration of the item entitled "The situation hetween Iran
and Iraq", the President of the Security Council made the tollowinq statement:
"Followinq consultations of the Council, I have been authorized to make
the followinq statement on behalt of the members ot the Council:
'The members of the Security Council express qrave concorn over the
fact that the traqic conflict between Iran and Iraq continues and has
entered its eiqhth year.
'They strongly deplore the escalation of the hostilities between
these two countries, particularly the attacks against r.ivi lian tarq1!ts
and cities that have taken a heavy toll in human lives and caused vast
material destruction, in spite of the declared readiness of the
belligerent parties to cease such attacks.
'The members of the security Council insist that Iran and Iraq
immediately cease all such attacks and desist forthwith from all acts
that lead to the escalation of the conflict and which thereby create
further obstacles in the way ot implementation ot resolution 5~b (19~7)
and undermine the efforts of the Security Council to put an early end to
this conflict in accordance with the resolution.
'They are convinced that the recent escalation has demonstrated the
need for full and rapid implementation of resolution 59b (1987).
'Determined to brinq the conflict between Iran and trau to an early
end, the members of the Security Council reaffirm their stronq commitment
to the implementation of resolution 59b (l9ij7) as an inteqrated whole
which is the only basis for a comprehensive, just, honourable and lastinq
settlement of the conflict.
'They express grave concern that resolution 598 (1Yb7), which has a
mandatory character, has not yet been implemented.
88-0&795

0075f (E)

I •••

S/ l'Jb~6

Enq lish
Paqe l

''l'he members of the Sec.urity Council take note o~ t:.~ statement made
by the Secretary-General to them on 14 March l~ijij, They encouraqe him to
continue his etforts as endorsed by the Security Council to secure
implementation of resolution !:>':lij ( l~b 7) ,,nd, in th1 s connection, support
hi.s 1.ntention to invite , ,: · Governmentr; ot Iran and Iraq to sencl, at the
earliest possih.Le date, th.-.dr toreiqn ministers, or anothPr senior
otticial, as a special emissary to New York to enter into urqent and
intensive consultations with the secretary-G~neral, They request the
Recretary-General to suhm1t to the Security Council, within three weeks,
the report on his consultations with the two Sldr:!S,
''l'he memb~rs ot the Security Council reat t irm tt1t•ir determination,
in accordance with op,-,rati ve pataqrilpl1 lll ol resn1 ut ion ':>Yti ( l\Hf/ l, to
consider promptly, 1n che liqht ot the Secretary-General's renewea
et torts to secure 1mplemfrntat1on ot t.hu: resolution, turthe-r t!t ter.tiv~
steps to ensure compliance with it,'"

..

... ........ ...-•·· "
,

..
