TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
lh
MEETING: 26 JANUARY

NEW

1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1388) . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

page
1

Adoption of the agenda 1 . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 25 January 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8360) .

5

Annex. Maps submitted to the Security Council by the representative of the
United States of America in the course of his statement at the present meeting .

13

SIPV.1388

NOTE
Symbols of Uniied Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The ‘date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH

Held in New York on Friday,
R&dent:

MEETING

26 January 1968, at 3.30 p.m.

Mr. Agha SHAH1 (Pakistan).

5. The Soviet delegation thinks that members of the
Council should realize that the accusations levelled by the
United States of America against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are as the United States knows completely unfounded. The aggressor in Korea is not the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but those who
have invaded the land of the Korean people, who for many
years have continued to occupy the southern part of Korea
and who are trying to impose upon the Korean People the
puppet regime of a clique of corrupt traitors.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 388)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
6. It is obvious that the main cause of tension in Korea is
the presence in the Territory of South Korea of United
States aggressive armed forces including the United States
Navy in the waters off Korea.

2. Letter dated 25 January

1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8360).
Adoption

7. It is a well-known fact that the United States of
America and all its supporters have opposed the numerous
proposals put forward by peace-loving States Members of
the United Nations for the withdrawal of all foreign armed
forces from South Korea. The United, States, pursuing its
acts of provocation and aggression against the Korean
people, has also systematically opposed the adoption by the
United Nations of any decision that might put an end to
foreign interference in the internal affairs of Korea. It has
ignored the numerous warnings of the Soviet Union and
other peace-loving countries about the dangerous and
explosive nature of the situation created in Korea by the
occupation of the southern part of that country by
America and other foreign troops.

of the agenda

1. The PRESIDENT: This meeting of the Security Council
has been convened in response to the urgent request of the
representative of the United States and following consultations with the members of the Council.
2. The provisional agenda for this meeting is contained in
document S/Agenda/ 1388. The first item is the adoption of
the agenda. If I hear no objection, I shall take it . . . .
3. The representative of the Union
Republics has asked to speak.

of Soviet Socialist

8. Thus only the United States and the Sfates that support
them in Korea are to blame for the fact that that country
remains a hotbed of tension, which threatens peace and
security ig that part of the world and hampers any peaceful
settlement of the Korean question. It can rightly be said
that the United States is now reaping the fruits of its
Korean p.olicy, the poisonous seeds of which it has been
sowing for many years on Korean soil and here in the
United Nations. And no dramatic moves or defamatory
attacks against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
such as the letter we now have before us, no other trickery
on the part of the United States representative can help to
twist the real facts.

4. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): As the President has just said,
the Security Council has been convened in response to a
request made by the United States of America in the letter
from the Permanent Representative of the United States to
the United Nations sent to the President of the Council late
last night [S/8360]. ‘A study of that letter, with which the
Council members are acquainted, leaves us in no doubt as
to the motives behind it. We should like to draw attention
to the actual way in which the matter was raised-the
attempt made by the United States-during the consultations mentioned by the President to dictate its terms
to other Council Members regarding the date and time for
the Council meeting to examine its complaint, as well as the
United States delegation’s reluctance to take into account
the fact that, owing to the short notice given, many
members of the Council were unable to communicate even
their position with regard to the time of the Council
meeting. All this goes to shdw that the United States is, in
this casetoo, in no way actuated by any desire to maintain
international peace and security.

9. Consequently, the request for a meeting of the Council
is clearly nothing but a manoeuvre in the sordid game
which the United States is playing. It is an attempt to shift
the responsibility for the continuing tension in Korea from
the guilty to the innocent, an attempt to disguise the
continuing aggression of the United States in that country.
We are well aware that the letter in question aho mentions
1

18. Ths representative of the United States said that there
is a situation of urgency, that there is tension in that area of
the world around Korea. We recognize that there is tension,
and it seems that that tension is increasing, not day bY day
but hour by hour, and is mainly created, 0ti:ginallY and
consistently, by the United States. It is already increasing
to the level of hysteria.

an incident involving the American naval vesselPueblo. But
it is obvious that this matter must not and cannot be
debated in the Security Council. The seizure of a foreign
vessel which has invaded the territorial waters of any State
with hostile intent is the internal affair of that State.
10. United States attempts to draw the Security Council
into a consideration of its slanderous accusations against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, far from
reducing tension in the Korean peninsula, will only serve to
aggravate that tension and the threat to the cause of peace
and security in that part of the world.

lg. Without going into the substance of the matter, I wish
to mention that the violation of the frontiers of other
countries is already becoming a consistent Policy of the
United States. Therefore, we were not too rnUC:h surprised
that another such occasion occurred, and this time in North
Korea.

11. The Soviet delegation therefore asks the members of
the Council to adopt an objective approach and to reject
the pretensions of the United States whose aim, as we have
already explained, is to use the Security Council to carry
out its iniquitous imperialist plans in the Far East and in
the Korean penin&la in particular.

20. The letter also mentions tensions and problems in
South Korea. If anyone is responsible in an international
sense for the tension in South Korea, then it is no one else
but the United States which occupies that COLIntrY
with
many thousands of troops-and that is the real source of
the tension.

12. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
representative of the Soviet Union, our colleague Ambassador Morozov, has not yet heard the evidence which I shall
offer-after the agenda is adopted, as I am sure it will be-in
support of the letter I have submitted to the President of
the Security Council [S/8360/.

91. By bringing this whole matter before the Security
Council, the United States is reverting to a very old practice
of sharing the responsibility-which
it should bear itself for
its actions-with the Security Council, wit11 the United
Nations, thus usurping the name of our Organization and of
13. It is characteristic perhaps of the Soviet Union to pass the Council. But bringing such aggressive acts before the
judgement before hearing the evidence. In Alice in WonderCouncil and putting them before the mcrnb’ers of the
land terms: “Sentence first-verdict afterwards”. But what
Council in a presentation as misleading as that contcined in
may be characteristic of Soviet justice is not the practice
the United States letter, only creates further misundep
and tradition of this Council.
standing and further trouble and, besides, casts a very heavy
shadow over the work of our Organization and does not
14. It is not overstating the facts to say that we have
promote peaceful co-operation or strengthen the cause of
brought to the Council on an urgent basis a matter which‘
international peace.
affects the peace and security of an important area in the
world. We have sought an urgent meeting of the Council
22. The Hungarian delegation is of the opinion that SI
because of our belief and conviction that if it is at all “ peaceful settlement is possible in Korea and elsewhere in
possible this situation should be dealt with and settled
the world. It could be implemented and achieved mainly by
peacefully through diplomatic channels. Clearly, the priwithdrawing
the occupation forces of the Uniteld States in
mary diplomatic channel in the world today is the Security
Korea
and
in
other parts of the world and by letting the
Council, the organ of this Organization with primary
Korean
people
settle their own affairs themselves,
responsibility for the mainteance of international peace and
security.
k23. The Hungarian delegation thus is of the opinion that it
is improper and untimely to bring this matter before the
15. We shall be quite content to have the Council judge
Security
Council, and considers that the tenor of this letter
the merits of the situation after hearing about the situation.
debases the dignity of the Council and lacks seriousness. MY
But whatever anyone’s views are, or may be, about the
delegation therefore strongly objects to the debate on this
merits of this situation, it would be completely incomprehensible, and I believe intolerable, to men’ of peace item, and objects to putting it on the agenlda of the
Security, Council.
throughout the world if the Council were to shun its duty
and to refuse to deal with this grave situation.
24. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): The representaltive of the
16. For this reason, I consider it an imperative duty of this
United States has requested an urgent rneethig of the
Council to proceed promptly to consider the agenda item
Council to consider certain events in the Far E:ast which
that we have proposed.
have undoubtedly brought about, to say the least, an
increase of tension in the area of Korea.
17. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The United States
delegation submitted a letter to you, Mr. President, yesterq5. I do not wish, any more than the preceding; speakers,
day evening, which we received this morning. We have
to enter into the substance of these developments at this
hardly had enough time to read it carefully, to analyse it
Point, but I wish to record why the Canadian delegation
and to make the necessary preparations for a careful
fully supports the inSCriptiOn Of this item on the agenda in
examination-not
to speak of getting the proper instrucresponse to the request contained in document ~/8360, In
tions from our Governments. We are still waiting for more
doing so, my delegation is conscious of the heavy respon.
proper information on the problem.
sibility which the Security Council was meant to exercise
2

&.’

and should exercise when problems arise relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security. This, after
all, is the purport of the Council’s responsibilities defined
under Article 24 of the United Nations Charter.

primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this dangerous age, in many ways
more dangerous than when the Charter was written, the
members of the Security Council have an immense responsibility in the fearful issuesof war and peace.

6. The issue, as I see it at this moment, is whether the
12Council will take advantage of this opportunity[to discharge
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security In the view of the Canadian
delegation, the Council shouBd not hesitate to do so and do
whatever it can to deal with a dangerous situation brought
to it by a Member State. Indeed, the fact that one of the
major Powers in the world should today be seeking the
assistance of th.e United Nations in overcoming a difficult
problem through, as the representative of the United States
said, diplomatic channels is surely something that should be
welcomed by the Security Council and by all the Members
of this Organization in whose name we act.

33. We have now before us a grave situation. No one who
has studied the facts can fail to feel blowing here the chill
wind of authentic danger. The world man-in-the-street does
not have to be a brilliant diplomatist or military expert to
see the obvious risks involved if this matter cannot be
settled peacefully. Certainly it can be settled peacefully,
but to achieve this the Security Council must play its
proper part. It will surely be inconceivable to the peoples of
the world if the Security Council of the United Nations
does not urgently consider the question now put before it.
34. Many of us here worked in the Security Council
through the long hot summer of the Arab-Israel war, whose
dangerous consequences still remain an anxious burden on
the world. When the situation which led to this war was
building up there was some talk of “over-dramatization” of
the situation, and a reluctance to get down to what is our
clearly defined primary job of tackling issues of international security. The resulting delay had, my delegation
believes, most serious consequences. We shall not easily be
forgiven by world opinion if we make the same mistake
again.

27, My delegation therefore believes that in the interest of
peace, in the interest of a speedy and equitable solution,
the Council should quickly agree to take up this question
and find some appropriate means of helping to resolve it.
One way might possibly be-and I only suggest this as an
indication of why we should be seized of it-to arrange for
an intermediary 01: intermediaries to exercise good offices
in this matter. All I would say is that in the present mood
of hostility in the area, surely the Council should lose no
time in taking up the matter and bringing the healing touch
of diplomacy to bear on the situation.

35. My delegation urges most strongly therefore that we
now decide without further delay to adopt our agenda, and
to proceed at once to consider the question which has very
properly been brought to our attention. I hope and believe
that we can reduce tension and find a satisfactory solution
to this issue in the just and peaceful manner required by the
Charter. To do this we need cool heads and good sense on
all sides; but we cannot afford to waste any time. This is
not a moment for procedural debate.

28. Reference has been made to various aspects of
document S/8360, and I realize from the preceding
statements that there will be disagreement as to the facts
and as to the background. But surely-certainly as far as
this delegation is concerned-the information available to us
so far indicates strongly that the PuebZo was in international waters at the time of its seizure. And in that event
those responsible for its seizure assumed a very heavy
responsibility in holding it forcibly, the ship together with
its crew, in clear violation of international law.

36. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
As the President has just said
that there are no more speakers on his list, I should like to
take this opportunity to make some additional remarks in
connexion with the statement made by the United States
representative and the statements made by the representatives of the United Kingdom and Canada which
supported his position.

(translated from Russian):

29. But one thing is crystal clear: the seizure in this event
is a very unhappy omen for future peace in the area unless
steps are taken to deal effectively, equitably and promptly
with the consequences. And it is in this spirit I believe that
the Council should proceed in adopting the agenda.

3 1. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): The question we
Ilave to decide is whether the Council is to consider and
deal with the serious situation which has been brought to
our attention. We are not yet dealing with the substance of
the situation. In my statement I shall therefore limit myself
strictly to the question of the inscription of this item and
the adoption of the agenda.

37. The United States representative continued to complain about the situation which endangered peace and had
allegedly been brought about by the activities of the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
He somehow passed over tlie whole previous history of the
question in silence and seemed not to have heard or to be
aware of it, although, as I have already amply demonstrated
today, it was the result of the aggression of the United
States of America against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.

32. Article 1, Chapter I of the United Nations Charter sets
out the first purpose of our Organization as being to
maintain
international
peace and security. Article 24,
sub-paragraph 1, of the Charter sets out that the Members
of the United Nations confer on the Security Council

38. The occupation for many years of the South of Korea
by the United States armed forces, and the latest act of
provocation when a United States naval vespl intruded into
the territorial waters of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, are all that we need in the way of facts-and they

30. The PRESIDENT: I have no other speakers on my list.
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom.

3

L

briefly the negative vote it has just cast on the adoption of
the agenda as it was presented to us. My delegation felt that
the attitude to this matter revealed in the letter (S/8360/
was somewhat lacking in clarity. I believe, moreover, that I
am expressing what seems to us to be the feeling of the
Council, when I say that we have very little substa:ntiatcd
information about what really happened in the Gulf of
Wonsan. Furthermore, only one version of the event hiiS
been brought to our notice) and there is nothing about that
version which allows us to believe that it is not marred by
some degree of partiality, or at least by emotion little
conducive to revelation of the truth.

are fulIy substantiated--to deprive the United States representative of the moral right to present the matter to the
Council in the way in which he has done in his letter to the
President, dated 25 January. And if some still had any
doubts as to the real intentions behind that letter, then the
United States representative himself helped them to dispel
all their doubts and illusions.
39. For that reason, the Soviet delegation continues to
oppose, and will vote against, the inclusion on the agenda
of the item proposed by the United States of America.
40. The PRESIDENT:
I have no other speakers on my list
on the question of the adoption of the agenda. As
objections have been raised to the adoption of the agenda
contained in document S/Agenda/1388 by the representatives of the Soviet Union and Hungary, the Council
will now proceed to take a vote on the adoption of the
agenda.

45. In view of this, and since in addition it seemed to us
that there was a tendency, conscious or unconscious, to
dramatize the situation and thus to imbue with a sense of
urgency and haste work that the Council should be carrying
out as calmly as possible, we felt it our duty not to add our
voice to the voices of those who supported the adoption of
the agenda.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.

46. Our vote was motivated also by the fact that the
adoption of the agenda implies, whether we like it o’r not, a
certain orientation of the Council’s work, and we felt that,
in the absence of sufficient information on which to base a
judgement, that orientation would not accord with the
feelings of impartiality and fairness which I am sure inspire
all delegations.

In fauozly: Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia,
France, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Against:

Algeria,

Hungary,

Union

of Soviet Socialist

Republics.

47. We know that the Council’s usage sanctions the
adoption of the agenda in the form in which it has beer1
adopted, but our almost complete ignorance of the facts, or
the rather questionable account which we have of those
facts, was an additional factor prompting my delegation to
vote against the adoption of the agenda.

The agenda wasadopted by 12 votes to 3.

41. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to explain their vote after the vote.
42. Mr. MIST-IRA (India): Very briefly, I should like to
explain the vote of my delegation, which was in support of
the adoption of the agenda contained in document
S/Agenda/1388. The vote of my delegation should in IIO
way be construed as agreement with or support for the
contents of the letter of the Permanent Representative of
the United States (S/8360]. The vote of my delegation, on
this clear understanding, is completely in accordance with
the established practice of the Council.

48. Although Algeria is a new member of the Security
Council, we believe we are right in thinking that in casts (>I”
urgency the Secretary-General communicates the agenda t[%
the members along with the notice for the meetin:& Here 1
refer to rule 8 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council. Furthermore, to pursue this lint of
thought, it would have been useful if the Secretariat lrtld
put before us the first items of information which came CC)
its notice; this would have been in conformity with rule 2Z!
of the provisional rules of procedure. We realize, howcvcr,
that these last two points could not have come into tllc
picture, since the situation has already existed for mang
years.

43. Mr, BERARD (France) (translated from French): I
should like to explain briefly the vote that my delegation
has just cast. A particularly serious situation has just arisen
in the Far East and the attention of the world is focused
upon it, We have been asked to study this question in the
Security Council. In accordance with the traditional policy
of my Government, my delegation has agreed that the
matter be studied here, but without committing itself on
the substance of the problem and without subscribing to
the arguments which may have been put forward by any
other delegation-for
example, by the United States delegation in the letter which was circulated to us. We feel that
a discussion will give each party, each State, an opportunity
of expressing its views, and it was in this spirit that we
voted in favour of including the item on the agenda.
44. Mr.

BOUATTOURA

(Algeria)

(translated

49. This makes it obvious that the question, as it stands in
the agenda, is bound up with a broader question ,which, ;1s
we all know, has severely shaken this Organization,
50. We are convinced that, whatever the outcome, the
path chosen can lead to an aggravation of the :situati*n N
which, according to all the official declarations we hn\ae:
recently heard, is aiready extremely tense. I can assure you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council, that
it was not without mental conflict and qualms of COI%science that we came to take this decision. But the
explanations of votes which we have heard since: the votrz
was taken seem to support our conviction, if -that wcrc
necessary,

from

French): The Algerian delegation would like to explain WY

4

.

5 1. The PRESIDENT: Speaking as the representative of
PAKISTAN, I wish to state that my affirmative vote on the
adoption of the agenda does not in any way prejudge the
position of my Government on the contents of the letter of
the Permanent Representative of the United States. Our
vote is without prejudice to the position of principle which
my delegation has always taken on such questions, and
must be construed to have been purely procedural. It does
not in any way reflect our judgement on the matters of
substance raised in the letter.

seized by armed North Korean patrol boats, and her crew
forcibly detained. This warlike action carries a danger to
peace which should be obvious to all.
58. A party of armed raiders, infiltrated from North
Korea, has been intercepted in the act of invading the
South Korean capital city of Seoul with the admitted
assignment of assassinating the President of the Republic of
Korea. This event marks the climax of a campaign by the
North Korean authorities, over the past eighteen months, of
steadily growing infiltration,
sabotage and terrorism in
flagrant violation of the Korean Armistice Agreement.

Letter dated 25 January 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/8360)

59. These two lines of action are manifestly parallel: both
stem from North Korea. Both are completely unwarranted
and unjustified. Both are aimed against peace and security
in Korea. Both violate the United Nations Charter, solemn
international agreements and time-honoured international
law. And both pose a grave threat to peace in a country
whose long search for peace and reunification in freedom
has been an historic concern of the United Nations and of
my country.

52. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now begin its
discussion of the question on our agenda. The first speaker
;‘i inscribed on the list is the representative of the United
States, but before I call upon him I should like to say a few
words.
53. As we meet in the Council today, I am sure that all the
members around this table are mindful of the extraordinary
nature of the situation which has prompted the request for
this meeting. It is clear that situations of this character,
which involve one or more of the permanent members,
throw into sharp relief the heavy responsibilities of the
United Nations, but as we are conscious of our limitations,
we are equally aware of our responsibilities. Perhaps the
chief responsibility that rests on us, and which the Council
is fully capable of discharging, is to inject the elements of
moderation and restraint into situations of this character.

60. We bring these grave developments to the attention of
the Security Council in the sincere hope that the Council
will act promptly to remove the danger lo international
peace and security. For it must be removed, and without
delay. And it will be removed only if action is taken
forthwith to secure the release of the USS PuebZoand its
eighty-three man crew and to bring to an end the pattern of
armed transgressions by North Korea against the Republic
of Korea.

54. As far as the non-permanent members are concerned,
they are armed with only their integrity and their judgement; nevertheless, they can help in preventing angry
confrontations that might tear the fabric of peace,

61. My Government has stated at the highest level its
earnest desire to settle this matter promptly and peacefully
and, if at all possible, by diplomatic means. It is testimony
to this desire that, in fidelity to the Charter, my Government has brought this matter to the Security Council,
which has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and which, together with
other organs of the United Nations, has a special, an
historic concern for peace and security in Korea.

55. With all humility, I would appeal to all Powers to heed
the voice of an anxious humanity outside these doors in all
continents, which implores us to be considerate of difficulties, objective in our judgement, and measured in our
speech.

62. It is imperative, therefore, that the Security Council
act with the greatest urgency and decisiveness. The existing
situation cannot be allowed to stand. It must be corrected,
and the Council must face up to its responsibility to see it
corrected. This course is far more preferable to other
remedies yhich the Charter reserves to Member States.

56. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
United States has requested this meeting, as I stated in my
letter of yesterday to you, Mr.President, to consider the
grave threat to peace which the authorities of North Korea
have brought about by their increasingly dangerous and
aggressive military actions in violation of the Korean
ArmisticF Agreement of 1953,’ of the United Nations
Charter and of international law. We have asked that the
Council be convened urgently at an hour when peace is in
serious and imminent danger, when firm and forthwith
action is required to avert that danger and to preserve
peace.

63. Let me now turn to the facts concerning these twp
aspects ‘of North Korean aggressive conduct on which the
Council% action is urgently required.
64. At 12 noon on 23 January, Korean time, the United
States ship Pueblo, manned by a crew of six officers,
seventy-five enlisted men and two civilians, and sailing in
international
waters off the North Korean coast, was
confronted by a heavily armed North Korean patrol boat
identified as submarine chaser No. 35. The strict instructions under which the Pueblo was operating required it to
stay at least thirteen nautical miles from the North Korean
coast. While my country adheres to the
three-mile
--.-----._
I_.. rule of
international law concerning territorial waters, nevertheless

57. A virtually unarmed vessel of the United States Navy,
sailing on the high seas, has been wantonly and lawlessly
1 For the text of the Armistice Agreement entered into in Korea
on 27 July 1953, see Official Records of the Security Council,
Eighth

Year, Supplement

for July, August and September 1953,

document S/3079, appendix A.

5

the ship was under orders whose effect was to stay well
clear of the tv&ve-mile ,&nit which the North Korean
authorities have by%%ig$actice followed.

by its own ship was virtually identical, with OII]Y this small
margin of difference, and interestingly enough the North
Korean ship reported the Puebb to be about a mile farther
away from the shoreline than the United States’ fix of its
position. That distance between the Blue and the Red is
about a mile, so you see the North Korean broadcast,
monitored, was reporting what I have stated to this
Council.

65. The USS Pueblo reported this encounter and its
location at the time in the following words-and I wish to
quote exactly what was reported by radio at the time of the
encounter:
“USS Pueblo encountered one SO-1 classNorth Korean
patrol craft at 0300Z.“-that
is at 12 noon Korean time.
And then (I am repeating its broadcast)-“Position
39O25’2” NL, 127O55’0” EL DIW.”

7 1. We have numerous other reports during this encounter
consistent with the location I have described. Information
other than co-ordinates corroborative of what I have said is
by voice monitor; information on co-ordinates, as I have
stated, was by International Morse Code.

I might explain that DIW means “Dead in Water”, the
standard Navy terminology meaning that all engines are
stopped and the vessel was stationary.

72. The North Korean patrol boat, having made its
approach, used international flag signals to request the
Pueblo’s nationality. The Pueblo, replying with the same
signal system, identified itself as a United States vessel. The
North Korean vessel then signalled: “Heave to or I will
open fire on you.” The Pueblo replied: “I am in international waters.” The reply was not challenged by the
North Korean vessel, which, under international law, if
there had been an intrusion-which there was not-should
have escorted the vessel from the area in which it was.
However, that vessel then proceeded for approximately an
hour to circle the Pueblo, which maintained its course and
kept its distance from the shore. At that point three
additional North Korean armed vessels appeared, one of
which ordered the Pueblo: “Follow in my walke.” As that
order was issued, the four North Korean vessels closed in on
the Pueblo and surrounded it. At the same time, two MIC
aircraft appeared overhead and circled the Pueblo. The
Pueblo’ attempted peacefully to withdraw from this encir.
clement but was forcibly prevented from doing so and
brought to a dead stop. It was then seized by an armed
boarding party and forced into the North Korean port of
Wonsan,

66. Now, with your permission, Mr. President, I should
like to refer to this map2 provided for the convenience of
the Council and show the exact location of the Pueblo as
given in these co-ordinates. If the members of the Council
will look at the map, they will see a number 3 Blue.
Number 3 Blue is approximately twenty-five nautical miles
from the port of Wonsan. It is 16.3 nautical miles from the
nearest point of the North Korean mainland on the
peninsula of Hodo-Panda and 15.3 nautical miles from the
island of Ung-do.
67. Now, at exactly the same time, the North Korean
submarine chaser No. 35 which intercepted the Pueblo
reported its own location in the nurnber‘3 Red-and this is
a report now from the North Korean submarine chaser
No. 35 monitored by us-and that location was 39 degrees
25 minutes North latitude and 127 degrees 56 minutes East
longitude. Members will note the positions. In other words,
these two reported positions are within a mile of one
another and show conclusively that according to the North
Korean report, as well as our own, the Pueblo was in
international waters.

73. Now, reports from the North Korean nav,al vessels on
their location and on their seizure of the Pueblo at this
point show that the Pueblo was constantly in international
waters. At 1.50 p.m. Korean time, within a few minutes of
the reported boarding of the Pueblo, North Korean vessels
reported their position as 39*26’NL, 128°02’EIL, or about
21.3 miles from the nearest North Korean land, This is the
point on the map here, and we shall .be very glad to make
this map availabIe for the records of the Securi,ty Council?

68. The report of its location by the North Korean craft,
made by International
Morse Code, was followed ten
minutes later by the following oral message from the North
Korean craft to its base:
“We have approached the target here, the name of the
target is GER l-2.”
69. Now we talk about the Pueblo, and that is the name
by which the ship is, of course, known, but the technical
name for this ship is GER-2, and this name waspainted on
the side of the ship. The message continued, and I again
quote the Korean radio message in Korean words:

74. I want now to lay to rest, completely to rest, some
intimations that the Pueblo had intruded into the territorial
waters and was sailing away from territorial waters and that
the North Korean ships were in hot pursuit. This is not the
case at all, and I shall demonstrate it by this map. Now we
shall show by times and the course of the vessel exactly
what occurred, and you will see from this that the location
of the Pueblo was constantly far away from the Korean
shores, always away from the twelve-mile Iirnit until it was
taken into Wonsan by the North Korean vessels.

“Get it? GER l-2: Did you get it? So our control
target is GER 1-2. I will send it again. Our control target
is GER 1-2.”
70. Inasmuch as the location of the Pueblo is, of course, a
matter of vital importance, it is important to the Council to
know that the information available to the United States as
reported by our vessel to our authorities and to the North
Korean authorities as reported by its vessel and transmitted

2 The representative of the United Statesof America rcforrod in
his statementto two mapswhichhe submittedto the Council a11d
which arereproduced
in the annexto the present verbrttim record as
mapNo. 1 andmapNo. 2.
P
6

75. The locations of the Pueblo are shown on the blue
line, and the location of the SO-1 03.5, the first North
Korean vessel, on the red line.

messages exchanged among the North Korean vessels
themselves which we monitored, including, the following:
“BY talking this way, it will be enough to understand
according to present instructions we will close down the
radio, tie UP the personnel, tow it and enter port at
Wonsan. At present we are on our way to boarding, We
are coming in.”

76. The Pueblo, far from having sailed from inside
territorial waters to outside territorial waters, was cruising
in this area here on the map, and this will be demonstrated
by the time sequence-and when I say “this area” I mean
the area that is east and south of any approach to the
twelve-mile limit.

This is an exact voice broadcast from the ship, which
acknowledges the instructions that it wasfollowing.

77. At 0830 hours Korean local time, the Pueblo was at
the location I now point to on the map. It had come to that
point from the south-east, not from anywhere in this
vicinity. That is point 1 on the map, so that our record will
be complete.

86. In the light of this, this wasno mere incident, no case
of mistaken identity, no case of mistaken location. It was
nothing less than a deliberate, premeditated armed attack
on a United States naval vessel on the high seas, an attack
whose gravity is underlined by these simple facts which I
should now like to sum up.

78. Point 2 on the map shows the position of the North
Korean submarine chaser No. 35, as reported by that vessel
at 1055 hours; and you will see that it-the North Korean
vessel, not the Pueblo-is close to the twelve-mile limit.

87. The location of the Pueblo in international waters was
fully known to the North Korean authorities since the
broadcasts not only were between its own ships but were
directed to its shore installations. The Pueblo wasso lightly
armed that the North Koreans in one of the conversations
which we have monitored even reported it as unarmed, The
Pueblo was, therefore, in no position to engage in a hostile,
war-like act towards the territory or vesselsof North Korea;
and the North Koreans knew this. Nevertheless, the Pueblo,
clearly on the high seas,wasforcibly stopped, boarded and
seized by North Korean armed vessels.This is a knowing
and wilful aggressive act-part of a deliberate series of
actions in contravention of international law and of solemn
international arrangements designed to keep peace in the
area, which apply not only to land forces but to naval
forces as well. It is an action which no Member of the
United Nations could tolerate.

79. Point 3 is the position reported by the Pueblo at 12
o’clock noon, and you will see that it is at a considerable
distance from the twelve-mile limit, which is the dotted
line, Red Point 3 is the position reported by the North
Korean submarine chaser No. 35 at 12 o’clock noon, when
it signalled the Pueblo to stop.
80, In other words, this is the position of the North
Korean vessel, this is the position of the Pueblo; and the
position of the North Korean vessel that I point to, the red
line, is the position reported audibly by the North Korean
vessel. There is very little difference in these two reports.
81. Point 4 is the position reported by the North Korean
vessel at 1350 hours, that is at 1.50 p.m., when it reported
boarding the Pueblo.

88, I might add, in the light of the comments of the Soviet
representative on the adoption of the agenda, that Soviet
ships engage in exactly the same activities as the Pueblo, sail
much closer to the shores of other States, and one such
Soviet ship is to be found right now in the Sea of Japan,
and currently is not far from South Korean shores.

82. You will recall that I just told the Council that the
Pueblo, in seeking to escape the encirclement, did not move
in the direction which would have transgressed the twelvemile limit.

89. I turn now to the other grave category of aggressive
actions taken by the North Korean authorities. Their
systematic campaign of infiltration, sabotage and terrorism
across the armistice demarcation line, in gross violation of
the Armistice Agreement-not only in the vicinity of the
demilitariied zone but also in many cases deep in the
territory of the Republic of Korea-culminating in the
recent raid against the capital city of Seoul, the Presidential
Palace and the person of the President of the Republic. The
gravity of this campaign has already been made known to
the Security Council.

83. All of this is verified not by reports solely from the
Pueblo; all of this is verified by reports from the North
Korean vessels which were monitored, and I think it is a
very clear picture of exactly what transpired. Here, too,
Mr. President, with your permission, we will make this
available.
84. It is incontrovertible
from this type of evidence, which
is physical evidence, of International Morse Code signals
and voice reports, that the Pueblo, when first approached
and when seized, was in international waters well beyond
the twelve-mile limit; and that the North Koreans knew
this.

go. on 2 November 1967, I conveyed to the Security
Council a report from the United Nations Command in
Korea (&‘/&?I 71, summing up the evidence of a drastic
85. Further compounding this offence against internation- , increase in violations by North Korea of the Korean
Armistice Agreement and subsequent agreements pertaining
al law, and the gravity of this war-like act, is the fact that
thereto.
That report to the Council noted that the number
the North Koreans clearly intended to capture the Pueblo,
of
incidents
involving armed infiltrators from North Korea
knowing that it was in international waters, and to force it
had
increased
from 50 in 1966 to 543 in the first ten
to sail into the Port of Wonsan. That aim is made clear by
7

threat to peace. Despite the most serious provocation-n
provocation which every nation would recognize as serious
and dangerous-my Government is exercising great restraint
in this matter. We seek to give the processes of peaceful
action all possible scope. We believe that those processes
can work swiftly and effectively, if the international
community-including
the members of this Council, individually and collectively-so wills it.

months of 1967; and that the number of soldiers and
civilians killed by those infiltrators had increased from 35
in 1966 to 144 in the same period of 1967.
91. The further report of the United Nations Command
for the whole year 1967, filed today [S/8366], shows a
total of 566 incidents for 1967 and a total of 153
individuals killed by North Korean infiltrators. The United
Nations Command in its report has further pointed out
that, although North Korea had refused all requests by the
United Nations Command for investigation of these incidents by Joint Observer Teams pursuant to the Armistice
Agreement, the evidence that the attacks had been
mounted from North Korea is incontestable. This evidence
is subject to verification by these reports which are on file
with the Security Council.

97. But these peaceful processes must work. The present
situation is not acceptable and it cannot be left to drift.
This great and potent Organization of peace must not let
the cause of peace in Korea be lost by default to the
high-handed tactics of a lawless r&ime. Such a course
would be an invitation to catastrophe. Therefore, let the
Security Council, with its great influence, promptly and
effectively help to secure forthwith the safe r&urn of the
Pueblo and its crew; and to restore to full vigour and
effectiveness the Korean Armistice Agreement.

92. The terrorist campaign has now reached a new level of
outrage. Last Sunday, 21 January, security forces of the
Republic of Korea made contact with a group of some
thirty armed North Koreans near the Presidential Palace in
Seoul. In a series of engagements, both in Seoul and
between Seoul and the demilitarized zone, lasting through
24 January, about half of that group were killed and two
were captured. It has now been ascertained that the
infiltration team totalled thirty-one agents, all with the
rank of lieutenant or higher, dispatched from the 124th
North Korean army unit; that these agents had received two
years’ training, including two weeks of specialized training
for the present mission in special camps established in
North Korea for this purpose; and that their assigned
mission included the assassination of the President of the
Republic of Korea.

98. Fellow members of the Security Council, we have a
clear and urgent responsibility under the Charter to hell]
keep the peace. I trust the Council will discharge this
responsibility.
99. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(transZated from Russian): In spite of the well-founded
objections of a number of Council members, the United
States has imposed on the Security Council consideration
of its complaint against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
100. The Soviet delegation has already had the; opportunity, at the beginning of this meeting, to show how
completely unfounded are the accusations levelled by the
United States against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We have also emphasized in this connexion that the
aggressor in Korea is not the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea but those who invaded the territory of the Korearl
people, who for many years have occupied the south of
Korea and are striving to impose by force upon the Korean
people a rBgime which it does not want. We have noted that
the request of the United States for a Security Council
meeting is noihing more than a manoeuvre, an attempt to
distort facts and conceal the illegal hostilities and the
aggression which the United States has been engaging h
against the Korean people for many years.

93. I might add that the North Korean authorities make
no secret of the political strategy and motivation behind
those attacks. Their daily propaganda vilifies the Government of the Republic of Korea, and denies its very right to
exist. Yet, that same Government of the Republic of Korea
is recognized by seventy-seven Governments, is a Member
of nunierous specialized agencies of the United Nations,
and enjoys observer status at the United Nations Headquarters.
94. It is obvious that this long series of attacks by North
Korean infiltrators across the demilitarized zone-and by
other groups of North Korean armed personnel which,
travelled by sea, have penetrated into even the southern
portions of South Korea-has steadily increased in its
tempo and its scope until it threatens to undermine the
whole structure of the armistice regime under which peace
has been preserved in a divided Korea for fourteen years.

101. Having listened attentively to the statement made by
the United States representative, we can say that it clearly
confirms the evaluation of the situation made by the Soviet
delegation during the debate on the adoption of the agenda.

95. In the interest of international peace and security, this
deterioration cannot be allowed to continue. It must be
reversed promptly. The Armistice Agreements must be
restored to their full vigour, and the weight and influence
of the Security Council must be exerted to this vitally
important end.

102. We wish to emphasize most strongly, and in the most
categorical terms, that we cannot ignore the specific
conditions in which the United States undertook this
obviously propagandistic manoeuvre in convening the Security Council. What are these conditions?

96. These are the facts of the threat to peace created by
North Korea’s aggressive actions on sea and land. With all
earnestness I ask the Security Council to act firmly and
swiftly to rectify this dangerous situation and eliminate this

103. My distinguished colleagues are well aware that in the
last few days war hysteria has been building up in the
United States. Threats are stream~lg from Washington
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, mobilization measures are being taken in the United States, and
8

-

Ition-a
seriow
:straint
eacefu1
ocesses
ationa1
I, in&

the United States Navy and Air Force continue to threaten
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Can this be
viewed as proof of the United States’ sincere desire to reach
a settlement of the Korean problem which is in keeping
with the desires and interests of the Korean people, and in
the interest of international peace and security in that part
of the world, as the United States representative tried to
affirm in his statement today?

present
3 drift.
not I&
to the
course
let the
ly <and
of the
ur and

104. No, all this shows more clearly that,the United States
is trying to use the Security Council for purposes totally
different from those which it should discharge as the
highest organ in the Organization which, under the Charter,
has the most responsible task of safeguarding international
peace and security.

hlvc a
0 help
p this
ublics)
runded
United
:ration
:public
xtunif how
by the
blic of
Kit the
public
Corean
.I th of
Lore an
‘d that
oun CD
npt to
d the
,ing in
ldc by
:lcarly
Soviet
zenda.
: most
xxific
c this
Secu.
in the
n the
ngton
-JobiG3, and

violations of the demarcation line-1 repeat, over 52,000
violations. During that time there were 568 cases of
artillery shelling of the territory of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, more ihan thirty armed attacks, and
over 800 cases of intrusion by military vessels into the
coastal waters of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
109. More than 800 casesof intrusion by military vessels!
We shall return later to the version of the incident which
took up about three-quarters of the statement made by the
United States representative today, but for now we wish to
repeat once more that there have been over 800 cases of
intrusion by military vessels into the coastal waters of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
110. There have been over 700 violations of the air space
of that country by the military aircraft of the occupiers of
South Korea. In 1967 alone, five times as many shots were
fired by American troops at objectives on the territory of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as in the whole
of the previous thirteen years which had elapsed since the
conclusion of the Armistice Agreement. These facts prove
that acts of military provocation by the United States
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, far
from abating, have been increasing month by month in
number and importance. In this connexion, the Memorandum of the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea states: “Owing to such reckless provocations on the part of the United States imperialist aggressors,
the demilitarized zone established under the Armistice
Agreement has now virtually become a field of uninterrupted battles.“3

,. 105. We have already said that no manoeuvres, no lectures
with aids such as those used by Ambassador Goldberg, who
for a while fenced in his own deputy and the deputy of the
British representative by means of a map-to which,
incidentally, we shall revert-no trickery and no such
attempts of any kind will deceive world public opinion and
all the peace-loving peoples of the world about the real aims
and intentions of the United States in Asia, including the
Korearl Peninsula.
106. Nothing will help the United States to divest itself of
its responsibility for the tense situation which is a serious
danger to peace and which has existed for a long time on
the Korean Peninsula as a result of the activities of the
United States of America. The present aggravation of the
situation in Korea is a’ direct result 0’ the aggressive acts
committed by United S&es and South Korean armed
forces on land and sea against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The peoples and the Government of the
Soviet Union condemn now, as in the past, such acts of
aggression.

111. The extension of the war activities of the United
States militarists against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, is being combined with extensive measures to
strengthefi the South Korean army. This army is being
equipped with modern weapons. South Korea is being
supplied with guided missiles of the Hawk, Nike-Hercules
and Nike-Ajax type, supersonic military planes, including
fighter-bombers, heavy and medium-sized tanks, longdistance artillery weapons, large naval vessels and other
weapons and military equipment.

107. The persisting cause of tension in Korea is the
continued presence on the Territory of South Korea of the
aggressive forces of the IJnited States. No person who is at
all objective and impartial, regardless of his opinions and
views, could deny this fact, These forces, and the military
activities of the occupiers in Korea are bringing the danger
of a new war in the Far East closer literally every day and
every hour. The Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea quite rightly stated in its Memorandum
to the General Assembly in October 1967, that since 1966
“there has been created the sharpest tension ever seen after
the armistice along the military demarcation line in Korea,
and a dangerous situation has remained unabated for more
than a year now which may ignite war at any moment.“3
Such was the conclusion of the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, based on the
analysis of many facts, of which we shall mention only a
few.

112. More and more new military airfields are being built
in South Korea, and South Korean ports are being equipped
as military naval bases. One example comes easily to mind:
the South Korean port of Chinhae has been transformed
into a riaval base capable of accommodating nuclear
submarines and other naval vessels of the United States
Seventh Fleet .
113. What the American masters do not tell their South
Korean puppets is brazenly blurted out by these servants of
American imperialism and traitors to the Korean people.
They reveal the purposes of these military preparations in
their statements. The inflammatory statements of responsible people, the so-called ministers of the puppet regime in
Seoul have told us that “the Armistice Agreement has been
rendered completely null and void”, and again that South
Korea “will not hesitate to start a war if necessary”.

108. It is well known that incidents and conflicts have
been occurring systematically along the demarcation line in
Korea on the 38th parallel. From the conclusion of the
Armistice in July 1953 until September 1967, the United
States and South Korean troops committed over 52,000
3 See document A/C.1/95

114. Is it not obvious that it is the presence of American
troops in South Korea that is encouraging this spirit of

1 (mimeographed).
9

119. These new steps to set up an aggressive military block
headed by Washington, in the Far East, are bolund to cause
concern to all those who are genuinely mterested in
strengthening peace in the Far East. The cre,ation of this
military group has posed an even greater threat to tlze
security of States in this region, including the security of
the Korean people who, it goes without saying, would not
be among those least exposed. All this goes to show how
absolutely necessary and vital it is that American and all
other foreign armed forces should be immediately withdrawn from South Korea.

recklessness among the South Korean warmongers? They
behave in an increasingly defiant manner, rejecting the
peace-loving proposals made by the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. A certain element
in South Korea makes no secret of their hopes of
attempting a new armed invasion of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
115. That is where the real danger lies, another danger
than the one about which the United States representative
was discoursing and for which he could produce no
evidence at all. That is where the real aggressive plans are
prepared under the guidance of the foreign protectors. And
let not the United States representatives try to prove that
South Korea is being threatened from the,North. There is
no such threat. There are no foreign troops or foreign
military bases on the territory of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and no military preparations are being
made there for an attack against South Korea.

120. That is why we shall continue to insist that the
occupation of South Korea by foreign troops is not only a
cause of tension, but also a major obstacle to tire
unification of the country.
121. The presence of United States troops in South Korea ’
leads to constant interference in the internal iaffairs of the
South Korean
people. It is a blatant violation of the
fundamental provisions of the United Nations Charter and
of the United Nations Declaration on the Inadmissibility of
Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and tire
Protection of their Independence and Sovereignty, adopted
by the General Assembly at its twentieth session. We only
have to recall that since the South Korean regime was set
up, Washington has concluded with it about seventy
one-sided treaties and agreements, by which it lhas bound its
South Korean proteges hand and foot, curtailing even their
illusory so-called independence, which the IJnited States
tries so much to publicize. Shielded by the IJnited States
forces of occupation in South Korea, a military and
despotic police regime has been set up to serve the interests
of its overseas masters and blindly do their bidding. The
anti-popular military fascist regime in South KLoreais hated
by the people and is propped up only by American
bayonets. The American occupiers use the Seoul puppet
regime to suppress the justified desire of the South Korean
people for freedom, independence and the unification of
their homeland in a united and independent State.

116. The Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has proposed, in the interests of establishing
peace and in order to ease tension, that an agreement
should be concluded on the reduction of armed forces in
North and South Korea and on the renunciation of the use
of force against one another. Would not any objective and
impartial observer regard this as the best proof of peaceful
intentions? And if anyone in South Korea really wishes to
help to ease reiations between the two Korean States, all
that need be done is to adopt the proposals made by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
117. The Soviet delegation considers it its bounden duty
to emphasize that unless an end is put to the dangerous
military activities of the occupiers of South Korea, and
unless American and all other foreign troops are immediately withdrawn from that Territory, events might indeed
lead to the unleashing of a new war in Korea and to a
further worsening of the situation in the Far East. This is all
the more evident because, as the facts I have presented
show, the South Korean regime is becoming ever more
deeply involved in United States aggression against the
Viet-Namese people and in the new military adventures of
the United States in Asia.

122. United States aggression in Korea is but one link in
the chain of Washington’s policies. Wherever one looksSouth-East Asia, the Far East, Europe, the Middle East, the
Pacific, the Caribbean-in every one of these areas hundreds
of thousands of American soldiers have occupied or arc
occupying lands belonging to other peoples. There is a
world-wide network of American military bases which are
bridgeheads for aggression and bastions in the struggle
against national liberation movements.

118. It should be remembered that as early as 1953, when
a military treaty was signed between the United States and
Korea,4 it was obvious that South Korea was considered as
a permanent bridgehead for a policy of aggression in Asia.
It is well known that in 1966, at the insistence of the
United States, a treaty was also concluded between Japan
and South Korea. There is also a military treaty of so-called
mutual security between the United States and Japan.5
Thus, a kind of “triangle” is being built up which its
creators intend to be the basis for a long-planned aggressive
military alliance of North-East Asian countries, a so-called
NEAT0 .

123. That is why the proposals constantly put forward by
peace-loving States, including those put forward by many
delegations at the recently concluded twenty-second session
of the General Assembly, for the withdrawal from South
Korea of all foreign forces have always been obstinately
opposed by the United States and, let us add, by all those
who continue to support the United States in. this matter.

4 Mutual Defense Treaty bet’ween the United States of America
and the Republic of Korea, signed at Washington on 1 October
1953.
5 Treaty
of Mutual Co-operation and Security between Japan and
the United States of America, signed at Washington on 19 January
1960.

124. At the recent twenty-second session of the Gencrnt
Assembly, on the initiative of a number of socialist and
other countries, a debate was held on the qulestion of ttre
withdrawal of United States and all other foreign forces
occupying South Korea under the flag of the United
10

c

-

Nations. That is where the United States representative
should have spoken, and made not merely verbal peaceloving protestations, but practical peaceful proposals, supporting them with deeds which could put a real end to the
extremely tense situation which persists in that part of the
world.

129. This is an objective analysis based on facts and borne
out by specific actions, which show the reason for the
continuing state of tension in the Korean peninsula.
130. To conclude my review of the circumstances and
facts I wished to mention in the statement I have made as a
result of the consideration of this matter which has been
imposed on the Council, I want to say a few words about
the events connected with the detention of the American
military vessel, the Pueblo.

125. But what has the United States done? All members
took part in the debates on the matter in the First
Committee of the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly. What did the United States do there? It
prevented the General Assembly from adopting a very
important decision which would have at once created a
completely normal situation in Korea and established
conditions favourable to the peaceful unification of the
country on a truly democratic basis.
1
126. The United States and its South Korean puppets have
rejected in the past and are rejecting the many constructive
proposals put forward by the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, proposals prompted by a
desire to maintain peace and aimed at achieving a really
peaceful solution of the Korean problem. Let us recall that
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has proposed that Korea should be reunified peacefully through the creation of a single all-Korean Government which would represent all levels of the population
through free and democratic general elections held by the
Korean people themselves in the northern and southern
parts of the country, without any interference from outside
and, it goes without saying, after the withdrawal of the
imperialist forces from South Korea. In an attempt to find
a really peaceful solution to the problem, the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has also put
forward a proposal for establishing a confederation of
North and South Korea as a temporary measure pending
the complete unification of the country, in the event that
the South Korean authorities should be unable to agree to
free and general elections in the north and south of the
country immediately after the withdrawal of foreign troops
from South Korea.

13 1, I did not really wish to strain my eyesight when the
United States representative, for want of arguments to
make his statement sound convincing, twice resorted to the
visual aids I have already mentioned. Frankly speaking, I
was not particularly interested and am not interested in the
whole course followed by the&ebEo and the various points
where it happened to be at one time or another. I did not
make too much of an effort because I knew that when the
United States representative showed us the various points
on the map presented by his delegation, he would not show
us those co-ordinates where the United States naval vessel
Pueblo was when it intruded into the territorial waters of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
132. That is exactly what happened. The point 39” 17’ 4”
latitude North, 127” 46’ 9” longitude West, was not indicated by the lecturer’s pointer which the United States
representative wielded for so long and, as he apparently
thought, so convincingly-but
in my opinion not convincingly at all-during a lengthy exposition of the matter
giving the one-sided American version of the events linked
with the fate of the naval vessel Pueblo.
133. The United States representative referred here many
times to various interceptions of radio inessages, monitorings and the like, for which United States technology is
famous. But there is one thing he did not tell us about.
Unfortunately, despite the perfection of its technology, the
United States did not manage to intercept the authentic
description of what actually happened to the Pueblo when
it was detained, and the reasons why it was detained, the
description given by the captain of that vessel.

127. In addition to proposals for the solution of a number
of political questions, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has also proposed that economic and cultural
exchanges, reciprocal visits and postal links should be
organized between the two parts of Korea, Surely these are
sensible proposals? Surely this a sensible approach and the
right way to achieve a sounder climate in Korea and
strengthen peace and security in that part of the world?
The sooner these proposals are adopted, the sooner the
situation in Korea will return to normal.

134. I do not know whether I can compete with the
United States representative’s knowledge of naval affairs,
but speaking as a complete layman in such matters I must say
that as far as I am concerned, the captain is the one best
able to tell us at which point his vessel was when it was
detained by a patrol boat of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. This is what the captain of the Pueblo, a
man named Bucher, had to say about it; his statement
leaves no doubt about the co-ordinates and the position of
his vessel when it intruded into the territorial waters of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, nor does it leave
any doubt as to the aims, or rather hostile aims, of this
vessel in intruding into the territorial waters of the
Republic in violation of that country’s territorial integrity
and sovereignty.

128. We repeat that United States and all other foreign
troops must be withdrawn immediately from the territory
of South Korea and the Korean people must at last be given
the right to settle their own fate themselves after many
years of suffering. That is their inalienable right, laid down
in the Charter of the Organization, and confirmed in many
decisions taken in this building by various organs of the
United Nations, from the Security Council to the General
Assembly.

135. Bucher admitted that the vessel of which he was in
command was engaged in espionage activities in the
territorial waters of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea on the instructions of the Central Intelligence
11

Agency of the United States. He testified that: “The Pueblo
was studying the network of radar installations, the
characteristics of various ports, the incoming and outgoing
vessels, and the lnanoeuvrability of vessels of the Korean
People’s Army. In addition”-stated Bucher-“we spied on
various military installations and the locations of armed
forces along the eastern coast and reached a point located
7.6 miles from Nodo”. This point is the one which the
United States representative did not indicate with his
pointer on his splendid maps and for which I have already
given the co-ordinates (this, of course, is something I am
adding, not something mentioned by Bucher, who did not
talk about the representative of the United States and who
could not know what he would be saying today). After
giving those co-ordinates Bucher goes on to say that “it was
at this time that a patrol vessel of the Korean People’s
Army appeared”.
136. So we see how simple and, at the same time,
outrageous the real facts are, as compared with the made-up
version submitted here as an account of events. This is what
actually happened along the coast of North Korea on 23
January, This is why, for sound reasons based on factual
evidence, the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in a statement made on the very day the
events we are now examining took place, noted the
following: “Today the vesselsof our People’s Army seized
an armed espionage vessel of the United States imperialist
aggressors which had intruded in the territorial waters of
the Republic where it wasengaged in hostile activities”.
137. Is it necessary to add anything more in order to put
an end to that version of the incident which the United
States representative is trying to foist on us and which, I
must say, he presents rather nicely-the second map was
particularly pretty to look at, all in colours-but which had
nothing whatsoever to do with the true facts of the case,as
they say in the courts.
138. Today, as I listened to the United States representative presenting his version of the incident concerning the
United States naval vessel, I remembered, as an old hand in
this Organization, much that had been said at the Council
table by the predecessors of the present United States
representative that was,to put it mildly, untrue. They made
such statements when they thought it appropriate and
when it suited their political purposes.
139. Was that not the case with the United States spy
plane that intruded into the air space of the Soviet Union?
Was not the version at first presented as an explanation of
theSe
circumstances completely at variance with the truth?
Such embarrassments have frequently befallen the represen.
tatives of the United States, and we can only regret that
such a serious gathering as this Security Council meeting
has to consider and listen to such inconsistent explanations
and unfounded assertions which are contrary to the facts,
140. TO conclude with this matter, we shall say that this
constitutes yet another dangerous act of provocation on the
Part of the United States militarists against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The dispatch of a vessel of the
United States Navy into the territorial waters of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, for the purpose of

conducting espionage and intelligence activities there, can
only be described as a violation of the sovereignty of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and of the elemen.
tary principles of international law, which, I might add, my
colleague from the United States is always so eager to
defend. From all that has been said, it is quite obvious that
the detention of a foreign naval vessel in the territorial
waters of any State comes within the internal jurisdiction
of that State, and it is not for the Security Council to
consider such matters.
141. For these reasons the Soviet delegation has opposed
and still opposes the consideration
of the slanderous
accusation made by the United States against the Demo.
cratic People’s Republic of Korea.
142. In conclusion, since this discussion has been imposed
on us, let us repeat that only the immediate withdrawal of
foreign forces from South Korea and the cessation alf
foreign interference in the affairs of the Korean people
could pave the way for a speedy peaceful settlement of the
Korean problem in the interests of the Korean people as a
whole and of peace and security in the Far East and the
whole world.
143. The PRESIDENT: I calI on the representative of the
United States in the exercise of his right of reply.
144. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): In view
of the hour, I shall be very brief. Ambassador Morozov, th:
representative of the Soviet Union, has made a long, and as
far as I can see, a largely irrelevant speech, more suitable to
the. First Committee than to this Council which is dealing
with a specific complaint. When he finally and at long last
came to the subject, he mentioned only two points, as far
as I can gather. The first was the so-called confession by
Commander Bucher. Now, I am very ready to recognizo
Soviet cxpcrience in coerced and fabricated confessions.
But I had really hoped that in light of Soviet history the
Soviets had learned to place little credence in them.
145. Ambassador Morozov complained that I did not
mention a co-ordinate for the location of the ship released
by the North Korean authorities after the ship was seized in
the port at Wonsan-considerably after. I did not mention
that co-ordinate for the very good reason that thal.
co-ordinate was never mentioned in any report of location
by the Pueblo or by the four North Korean’ships on the
spot engaged in the enterprise. They reported the location-and I have given this Council the exact words,
146. My colleague, Ambassador Morozov, is a distin
guished lawyer, and he is well familiar with the old rule of
law that it is the contemporary account at the time which is
entitled to weight, not a subsequent one which may be
invented to suit the needs of the party involved.
147. Finally, a country like the Soviet Union whose
representative denied to this Council that Russian missiles
had been introduced into Cuba, is hardly in a position to
raise a question about the veracity of <anyone at this table.
148. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union in the exercise of his right of reply.

149. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian):
1 expected all kinds of
criticism of my statement from the United States representative, but I did not expect him to rebuke me on the
grounds that apparently, in his opinion, the Soviet delegation was speaking on irrelevant matters not connected with
the agenda item.

the whole presentation of the matter somewhat more
convincing. Are we to understand that even from the
American point of view all this is intended asa camouflage
to justify the intrusion of the American naval vesselPueblo
into the territorial waters of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea?
153. Having asked that question, I should like, for myself
at any rate at least, to answer in the affirmative. Little
importance can be attached to the information given about
the vessel if a whole series of other fabrications, unconfirmed by any kind of evidence, had to be tacked on to this
incident, which is one of the many dangerousarmed acts of
provocation carried out by the United States against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Of course, there
are various rhetorical devices that can be usedto evadeany
analysisor examination of the factual data submitted in our
statement, but that would hardly convince anyone here or
world public opinion in general.

ISO. I have to infer that this is all that the United States
representative can say in reply to the concrete facts, figures,
dates, events and statements and, above all, on the very fact
of the long-standing presence of American occupation
forces in the Korean peninsula. That is all that he could say
in reply. Since he has imposed on us a discussion which we
did not want and which we opposed, we must yet again
emphasize that the United States, which has for years
trampled Korean soil under the boots of its soldiers, has no
moral right whatsoever to argue the matter here and to
accuse the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of
aggression.

154. I think I can conclude as I began, by saying that a
genuine relaxation of tension in the Korean Peninsula is
necessaryand possible.The basic prerequisite for achieving
that objective which, from what he says, seemsalso to be
the objective of the United States representative, is the
immediate withdrawal of United States and other foreign
troops from the territory of South Korea.

15 1. It seems he did not like the fact that I had so little to
say about this vessel. Here I really do not agree with the
United States representative, and, I must say, he did not
agree with his own letter (S/8360/. For if you look at the
letter as a whole, and see how much space is devoted to
general matters concerning unfounded accusations of aggression made against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in comparison with the space devoted to the Pueblo
incident, then on balance the relative importance given to
these matters in the document before you is the exact
opposite of that given by the United States representative,
who devoted about three-quarters of his statement to the
question of the vessel.Of course, that is his own affair, and
I would not have brought this up had he not reproached me
for the way I presentedmy own statement.

155. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list, If no other representative wishesto
take the floor at this stage, I shall declare the meeting
adjourned.
156. After informal consultations with my colleagues,I
wish to inform the Council that a majority of its members
are in favour of holding a meeting tomorrow morning at
10.30 a.m. in order to continue the Council’s deliberations
on this question. As there are no further observations, I
shall therefore convene the Council at that time.

152. Are we to understand, that all the rest, including the
wild inventions-I really cannot call them anything elsecontained in the third sentence of this letter, were put
forward only to make this whole American conception and

The meeting roseat 6.45 p.m.

ANNEX
Maps submitted to the Security Council by the representative of the United States of America in the
course of his statement at the present meeting
(See maps nt end of fascicle.)

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations
publications,may
be obtained
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or write
or Geneva.

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publications
der
dipositaires
du made
Nations
Unier, Section
KAK

llOflYqMTb

LES PUBLICATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Nations
Unies
sont en vente
danr
ler librairies
et ler ogences
entier.
Informez-vour
ouprbs
de votre libroirie
ou adrasscz-vous
b:
der venter, New York ou Genhve.
MJAAHMFl

OPI-AHtl3AUHIl

OSbEAHHEHHblX

HAL(lrlfl

IIa~ai~rri Opreiman~~rrn 06~e~niici1~i~1x Haynil ~IOPIIOicynu~a R ~iimii~~i~ >taramiax II
:~~CIlT~~Tll~i

110 BCCX

@IOiiCtX

Jllip&

hllO@lTe

ClIpaBiill

06 113~~illUlX

R RllUlCM

l~lliIililIOX

!.faraaniie 11x1 nliuri~~
no axpecy : Opraiinaarlmi Oi?bepmciiiih~x IIalpfii, Cel;qnfl no
lrpo~amc ns~ailnfi, &~~-l~opi~~n~~ %eacna.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicociones
de 10s Nacioner
Unidor
ert6n
en todos portes del mundo.
Consulie
a su librero
Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebro.

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y cosos dirtribuidoror
o diriiose
o: Naciones
Unidos,
Secci6n

de

Litho in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

35201-March

1971-2,100
