RP-11olutione adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Committee

37

2. Requests the Administering Members to do their
utmost to mobilize the effective participation of the
inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by
transferring to them effective power in order to accelerate their social, economic and educational advancement;
3. Considers that the transmission of information on
developments in the political field will enable the
General Assembly better to assess the information
transmitted by the· Administering Members concerning
educational, social and economic development in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Reiterates the view that the voluntary transmission of information on political developments in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories is fully in accord with
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter of the United
Nations;
5. Urges the Administering Members concerned to
extend their full co-operation in this matter by voluntarily transmitting information of a political and constitutional character with regard to developments in the
Territories under their respective administrations, including the establishment of intermediate time-tables
leading to the attainment of self-government by these
Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

longer appropriate or necessary for it to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations in respect of Alaska and Hawaii;
2. Expresses the opinion, based on its examination
of the documentation and the explanations provided,
that the people of Alaska and Hawaii have effectively
exercised their right to self-determination and have
freely chosen their present status;
3. Congratulates the United States of America and
the people of Alaska and Hawaii upon the attainment
of a full measure of self-government by the people of
Alaska and Hawaii ;
4. Considers that, owing to the circumstances mentioned above, the declaration regarding Non-Se!tGoverning Territories and the provisions established
under it in Chapter XI of the Charter can no longer he
applied to Alaska and Hawaii;
5. Considers it appropriate that the transmission of
information in respect of Alaska and Hawaii under
Article 73 e of the Charter should cease.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1469 (XIV). Cessation of the transmission of
information under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Alaska and Hawaii

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 1330 (XIII) of 12 December 1958,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community,8 ~
Noting with concern that the Administering Members have not yet submitted sufficient information on
the possible effects of the association of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under their administration with
the European Economic Community,
Considering that the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories with the European Economic Community may have significant effects on the development
of these Territories towards the objectives of Article 73
of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the association oi Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community;
2. Again invites the Administering Members concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General information
on the possible effects of the association of the NonSelf-Governing Territories under their administration
with the European Economic Community;
3. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to devote special attention at its 1960 session, at which it is to deal particularly with the economic development of the NonSelf-Governing Territories, to the question of the
association of certain Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community and to the
possible effects of tltls association on the development of
these Territories towards the objectives of Article 73
of the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for the
fifteenth session of the General Assembly, a report on
new developments connected with the association of

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 222 (III) of 3 November 1948, the General Assembly, while welcoming any
development of self-government in Non-Self-Governing
Territories, considered it essential that the United
Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional
status of any such Territory as a result of which the
responsible Government concerned thinks it unnecessary
to transmit information in respect of that Territory
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
Having received from the Government of the United
States of America communications dated 2 June 195938
and 17 September 19593 4 informing the SecretaryGeneral that Alaska and Hawaii, respectively, have, as
a result of their admission into the United States as
the forty-ninth and fiftieth States, attained a full measure of self-government and that, as a consequence of
this change in their constitutional status, the United
States Government would cease to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Alaska
and Hawaii,
H wing examined the communications of the Government of the United States of America in the light
of the basic principles and objectives embodied in
Chapter XI of the Charter and of all the other elements
of judgement pertinent to the issue,
Bearing in mind the competence of the General
Assembly to decide whether a Non-Self-Governing Territory has or has not attained a full measure of selfgovernment as referred to in Chapter XI of the Charter,
1. Takes note of the opinion of the Government of
the United States of America that, owing to the new
constitutional status of Alaska and Hawaii, it is no
33 Jbid., Fourteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, document A/4115.
34 Jbid., document A/4226.

1470 (XIV). Effects of the European Economic
Community on the development of certain
Non-Self-Governing Territories

a~ !hid., document A/4197.
