20

General Assembly-Sixteenth Seaion

3. Requests the Secretary-General, the Executive
Chairman of the Technical Assistance Board, the Managing Director of the Special Fund and the executive
heads of the specialized agencies and oí the International Atomic Energy Agency. to inform the Committee for Industrial Development on the assistance
rendered by these bodies to the economically less developed countries in t~e field of industrial development;
4. Requests the Committee for Industrial Development to study, in the light of information submitted
pursuant to paragraph 3 above, the flow oí assistance
taking place at the present time under these programmes, and to submit to the Economic and Social
Council recommendations aimed at expanding these
activities for the benefit oí these countries' industrialization;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at
its resumed thirty-second session, to direct the Committee for Industrial Development to give further consideration to the expansion oí United Nations activities
in the field of industrial development, in particular to
the advisability of establishing a specialized agency or
any other appropriate body for industrial development,
and to prepare a special report on this question, including, ií need be, recommendations regarding the
structure and scope oí such an organization;
6. Further requests the Committee for Industrial
Development to submit its repor.t to the Economic
and Social Council at its thirty-fourth session, and
asks the Council to transmit that report, with its comrnen~s, to the General Assembly at its seventeenth
sess1on.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1713 (XVI). The role of patents in the transfer
of technology to under-developed countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1429 (XIV) oí 5 December
1959 on the possibilities oí a further expansion of international contacts, as well as an increased exchange oí
knowledge and experience in the field oí applied science
and techt'l\'.)logy,
Taking· note of Economic and Social Council resolution 375 (XIII) of 13 September 1951 and oí the reports on restrictive business practices prepared by the
Secretariat and by the Ad H oc Committee established
under the above-mentioned Council resolution, 19
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Conference
on the Application of Science and Technology for the
Benefit of the Less Developed Areas will be convened
under Economic and Social Council resolution 834
(XXXII) of 3 August 1961,
Bearing in mind that access to knowledge and experience in the field of applied science and technology
is essential to accelerate the economic development of
under-developed countries and to enlarge the over-all
productivity of their economies,
Realizing that the protection oí the rights of the
patent-holders both in their country of origin and in
18

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Sixteenth Session, SupPlement No. 11 (E/2380); ibid., Supplement No. 11A (E/2379 and Add.1) ; ibid., Nineteenth Session.
Supplement No. 3 (E/2671); ibid., Supplement No. 3A
(E/2675); and document E/2443.

foreign countries has contributed to technical research
and, therefore, to international and national industrial
progress,
Affirming that it is in the best interest of all countries
that the international patent system should be applied
in such a way as to take fuily into account the special
needs and requirements oí the economic development
of under-developed countries, as well as the legitimate
claims of patentees,
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
appropriate international and national institutions and
with the concurrence of the Governments concerned,
to prepare for the Committee for Industrial Development, the Economic and Social Council, and the General Assembly at its eighteenth session, taking into consideration any pertinent discussions which might take
place in the United Nations Conference on the Application oí Science and Technology for the Benefit of
the Less Developed Areas, a report containing:
(a) A study of the effects of patents on the economy
of under-developed countries;
( b) A survey of patent legislation in selected developed and under-developed countries, with primary
emphasis on the treatment given to foreign patents;
(e) An analysis of the characteristics of the patent
legislation of under-developed countries in the light of
economic development objectives, taking into account
the need for the rapid absorption of new products and
technology, and the rise in the productivity leve! of their
economies;
(d) A recommendation on the advisability of holding an international conference in order to examine
the problems regarding the granting, protection and
use of patents, taking into consideration the provisions
of existing international conventions and the special
needs of developing countries, and utilizing the existing
machinery of the International Union for the Protection
of Industrial Property.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1714 (XVI). World Food Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1496 (XV) of 27 October
1960 and Economic and Social Council resolution 832
(XXXII) of 2 August 1960 on the provision of Food
surpluses to food-deficient peoples through the United
Nations system,
H aving considered the report of the Director-General
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations entitled Development through Food-A Strategy for Surplus Utilization, 20 the report of the Secretary-General entitled "The role of the United Nations
and the appropriate specialized agencies in facilitating
the best possible use of food surpluses for the economic
development of the less developed countries", 21 and
the joint proposal by the United Nations and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
regarding procedures and arrangements for multilateral
utilization of surplus food, 22
00
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Rome, 1961.
,n Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirtysecond Session, Annexes, agenda item 8, document E/3509.
"'Official Records of the General Assembly, Si.xteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 28, document A/4907.

Resolutions adopted on the reports oí the Second Committee

Having reviewed the action taken at the eleventh
session of the Conference of the F ood and Agriculture
Organization on the utilization of faod surpluses and,
specifically, its resolution of 24 November 1961 stating
that, subject to the concurrence of the General Assembly
of the United Nations, an initial experimental programme far three years, to be known as the World
Food Programme should be undertaken, having also
noted in particular the reference to safeguards contained in paragraph 13 of the above-mentioned resolution,
Recognizing the existing facilities far consultation
provided by the Food and Agriculture Organization
through its Consultative Sub-Committee on Surplus
Disposals,
Bearing in mind its resolution 1710 (XVI) of 19
December 1961 on the United Nations Development
Decade, and in particular the reference in par~graph
4 ( d) to the elimination of illiteracy, hunger and d1sease,

I
1 Approves the establishment of an experimental
Wo~ld Food Programme to be undertake1;1 jointly by
the United Nations and the Food and Agncul~ure qrganization of the U~ited Nat~ons, in co:operat10n with
other interested Umted Nat1ons agencies and appropriate inter-governmental bodies, bearing i~ mind that
the establishment of such a programme m no way
prejudices the bilateral agreements between developed
and developing countries, and accepts and endors~s the
purposes, principies and procedures formulated m the
first part of the resolution approved by the Conference
oí the Food and Agriculture Organization on 24 November 1961 the text of which is annexed to the
present resol~tion, including the safeguards mentio~ed
in that resolution and General Assembly resolution
1496 (XV), especially in paragraph 9 thereof;
2. Approves specifically the est:i.blishment o_f a
United Nations/FAO Inter-Governmental Comm1ttee
of twenty States Members of the United Nations and
members of the Food and Agriculture Organization to
provide guidance on pol!cy, adn:inistration and . operations, and of a joint Umted Nations/FAO admm1strative unit reporting to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Director-General of the Food
and Agriculture Organization ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
resumed thirty-second session to elect, subject to the
provisions of paragraph 9 below, ten States Members of
the United Nations and members of the Food and
Agriculture Organization to the United N ations/F AO
Inter-Governmental Committee, taking into account:
. (a) The representation provided by the ten States
that were elected to serve on the United Nations/F AO
Inter-Governmental Committee by the Council of the
Food and Agriculture Organization;
( b) The need far balanced representation o f economically developed and developing countries, and
other relevant factors such as the representation of
potential participating countries, both contributing and
recipient, equitable geographical distribution and the
representation of both developed and less developed
countries having commercial interests in international
trade in foodstuffs, especially those highly dependent
on such trade;
4. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council at
its thirty-third session, in co-operation with the Council

21

of the Food and Agriculture Organization, to review
and to take appropriate action on the procedures and
arrangements far the World Food Programme recommended by the U nited N ations/F AO Inter-Governmental Committee;
5. Decides that pilot projects to be undertaken ~y
the joint United Nations/FAO administrative umt,
under the guidance of the United Nations/FAO InterGovernmental Committee, involving the use of faod
as an aid to economic and social development, shall be
undertaken in agreement between the Secretary-General, acting on behalf of the United Nations, and the
Director-General, acting on behalf of the Food and
Agriculture Organization;
6. Concurs in the calling of a conference where
States Members of the United Nations and members
of the Food and Agriculture Organization will be invited to pledge contributions ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General oí the Food and Agriculture
Organization, to convene such a conference at United
N ations Headquarters as soon as feasible after the
concurrent sessions of the Economic and Social Council
and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization;
8. Urges States Members of the United Nations
and members of the Food and Agriculture Organization, in considering their contributions, to make every
effort to assure the early attainment, on a voluntary
basis, of the $100 million programme;
9. Further requests the Economic and Social Council, in co-operation with the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization, at its next regular session
following the pledging conference, to review the composition of the United Nations/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee and to make, by election far the
balance of the three-year programme, any adjustments
of membership that might be deemed desirable in the
light of the considerations outlined in paragraph 3
above;
10. Instructs the United Nations/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee, in preparing recommendations on
the conditions and procedures for the establishment and
operation of the programme for the review and approval by the Economic and Social Council and the
Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization, to
proceed on the basis of the present resolution and the
resolution of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of 24 November 1961, taking
into account the joint propasa} by the United Nations
and the Food and Agriculture Organization regarding
procedures and arrangements for the multilateral utilization of surplus food, 22 statements made during the
debates in the General Assembly and in the Conference
of the Food and Agriculture Organization and such
other conditions and procedures as may seem to it appropriate;
11. Recommends that Governments requesting
assistance under this programme, the United Nations/
F AO Inter-Governmental Committee, and the joint
United Nations/FAO administrative unit responsible
far the administration of the program, keep the resident
representatives fully infarmed about, and, within their
field of competence, associated with, activities undertaken under the programme;
12. Invites tbe Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the Food and

22

General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

Agriculture Organization to ensure that, in carrying
out the programme, the joint United Nations/FAO
administrative unit rely to the fullest extent possible on
the existing staff and facilities of the United Nations
and the Food and Agriculture Organization, as well as
other appropriate inter-governmental agencies;
13. Requests the United Nations/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee to report annually to the Economic and Social Council and to the Council of the
Food and Agriculture Organization on the progress
made in the development of the programme and on its
administration and operation;
14. Decides to undertake, not later than at its
nineteenth session, a general review of the programme,
taking into account the objectives of its resolution
1496 (XV);

II
Recognizing that the experimental programme outlined above constitutes a step towards the broader obj ectives outlined in its resolution 1496 (XV),
Recognizing further that the ultimate solution to
this problem of food deficiency lies in self-sustaining
economic growth of the economies of the less developed
countries to the point where they find it possible to
meet their food requirements from their food-producing
industries or from the proceeds of their expanding
export trade,
Recognizing that the effective utilization of available
surplus foodstuffs, in ways compatible with the principies of surplus disposal recommended by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, provides an important transitional means of relieving the
hunger and malnutrition of food-deficient peoples, partw:ularly in the less developed countries, and for assisting these countries in their economic development,
Recognizing further that food aid is not a substitute
for other types of assistance, in particular for capital
goods,
1. Recognizes that food aid to be provided under
this programme should take into account other forms
of assistance and country plans for economic and social
development ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in clase co-operation with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and with interested groups or agencies,
and jointly where appropriate, to undertake, as soon
as feasible, expert studies which would aid in the consideration of the future development of multilateral
food programmes;
3. Expresses the hope that, in the light of these
studies and of the experience gained, the progress of the
experimental programme will be such as to permit the
United Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organization to consider the possibility and advisability
of increasing the programme, taking into account the
advantages to developing countries, the interests of the
contributing States, the interests of the food-exporting
countries, the effectiveness of the programme and its
contribution to the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1496 (XV);
4. Endorses again the Freedom from Hunger Campaign launched by the Food and Agriculture Organization, and requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the Food and

Agriculture Organization, simultaneously with the implementation of the present resolution, to pay particular
attention to the necessity of improving and increasing
local food production and to include, where appropriate,
reference to this subject in the reports mentioned above,
and requests the United Nations/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee to consider the possibility of applying to this purpose a reasonable proportion of resources
resulting from the World Food Programme.

1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
ANNEX
PART l OF THE RESOLUTION ON THE UTILIZATION OF FOOD SURPLUSES ADOPTED BY THE CONFERENCE OF THE Foon AND AGRICULTURAL ÜRGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS ON 24
NOVEMBER 1961
The Conference,

I
Resolves, subject to the concurrence of the General Assembly
of the United N ations, that:
l. An initial experimental programme for three years of
approximately $100 million with contributions on a voluntary
basis be undertaken jointly by the Food and Agriculture Organization and the United Nations, in co-operation with other
United Nations agencies, and appropriate inter-governmental
bodies;
2. Contributions to the programme, to be known as the
World Food Programme, may be pledged by countries in the
forro of appropriate commodities, acceptable services, and cash
aiming in the aggregate at a cash component of at least onethird of the total contributions, and countries should give due
regard to the importance of achieving this over-all objective
when determining the cash element in their contribution;
3. An Inter-Governmental Committee of twenty nations
which are members of FAO or the United Nations be established to provide guidance on policy, administration and operations, as outlined in paragraphs 11 and 12 of part III of the
joint report of the Secretary-General and the Director-General ;
4. The Committee be elected half by the FAO Council and
half by the United Nations, taking into account the need for
balanced representation of economically developed countries
and of !ess developed countries and other relevant factors. In
appointing its representative each Government should pay due
regard to the complexities of the executive and operational
planning required for the proposed programme ;
5. The Inter-Governmental Committee meet in Rome early
in 1962 to develop detailed procedures and arrangements for
the Programme on the basis of this resolution, taking due account of the joint report of the Secretary-General and the
Director-General and giving consideration to the views expressed in reports of meetings related to this subject held under
the auspices of FAO and the United Nations;
6. The procedures and arrangements drawn up by the InterGovernmental Committee be reviewed and approved in concurrent sessions of the Council of FAO and the Economic and
Social Council in N ew York in April 1962;
7. A conference for contributing countries to pledge their
contributions in accordance with paragraph 2 above be convened by the Secretary-General and the Director-General after
the concurrent sessions of the FAO Council and the Economic
and Social Council ;
8. The FAO Council and the Economic and Social Council,
at their next regular meetings following th~ pledging conference, should make any adjustment of country composition on
the Inter-Governmental Committee (of twenty) that might be
deemed desirable in view of the considerations mentioned in
paragraph 4 above;
9. Subject to ti1e guidance of the Inter-Governmental Committee, the Programme will be carried on by a joint FAO/

23

Resolutions adopted ou the reports of the ,Second Committee

United Nations administrative unit located at FAO Headquarters in Rome and reporting to both the Director-General
and the Secretary-General, with the costs of administration and
operation under this resolution to be met from contributions
to the programme;
10. In the administration of the Programme attention should
be paid to:
(a) Establishing adequate and orderly procedures on a world
basis for meeting emergency food needs and emergencies inheren t in chronic malnutrition (fhis could include the establishment of food reserves) ;
(b) Assisting in pre-school and school feeding; and
(e) Implementing pilot projects, with the multilateral use of
food as an aid to economic and social development, particularly
when related to labour-intensive projects and rural welfare;
11. Proj ects should be undertaken only in response to requests from the recipient country or countries concerned;
12. The administration oí the proposed Programme will
require close co-operation, particularly on development projects,
between FAO and the United Nations, as well as with appropriate United Nations agencies, and other appropriate intergovernmental bodies;

13. The Inter-Governmental Committee shall ensure that:
(i) In accordance with the FAO principies of surplus disposal and with the consultative procedures established
by the Committee on Commodity Problems, and in
conformity with the United Nations General Assembly
resolution 1496 (XV), particularly paragraph 9, commercial markets and normal and developing trade are
neither interfered with nor disrupted;
(ii) The agricultura! economy in recipient countries is adequately safeguarded with respect both to its domestic
markets and the effective development of food production;
(iii) Due consideration is given to safeguarding normal
commercial practices in respect to acceptable services.

1715 (XVI). United Nations Development Decade
A programme for international economic
co-operation ( 11) 23
The General Assembly,
Having designated the United Nations Development
Decade, in its resolution 1710 (XVI) of 19 December
1961, as a period of intensified co-operation among all
peoples on behalf of those living in the less developed
countries,
Convinced that the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the Special Fund can play an
increasingly important role in this major international
effort,
Recognizing the necessity of making the fullest possible use of the available financia! resources of the
Special Fund,
l. Calls upan States Members of the United Nations and members of the specialized agencies to review
their contributions to the support of the work of the
Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and
the Special Fund so that the combined budgets for
these two organs in the year 1962 may reach the target
of $150 million;
2. Requests the Special Fund, following consultations with participating Governments but not later than
June 1962, to consider the desirability of establishing
'1 service to provide developing countries, upon request,
rvith information and guidance concerning the policies,
rules, regulations and practices of existing and future
• See also resolution 1710 (XVI of 19 December 1961.

sources of development capital and assistance necessary
to enable the less developed countries to determine for
themselves the most appropriate sources to which they
may turn for assistance as needed.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1716 (XVI). Confirmation of the allocation of
Funds for the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance in 1962
The General Assembly,
N oting that ~he Technical Assistance Committee has
reviewed and approved the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance for the biennium 1961 and 1962,
l. Confirms the allocation oí funds authorized by
the Technical Assistance Committee to each of the organizations participating in the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance from contributions, general resources and local costs assessments, as follows:
Participating
organiza/ion

Allocation
(Equivalen/ of US dollars)

United Nations ................... .
International Labour Organisation ... .
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations ............. .
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization ....... .
International Civil Aviation Organization
World Health Organization ......... .
International Telecommunication Union
World Meteorological Organization ..
International Atomic Energy Agency ..

8,092,082
3,947,229
9,557,874
6,161,880
1,441,354
6,435,048
777,985
598,896
732,065

TOTAL 37,744,413

2. Concurs in the Committee's authorization to the
Technical Assistance Board to allocate to the participating organizations an undistributed amount oí $10,169
not included in the amount shown above, as well as up
to $2,432,360 to take into account General Assembly
resolution 1658 (XVI) of 28 November 1961 on base
salary scales and post adjustments of the sta:ff in the
professional and higher categories of the international
civil service, and to make changes in these allocations,
as may be necessary, to provide as far as possible for
the full utilization of contributions to the Expanded
Programme and to allow appropriate revisions in the
supplementary programme, provided that such changes
shall not in the aggregate exceed 3 per~ent of the total
amount allocated to the organizations pá.rticipating in
the Expanded Programme.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1717 (XVI). African educational development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1415 (XIV) of 5 December
1959 and 1515 (XV) and 1527 (XV) of 15 December
1960,
Recognizing the importance of planned and co-ordinated educational development in promoting the
economic and social development of African countries,
Recognizing also the importance of co-ordinating educational plans with over-all national plans for economic
