S/2016/511

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 May 2016
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Mali,
Guinea-Bissau and Senegal
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 10 February 2016, the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General that the Council had decided to send a mission to
West Africa (Mali, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal). The composition of the mission and
its terms of reference were communicated to the Secretary-General on 3 March
2016 in a letter from the President of the Council (S/2016/215) and are set out in
annexes I and II to the present report. The Mali leg of the mission was led by the
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, François Delattre, and
the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations, Fodé Seck. The
Guinea-Bissau leg of the mission was co-led by the Permanent Representative of
Angola to the United Nations, Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins, and Mr. Seck. The
Senegal leg of the mission was led by Mr. Gaspar Martins.

II. Mali
A.

Background
2.
The Security Council mission was the third Council visit to Mali following its
visits in October 2000 (see S/2000/992) and February 2014 (see S/2014/173). Its
primary purpose, in line with the press statement by the Council dated 12 January
2016, was to reiterate the Council’s call for urgent and concrete progress in the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and to assess
the increased level of insecurity, including in central and southern Mali. The
mission was further aimed at assessing progress in the implementation of Council
resolution 2227 (2015), notably the supervision of the ceasefire arrangements, the
provision of good offices and reconciliation support, stabilization and the protection
of civilians, and the protection, safety and security of United Nations personnel, in
addition to the progress and challenges in the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The
mission liaised with the full complement of representatives of the Government of
Mali, women’s groups, the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) and
the Platform coalition of armed groups and the internationa l community.

16-09089 (E)

220616

*1609089*

S/2016/511

B.

Meetings in Bamako, Mopti and Timbuktu
3.
Upon their arrival in Bamako, on 4 March, the members of the Security
Council were welcomed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and African Integration, Abdoulaye Diop, and representatives of
MINUSMA and the diplomatic community. On 5 March, the members met the
Prime Minister, Modibo Keïta, in Bamako before travelling to Mopti, where they
met local authorities and MINUSMA representatives. Later that day in Timbuktu,
the members met the Governor of Timbuktu and other local officials, as well as
imams of the region and MINUSMA representatives. Upon their return to Bamako,
the members received a briefing from MINUSMA on security trends and threats in
Mali and the Sahel and participated in a dinner reception attended by representatives
of the Government, MINUSMA, political parties, the Platform, CMA, international
financial institutions, international non-governmental organizations and the
international community, including MINUSMA troop-contributing countries and the
United Nations country team.
4.
On 6 March in Bamako, the members of the Security Council were briefed,
successively, by representatives of the French Operation Barkhane, the European
Union military mission to contribute to the training of the Malian armed forces, the
MINUSMA leadership and the international mediation team. They then held a
meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
African Integration and representatives of the Ministry of Solidarity, Humanitarian
Action and Reconstruction of the North, the Ministry for the Promotion of Women,
Children and Family, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Ministry for
National Reconciliation, the Ministry of Security and Civil Protection and the
Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. At MINUSMA headquarters, they met
representatives of the Platform and CMA in a joint meeting, and MINUSMA, the
United Nations country team and the extended troika of development partners in
Mali hosted a lunch reception for the members. They also met the political parties of
the presidential majority and, separately, opposition political parties. The members
then met the President of Mali, Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta and, after a press
conference, participated in a dinner reception hosted by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and African Integration.

C.

Key issues raised

1.

Meetings with the President and the Prime Minister
5.
In his meeting with the members of the Security Council, the President of Mali
recognized the need for the specific and speedy implementation of the peace
agreement. He also noted the need to make compromises and reach consensus
among all the parties based on a relationship of trust that needed to be strengthened
and nurtured. He highlighted some of the recent steps taken to implement
institutional reforms, such as the creation of two new regions in northern Mali and
the launch of a constitutional reform process. He informed the Council of plans for
the three signatories to the agreement, who had met in Bamako on 27 February, to
develop and agree on, within the coming two months, a new timeline for the
implementation of the agreement. On security sector reform, he explained that Mali
was on the path of recovery and that, for the sustainability of peace and security,
particular attention would need to be given to the strengthening of the armed forces,

2/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

including their training and equipment. While acknowledging the problem of
corruption in Mali, he urged the international community to fulfil the pledges made
at the high-level international conference for the economic recovery and
development of Mali, held in Paris on 22 October 2015. He expressed his
appreciation for the work of MINUSMA and his desire to jointly reflect on how the
Mission could better address security threats. He called for an extensive review of
the mandate of the Mission, including the strengthening of its capacities, so that it
would be adapted to the current context, in which MINUSMA had become a prime
target of terrorist attacks.
6.
The Prime Minister highlighted that Malian expectations were high and that
the success of the peace agreement would be measured through the specific
improvement of living conditions. He noted the areas of pr ogress and the actions of
the Government for the further implementation of the agreement, adding that
insecurity remained a significant obstacle. He deplored the numerous violent attacks
against national and international forces in Mali and advocated addit ional support in
the reform and strengthening of the armed forces. Regarding cantonment and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, delays in those processes could
cause elements of the signatory armed groups to be tempted to join the ranks of
terrorist groups, he said.
7.
The members of the Security Council emphasized to the Prime Minister, as
with the President and other government interlocutors, the need to implement the
peace agreement concretely and speedily. They suggested a particular focus o n
decentralization and the interim administrative authorities in the north, local
elections, cantonment, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security
sector reform, reconciliation and combating impunity.
2.

Implementation of the peace agreement
8.
In their discussions with the members of the Security Council, the CMA and
Platform representatives highlighted the need for them and the Government to
accelerate the implementation of the peace agreement. The members of the Council
noted that the CMA and Platform armed groups appeared united, attending a single
meeting with them. They handed to the members of the Council a joint assessment
of the progress made and the challenges faced in the implementation of the peace
agreement, highlighting the risk of further delays. The CMA and Platform
representatives suggested that increasing the participation and representation of the
Malian people in the peace process would not only contribute to reconciliation and
advancement in the implementation of the agreement but also prevent radicalization
and counter extremism.
9.
The members of the international mediation team commended the progress
made since the signing of the peace agreement, especially the cessation of hostilities
between the signatories and the intercommunal reconciliation, while observing that
the security situation had deteriorated owing to the increase, during the same period,
in terrorist attacks. They called for the accelerated implementation of the agreement,
with an emphasis on the political and security provisions, and warned against the
apparent competition between armed groups supporting the agreement and terrorist
groups fighting for the agreement not to be implemented.
10. The MINUSMA leadership discussed the recent call for the Miss ion to develop
an exit strategy and the relevance of engaging with the Government on mutual

16-09089

3/27

S/2016/511

commitments. In that regard, the MINUSMA leadership stressed the importance of a
clear division of labour based on comparative advantages towards the strengthening
of the country’s own capacity to address the political, security and development
challenges that it was facing. The reconciliation meeting announced by the
Government, CMA and the Platform, expected to be held in Kidal from 27 to
30 March, was seen by the MINUSMA leadership as a milestone and an opportunity
to address, through a nationally owned initiative, challenges in the peace process.
11. The CMA and Platform representatives noted that the National Council on
Security Sector Reform was of paramount importance, given that it would provide
direction to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and integration
processes for which political and institutional reforms were needed. The two
coalitions of armed groups explained that, on the basis of past experience, without
progress on security sector reform and further clarity on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and integration, further steps relating to the
defence and security elements of the peace agreement would be difficult.
Meanwhile, MINUSMA representatives stressed the importance of moving forward
on security sector reform, including for the purpose of providing a strateg ic
framework for the inclusion of former combatants into State institutions. They
highlighted that, while many strands of security sector reform were already in
progress, there remained a need for a broader and holistic vision encompassing and
linking up those many strands.
12. In the area of army reform, the European Union military mission to contribute
to the training of the Malian armed forces provided a briefing on its activities,
including its assistance with the implementation of the military plannin g law, which
was synchronized with those of other actors through the existing strategic and
technical security sector reform coordination mechanisms. It also stressed that the
future strengthening of the Malian armed forces would need to focus on leadershi p
education and logistics.
13. Lastly, the CMA and the Platform representatives mentioned the reluctance of
combatants to engage in a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process in
the absence of guarantees and commitments as to their future, in cluding with regard
to integration into State institutions. They also expressed concerns and reservations
at engaging in the cantonment of their combatants while terrorist groups operated in
the north of Mali with significant freedom of movement. Recognizi ng the
challenges faced, members of the Security Council reiterated that it was important
for the armed groups to provide lists of combatants, which was key to better
preparing the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes.
3.

Security situation
14. Government representatives commented that the mandate of MINUSMA had
to be adapted to the current context, in which transnational organized crime and
terrorism were the main challenges. The members of the Security Council explai ned
that the strategic review of MINUSMA would provide an analysis of the needs and
recommendations on the way forward, including on the mitigation of security
threats, which the Council would consider ahead of the renewal of the Mission’s
mandate. Government representatives also pointed to the need to consider the
country’s security in the broader context of the Sahel, especially given the

4/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

transnational nature of the security threats. They called for better cooperation and
coordination with MINUSMA on security issues and for the establishment of a new
counter-terrorism force to assist in efforts to combat terrorists in the north of Mali.
The establishment of a specialized judicial unit on terrorism and transnational
organized crime was highlighted as part of the efforts to tackle those threats.
15. Government representatives in Mopti mentioned the current efforts to
deradicalize elements of terrorist groups and requested the assistance of the
international community in that regard. Government interlocutors in Timbuktu
highlighted insecurity as the priority issue, which persisted despite the
implementation of mitigation measures and significantly impaired freedom of
movement.
16. The CMA and the Platform representatives also commented on the spread of
insecurity towards the central and southern parts of Mali, calling for all stakeholders
to counter negative forces together. They added that their combatants were already
engaged in efforts to combat terrorism and that, once integrated into State
institutions, would foster those efforts. They deplored the delays in the
implementation of the peace agreement, which they assessed as providing
opportunities for terrorists to strengthen and better organize themselves. They added
that, alongside military options, other approaches should be considered in
countering negative forces in Mali.
17. MINUSMA representatives explained that the Mission was already
contributing to efforts aimed at preventing or countering terrorism, including by
building the capacity of Malian institutions and patrolling. They expressed the hope
that Operation Barkhane would continue to operate until the threat of terrorism had
been sufficiently reduced and Malian capacities sufficiently strengthened.
18. The representative of Operation Barkhane in Mali provided a briefing on its
counter-terrorist activities and highlighted the challenge of distinguishing between
the various compliant and non-compliant armed groups present in the north. The
representative also highlighted the apparent desire of criminal and terrorist groups
to destabilize the central area of Mali, including through increased attacks against
the defence and security forces and thriving banditry. The representative also
commended the realistic and efficient approach of the Group of F ive for the Sahel in
its actions to combat terrorism.
4.

Women and peace and security
19. Women’s groups that met the members of the Security Council described the
very low participation of women in the peace negotiations in 2013 and 2014 -2015
and in the institutions established to implement the peace agreement. They
highlighted how discrimination against women was felt in their daily lives and also
present in Malian legislative texts. The issues of women’s access to justice,
education and health, and of women’s poverty, were highlighted.

5.

Deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali
20. Political parties of the presidential majority advocated the strengthening of the
military and police capacities of MINUSMA in the areas in which they were
currently deployed. They handed to the members of the Security Council a

16-09089

5/27

S/2016/511

document that contained an analysis of the implementation of the peace agreement,
together with recommendations on the role and mandate of MIN USMA. Also
highlighted therein was the deterioration of the security situation in Mali, with a call
made for greater support from MINUSMA, especially in efforts to combat terrorism.
21. MINUSMA representatives highlighted the current difficulties in deliv ering on
the Mission’s existing mandate and on the overstretch of resources and assets,
especially military. The multiplicity of tasks and continuous violent attacks against
the Mission were limiting the ability of MINUSMA to implement its mandate,
which most senior staff viewed as sufficiently robust, but there was a need for
additional or improved resources and assets for the Mission to accomplish its tasks
effectively. They stressed the need for deficits in training and equipment, in
particular in terms of armoured vehicles, to be addressed urgently and to further
enhance the capacities and assets of MINUSMA contingents. Lastly, they called for
budgetary and administrative procedures deemed slow or ineffective to be reviewed
in the light of their negative impact on the further operations and security of the
Mission and its personnel.
22. MINUSMA representatives in Mopti and Timbuktu pointed to the dichotomy
between the tasks given to the Mission and the resources allocated. The members of
the Security Council noted the specific governance, security and development
opportunities and challenges faced by the region of Mopti, which were
characteristic of the issues at the heart of the mandate of MINUSMA. Those
challenges included a deterioration in the security situation, owing mainly to
terrorist attacks, criminal activities and intercommunal violence, and in the
socioeconomic situation, as evidenced by a decrease in economic activities and the
closure of almost a quarter of the schools.

D.

Observations
23. The members of the Security Council noted the progress made in the
implementation of the peace agreement, but called upon the signatory parties to
implement it concretely and as swiftly as possible, with the support of the members
of the Agreement Monitoring Committee. They supported the development by the
parties of timelines for the implementation of the agreement, in coordination with
Committee and other key partners.
24. The members of the Security Council expressed concern at the lack of
inclusiveness of the peace process, especially with regard to the inclusion and
representation of women, disenfranchised young people and individuals at risk of
recruitment by negative forces. They expressed the belief that a more inclusive
process was key to more sustainable solutions and reconciliation, and to averting
further tensions or a relapse into conflict.
25. The members of the Security Council noted that, as part of the implementation
of the peace agreement, the most pressing issues appeared to be relat ed to
decentralization and the interim administrative authorities in the north, local
elections, cantonment, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security
sector reform, reconciliation, efforts to combat impunity, stabilization and counter terrorism.

6/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

26. More specifically, the members of the Security Council strongly encouraged
the signatory parties to the peace agreement and the country’s partners to support
further progress in the security sector reform, cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, which were highlighted by most
interlocutors as crucial confidence-building and enabling processes linked to other
aspects of the agreement. They recognized the political, institutional, governance,
security, development and reconciliation deficits at the heart of the crisis in Mali
and the contribution that the security sector reform, cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes could make to addressing some of those
root causes.
27. The members of the Security Council took note of the ongoing strategic
review of MINUSMA and looked forward to its findings and recommendations
ahead of the discussions on the renewal of the Mission’s mandate. In that context,
they noted the calls by many stakeholders, including the Government, for a revision
of the role, posture and capacities of MINUSMA to ensure that its direction,
priorities, configuration, internal organization and strength and assets were adapted
to the new environment.
28. The members of the Security Council supported the proposal for MINUSMA
and the Government to agree on mutual commitments and a division of labour
towards the strengthening of the country’s capacity to address the political, security
and development challenges.
29. The members of the Security Council expressed serious concern at the
deterioration of the security situation, especially in the central and northern areas,
and strongly condemned the violent attacks against civilians, government
institutions, armed groups, MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane. In that context,
they discussed the relevance of creating a more structured coalition against
insecurity to better identify the contributions, comparative advantages,
complementarity, coordination and information-sharing mechanisms for the actions
of MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane, the Malian defence and security forces, CMA
and the Platform to tackle insecurity.
30. The members of the Security Council also noted the deficits that MINUSMA
contingents still suffered from and expressed commitment to ensuring that
MINUSMA reached its full operational capacity, including in terms of training and
equipment, without further delay.
31. The members of the Security Council noted the regional and transnational
nature of many of the challenges facing Mali and expressed concern at the role that
organized criminal and terrorist groups in Mali played in the destabilization of West
Africa and the Sahel. They encouraged all stakeholders to continue and, if possible,
increase their involvement in and support for regional and subregional mechanisms
and processes, including the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Nouakchott
Process on the enhancement of security cooperation and the operationalization of
the African Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo -Saharan region, with a
particular emphasis on information-sharing, border security and management and
community-focused initiatives.
32. The members of the Security Council took note of the call for the fulfilment of
the pledges made at the high-level international conference for the economic
recovery and development of Mali, held on 22 October 2015, and called upon all

16-09089

7/27

S/2016/511

partners to honour those commitments without delay. They also encouraged the
Government to make progress on the creation of dedicated str ategies, funds and
zones for the development of the north.

III. Guinea-Bissau
A.

Background
33. This was the third Security Council mission to Guinea-Bissau since its
previous visits, in 2003 and 2004, respectively. The primary purpose of the vi sit on
7 March 2016 was to meet and gather first-hand information from the main
sovereign organs of the State and to deliver key messages to national stakeholders.
The mission was also aimed at assessing the situation on the ground in a context of
political tensions that had intensified since August 2015, with the dismissal of the
first Government following the general elections of 2014. The visit provided an
opportunity for the Council to express concern about the political tensions and to
call for continued respect for the rule of law and the promotion of dialogue to
resolve the political impasse.

B.

Meetings in Bissau
34. The schedule of the mission altered as a result of the mission’s delayed arrival
owing to heavy fog. Upon their arrival in Bissau, the members of the Security
Council received a briefing package on the security situation in the country from the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea -Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
Thereafter, the delegation proceeded to the government palace, where the two
co-leads briefly met the Prime Minister, Carlos Correia, and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Artur Silva, before joining the rest of the delegation for a meeting
chaired by the Prime Minister with several members of his Government, inc luding
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, the Presidency of the Council of Ministers and
Parliamentary Affairs, Defence, Justice, and Social Communication. The members
subsequently met, separately, the Speaker of the National Assembly, Cipriano
Cassamá; the President of the ruling African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cabo Verde (PAIGC), Domingos Simões Pereira; and the Vice -President of the
major opposition party, the Party for Social Renewal (PRS), Certorio Biote, on
behalf of the party’s President, who was abroad at the time of the meeting. The final
meeting was held at the presidential palace with the President, José Mário Vaz. At
the end of the visit, a press stakeout was held at the airport by the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS, Miguel
Trovoada.
35. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General accompanied the
members of the Security Council at all meetings. The planned encounters with civil
society, members of the United Nations and the diplomatic corps had to be cancelled
as a result of the delayed arrival of the mission in Bissau.

8/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

C.

Key issues raised

1.

Political situation
36. In their meetings with the national authorities and political parties, the
members of the Security Council voiced their concern about the risks of continuing
political instability in the country and expressed their full support for the authorities
to resolve the political issues and ensure stability. They appealed to the main
conflicting parties to make all efforts to resolve their political grievances and
differences and show flexibility in doing so. They recalled the political and
socioeconomic advances made following the successful general elections in 2014,
which should not be reversed, including the pledges made by international partners
at the international conference held in Brussels in March 2015.
37. The members of the Security Council called upon the President of Guinea Bissau to keep in mind the regional implications of a continuing impasse. They
requested him to finalize the formation of a complete cabinet by appointing the
remaining two ministers, the Minister of Natural Resources and the Minister of
Internal Administration. They also stressed the importance of respecting the rule of
law to resolve the crisis, noting that politicians were also subject to the rule of law.
They appealed to national stakeholders to reach a permanent agreement, through
dialogue, towards an inclusive, functional government to implement key reforms,
including in the defence, security and justice sectors. They also emphasized the
benefits of political participation and multiparty systems in democratic processes.
38. The President expressed his commitment to overcoming all institutional
challenges in the country and promoting reconciliation and the good functioning of
State institutions. He was of the view that the current crisis was political in nature
and therefore required a political solution. The legal path would only complement
political efforts and should not be the sole approach. Relying on the courts alone
would further undermine the situation and risk politicizing the judiciary. He gave
assurances of his commitment to respecting the decisions of the judiciary, citing his
acceptance of the ruling of the Supreme Court of Justice regarding the
unconstitutional nature of the presidential decree appointing the third Vice -President
of PAIGC, Baciro Djá, as the Prime Minister. Everyone had to abid e by the law; no
one was above the law.
39. The Prime Minister stressed that Guinea-Bissau had operated a multiparty
system since 1994, with about 40 political parties. He recalled the semi -presidential
nature of the political system, involving the Presid ent, the Head of Government and
the Speaker of the National Assembly as among the main sovereign organs.
Following its victory in the most recent legislative elections in 2014, with 57 seats,
PAIGC had formed an inclusive Government, offering six cabinet p ositions to PRS
and one each to the remaining three parties represented in the parliament. In that
favourable context, the Government, the European Union and the United Nations
Development Programme had co-hosted an international conference in support of
Guinea-Bissau in Brussels 2015, at which donors had pledged $1.2 billion in
response to the Government’s request for $500 million.
40. However, that positive momentum had not precluded the dismissal by the
President of the Government of Mr. Simões Pereira in August 2015. Subsequently,
the President had taken a presidential initiative, appointing the third Vice -President
of PAIGC as the new Prime Minister, without the approval of the party. The

16-09089

9/27

S/2016/511

Supreme Court of Justice had subsequently declared the president ial decree
appointing Mr. Djá as unconstitutional. Consequently, following the resignation of
the Prime Minister and his Government, the President had requested PAIGC to
nominate another candidate. Mr. Correia, as the party’s first Vice -President, had
accepted the nomination and thereafter formed a new Government in October 2015.
He concluded that, given that the National Assembly and the Government were
functioning, currently there was no political crisis.
41. The Speaker of the National Assembly also denied that the country was going
through a political crisis. He emphasized that the initial crisis had begun with the
dismissal of the Government of Mr. Simões Pereira, against all expectations. He
outlined the major political events following the dismissal, in particular, the
appointment of Mr. Djá as Prime Minister, the above-mentioned decision of the
Supreme Court of Justice, the debates at the National Assembly on the
Government’s programme and the situation of the 15 parliamentarians who had been
expelled from PAIGC.
42. Furthermore, he deemed the incomplete nature of the Government of the Prime
Minister a result of the “direct intervention” of the President, whom he blamed for
being responsible for the impasse, adding that the President had wished to di smiss
the current Government and exert executive power, in common with his
counterparts in the subregion.
43. In the interest of time, the leader of PAIGC handed over the following
documents to the members of the Security Council: the party’s counterpropo sal to
the President’s draft political agreement, the party’s initial observations on the
proposed document and the party’s correspondence on the consultation process. He
recalled the inclusive approach of PAIGC following the elections in 2014, which
had enabled the party to bring all political forces together in the Government and to
promote concerted solutions to the country’s problems. He highlighted that the main
concern for his party was that the law should be respected and democratic and State
institutions reinforced, thence the importance for national actors to abide by the
decisions of the courts.
44. Members of the Security Council expressed the hope that national stakeholders
would agree on a final solution to their problems, within the Constituti on, to avoid
an escalation of the situation and a negative impact on the population. They
wondered whether PAIGC was ready to make a political compromise to that end.
45. The leader of PAIGC expressed his party’s readiness to consider making the
necessary compromise, including the formation of an inclusive Government with
PRS, provided that all parties would abide by the law. For him, that PAIGC had
accepted the dismissal of his Government was evidence that the party was acting in
good faith and respecting the law and State institutions, as was the nomination of
Mr. Correia for the position of Prime Minister instead of the party leader. He
described his party’s efforts to reach out to PRS and the President to discuss specific
proposals. He called for the President to respect the outcome of the elections of
2014 and to allow PAIGC to lead the Government.
46. Speaking on behalf of the President of the party, the Vice -President of PRS
noted that during the electoral process of 2014, his party had consistently promoted
peace and stability and expressed its readiness to form an inclusive government in
case of victory. Consequently, PRS had joined the inclusive Government of

10/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

Mr. Simões Pereira following the victory of PAIGC. He deplored the fact that
PAIGC had not proposed a political agreement towards the formation of the
Government of Mr. Correia and had allegedly sought to buy the conscience of
members of PRS, instead. For that reason, PRS had not agreed to join the new
Government.
47. For PRS, even though PAIGC was holding the presidency, the Government and
the majority in the National Assembly, its internal divisions, which remained a
chronic problem, were at the root of the current crisis. He emphasized his party’s
commitment to overcoming the impasse, while noting its willingness to have a
political framework whereby PAIGC would rule the country as the party with the
most votes in the legislative elections of 2014.
2.

Situation at the National Assembly
48. The members of the Security Council praised national efforts to conduct
successful elections where the people were able to freely express their votes to elect
their representatives at the National Assembly, deserving the confidence of the
international community.
49. The President of Guinea-Bissau stated that the non-approval of the
Government’s programme on 23 December had been the result of a severe crisis in
the country. PAIGC had expelled 15 parliamentarians from the party and requested
the National Assembly to remove their mandates and replace them with others who
would vote in favour of the programme, which had been accepted by the Permanent
Commission of the Assembly. The decision by the Commission to withdraw the
parliamentary mandates had had a negative impact on the functioning of the
parliament.
50. The Prime Minister spoke to justify the decision of the Permanent Commission
to remove the parliamentary mandate of the 15 former PAIGC members, after the
latter had joined PRS and abstained from voting in favour of the Government’s
programme in December 2015. According to the statutes of PAIGC, candidates in
legislative elections were proposed and supported by the party. In addition, before
doing so, they had to declare that they would accept the conditions of the party and
support it. By deciding not to support the Government’s programme, the 15
parliamentarians had lost both the party’s support and membership. Furthermore,
the electoral law did not provide for independent candidates in legislative elections.
51. The Speaker of the National Assembly stressed that, on the basis of the
statutes of the National Assembly and the Constitution (copies of which he handed
over to the members of the Security Council), the Assembly had sought the legal
opinion of its ethical commission and thereafter concluded that the 15
parliamentarians were no longer meeting the eligibility requirements contained in
the electoral law necessary to maintain their seats. He claimed that the President and
the 15 expelled parliamentarians had enticed a judge of the Regional Court of
Bissau to make a second ruling contradicting a previous decision of the same court
in favour of PAIGC.
52. He recalled that the second debate on the Government’s programme had been
held on 18 January and been disrupted by the 15 former PAIGC mem bers and PRS.
The debate had eventually resumed on 28 January, with the adoption of the
programme, in the absence of the above-mentioned 15 individuals and PRS.

16-09089

11/27

S/2016/511

53. He also indicated that, at the request of PAIGC, the National Assembly had
created a commission of inquiry to investigate the veracity of the crimes, including
corruption, nepotism and misuse of State revenue, alleged by the President. The
report of the commission would be discussed at the next session of the Assembly.
He alleged that the President was concerned that the commission would instead
reveal his or his supporters’ wrongdoing.
54. The PAIGC leader, for his part, observed that the competent institution to
resolve the case of the 15 individuals was the Supreme Court of Justice. He
suggested that, if the 15 former parliamentarians were committed to promoting
peace and dialogue, they should go to court and present all their arguments to make
their case. PAIGC could reconsider its position, should the 15 individuals so request
and apologize for their actions.
55. The Vice-President of PRS underscored the key position of his party at the
National Assembly with 41 seats. He justified his party’s current standing at the
Assembly, highlighting the alleged failure of the Prime Minister to meet the legal
deadlines for submitting the Government’s programme to a second vote. He added
that PAIGC had lost the legal process in court and was not respecting the court
decision.
3.

Dialogue
56. The members of the Security Council consistently called for national
stakeholders to remain committed to genuine political dialogue to resolve the
impasse and deliver on the electoral promises made to the people of Guinea -Bissau.
57. The President of Guinea-Bissau informed the members about the consultation
process that he had initiated, following a request from the Speaker of the National
Assembly, to help to resolve the crisis. The consultations had involved all major
stakeholders in the country, namely, the Assembly, political parties with and without
parliamentary seats and civil society, and been held in the presence of the
international community (the African Union, the Community of Portuguese speaking Countries, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the European Union and the United Nations). In their wake, he had subsequently
held several bilateral, consultative and joint meetings with the parties in conflict to
reach an agreement towards governance stability until the completion of the current
legislature. Consequently, he had proposed a draft parliamentary political
agreement. All parties had commented on the draft, but their proposals had yet to be
harmonized, as initially planned. He undertook to make all efforts to promote
common understanding among national stakeholders and ensure stable governance.
58. The Speaker of the National Assembly stressed that, because the 15 former
PAIGC militants had been expelled from the party, they lacked the institutional
legitimacy necessary to participate alongside institutions in the consultatio n process
launched by the President of Guinea-Bissau. PAIGC had already protested against
the format of the consultations, requesting them to be held at the level of State
institutions, including the Presidency, the Government and the Assembly. He
insisted that he would not take part in any dialogue at the same level as the 15
expelled parliamentarians, and said that the President should have referred the case
of those 15 individuals to the Supreme Court of Justice instead.

12/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

59. The leader of PAIGC reiterated his party’s continued availability to engage in
dialogue with political parties and other institutions to find a lasting solution to the
current situation. In common with the Prime Minister and the Speaker, he rejected
the format of the consultations promoted by the President, which should remain at
the level of State institutions. Notwithstanding the situation, PAIGC had presented a
counterproposal to the President’s initial draft political agreement.
60. The Vice-President of PRS insisted on the need for profound national dialogue
to bring Guinea-Bissau out of the crisis, and assured the members of the Security
Council of his party’s commitment to continuing to give priority to dialogue for the
good of the country.
4.

Security, transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, and human rights
61. The members of the Security Council underscored the possible negative
consequences of the crisis on the security environment and the people of Guinea Bissau, as well as the importance of improving the population’s living conditions,
while recalling the regional peace and security context. They insisted on the
importance of patrolling the border to respond to the threat of transnational
organized crime networks. They pointed to the risk of the worsening of
transnational threats, such as drug trafficking, and even the possibility of extremist
terrorist groups taking advantage of the situation in Guinea -Bissau.
62. The members of the Security Council reiterated their support for the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB), to contribute to enhancing security in the
country. They also recalled the financial contribution of the European Union to
secure the operationalization of ECOMIB.
63. The Prime Minister welcomed the support of ECOMIB and assured the
members of the Security Council that his country was planning for the reform of the
defence and security sectors, calling for the support of the international commun ity
in that regard. He underscored that a specific financial package would be necessary
to secure the demobilization and reintegration phase of the reform. He insisted that
the military were anxious and ready to demobilize and return to civilian life,
provided that they received the funds promised.
64. The President of Guinea-Bissau praised his first year in office as having been
free from gunshots, killings, beatings and arbitrary arrests. On the contrary, there
had been freedom of speech and the press, with the military remaining away from
the political sphere.

5.

United Nations
65. The President emphasized the important role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS
and expressed thanks to him for his patience and facilitation efforts in the
consultation process towards finding a solution to the crisis. He also welcomed the
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of UNIOGBIS to contribute
to the consolidation of the rule of law and democracy and the materialization of the
security sector reform. He undertook to make all efforts to transform Guinea -Bissau
into a productive partner of the United Nations. In that connection, he asked the
members of the Council to consider the return of the country’s armed forces to
peacekeeping operations, a request also made by the Prime Minister.

16-09089

13/27

S/2016/511

66. The Speaker of the National Assembly also commended the Security Council
for extending the mandate of UNIOGBIS and called for a redefinition of the
mandate to enable the Office to promote the principles of democracy. He also
suggested a more interventionist role for UNIOGBIS to implement mandated
support to combat drug trafficking and violent extremism.
D.

Observations
67. National stakeholders welcomed the visit of the members of the Security
Council, which they viewed as a sign of the importance that the Council was
attaching to Guinea-Bissau, as well as the Council’s commitment to supporting the
country’s efforts towards stabilization.
68. The members of the Security Council observed that the parties were deeply
divided and called upon them to give priority to dialogue in resolving their
differences, in line with the country’s laws and Constitution. They agreed that the
problems of Guinea-Bissau must be solved by the people, highlighting the
importance of respecting the rule of law, combating impunity and promoting
accountability. Searching for lasting political stability should be a must for the
national authorities in order to tackle the problems of the people and respond to
their critical needs. That required the Government to play its executive role and the
National Assembly to function in accordance with the law. While underscoring that
the situation was fragile, the members of the Council acknowledged that, with
patience, a commitment to seeking solutions and some flexibility, the political
divergences among the political class and the organs of sovereignty could be solved.

IV. Senegal
A.

Background
69. On 8 March 2016, the members of the Security Council visited Dakar on the
final leg of their mission. The mission was led by the Permanent Representative of
Angola to the United Nations. They held first a meeting with the leadership of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), then with the
Senegal-based diplomatic corps, which included France (Senegal and the Gambia),
China, the Russian Federation (Senegal and the Gambia), Japan (Senegal and the
Gambia, Cabo Verde and Guinea-Bissau), Malaysia (Senegal and the Gambia, Cabo
Verde and Burkina Faso), Spain (Senegal), Ukraine and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) (several countries). Later, they met the President of Senegal, Macky Sall.

B.

Meetings
70. The aim of the visit to UNOWAS was to exchange information on the political
and security situation in West Africa and in the Sahel and to be briefed on the level
of implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. The
mission was further aimed at assessing the implementation of the decision (see
S/2016/89) to merge the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel (OSES). The
visit was an opportunity for the members of the Security Council to express their
full support for the Special Representative of the Secretary -General for West Africa

14/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

and the Sahel and welcome the activities of UNOWAS in the framework of its
mandate. The meeting with the diplomatic corps was aimed at exchanging
information on peace and security challenges in the region and on the Council’s
visit to Mali, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal.
71. In his remarks, the Special Representative of the Secretary -General described
the situation in the subregion and the implementation of the UNOWAS mandate. He
highlighted that security challenges and the international community response
remained at the heart of the discussions in the region. He noted that, since his
arrival at the head of UNOWA, he had witnessed the growing efforts aimed at
improving regional coordination and cooperation, such as the African Union Peace
and Security Architecture and the Group of Five for the Sahel. He said that there was
a greater regional awareness of the vulnerabilities of the countries to terrorism and
other security threats, which had fostered a common determination to unify forces.
72. Subsequently, the members of the Security Council held a meeting the
President of Senegal in his capacity as Chair of ECOWAS. They interacted with him
on the situation in West Africa, expressing interest in his evaluation of issues
affecting the region, including the threat of terrorism. He shared his views on the
situation in Mali and voiced the need to ensure the territorial integrity of the
country. He suggested that MINUSMA should be empowered to perform its mandate
in the light of the current violence affecting Mali.
73. Regarding terrorism, he emphasized the transnational nature of the proble m
and called for the combined efforts of all the international community to support
work to combat terrorist groups in the region. He also noted the need for West
African countries to develop their capacities to deal with that threat.
74. In response to a request for his views on resolving the crisis in Burundi and
Guinea-Bissau, he said that the latter country’s semi-presidential system was the
main reason for the crisis, given that it had multiple sources of power. He suggested
a constitutional review to resolve the situation in the future and urged the authorities
to work together until the end of the term of office of the current President.
75. He also emphasized the role of ECOWAS in resolving the crisis in Guinea Bissau and the financial difficulties facing ECOMIB, which was playing an
important role in the maintenance of peace and security. He highlighted the danger
of violence if ECOMIB were to leave Guinea -Bissau as a result of financial
problems, saying that Senegal allocated an annual budget of $20 million to support
the Mission.
76. He explained that he had been in Burundi on 25 and 26 February as part of the
high-level delegation of the African Union, which also comprised the Presidents of
Ethiopia, Gabon, Mauritania and South Africa. They had asked the President of
Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza, to conduct an inclusive dialogue with all Burundian
stakeholders, including those who had left the country, and to release all political
prisoners.
77. He noted the importance of the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, as
facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue and of finding ways to reduce tensions
with Rwanda. He said that the African Union should lead the negotiations in
Burundi and would send 100 military observers and 100 human rights observ ers to
the country after the refusal of the President to accept its proposal to dispatch an

16-09089

15/27

S/2016/511

African peacekeeping mission. He requested the Security Council to support the
observer mission to Burundi.

C.

Key issues raised

1.

Elections
78. The Special Representative briefed the members on his good offices activities
relating to the elections in Benin and the Niger and the continuing preparations in
Cabo Verde. On the elections in Benin, he said that he had just returned from the
country, where, after a peaceful campaign, the first round of the presidential
elections had been successfully organized. The only contentious issue had been
related to the voting cards to be used, given that the biometric cards for 2016 had
not been distributed on time. He explained how, on behalf of international partners,
including the African Union, ECOWAS, the Council of the Entente, present in Benin
to monitor the elections, he had successfully led good offices consultations to
resolve a contentious confusion between the Constitutional Court and the National
Independent Electoral Commission on the issue. He would, in collaboration with
other international partners, continue to carry out his good offices activities in view
of the second round of elections on 29 March.
79. In relation to the Niger, he explained that the first round of elections had been
held peacefully, notwithstanding the highly complicated situation in which one of
the presidential candidates and a former Speaker of the parliament, Hama Amadou,
was in prison on charges of trafficking in children. He noted that that matter was
mainly legal and that Mr. Amadou’s party had thus far exercised restraint and
showed a great sense of responsibility. He added that the second round of the
elections was scheduled for 20 March and he had a team on the ground and would
continue his good offices in that regard. On Cabo Verde, he indicated that he would
travel to Praia to meet the President and other key actors in the electoral process to
encourage them in the peaceful organization of the elections on 20 March. On the
political situation in Senegal, he stressed that Senegal enjoyed a well -deserved
reputation as a solid democracy in Africa and that he was encouraging Senegalese
actors to conduct a serene debate in view of the referendum of 20 March on
constitutional reforms.

2.

Terrorism and violent extremism
80. Concerning the security challenges posed by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
basin area, the Special Representative indicated that he and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, had
conducted a tour of countries affected by Boko Haram. In this connection, they had
both visited the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Multinational Joint Task
Force headquarters in N’Djamena, where they had been briefed on the progress in
relation to the coordination of action among the countries concerned and on the
level of deployment of troops. He highlighted that countries had even exceeded the
African Union-designated level of 8,500 troops to be deployed for the Task Force.
He noted that forces from Cameroon and Nigeria were wor king jointly to conduct
cross-border operations against Boko Haram. He stated that he and the Special
Representative for Central Africa had encouraged the States concerned to strengthen
their unified front against the asymmetric warfare of Boko Haram and c alled for

16/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

synergy of efforts between the African Union and the Basin Commission with
regard to access to resources. He highlighted that better coordination with the
African Union was needed to ensure that international resources provided through it
trickled down to the Task Force. A high-level consultative meeting in May would
bring together the concerned countries. He strongly encouraged international
partners to attend the meeting at the highest level.
81. Responding to the concerns voiced on the growing threat represented by
terrorism and violent extremism in communities, he mentioned that at the root of
violent extremism was the low level of socioeconomic development and
opportunities. He highlighted that more mobilization was needed, as was currently
done by United Nations country teams through the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, to address social and economic marginalization and to
provide support to communities affected by Boko Haram. He stressed that that
would be the means of weakening the capacity of terrorists to build networks and to
kill and destroy communities, given that Boko Haram appeared to receive support
from everywhere, including from Al-Shabaab and Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. He stressed that young people in areas affected by Boko Haram in northern
Cameroon, north-eastern Nigeria, the southern Niger and Chad should be provided
with more creative social and economic opportunities to open up those regions.
3.

Merger of offices
82. Regarding the decision of the Security Council to merge UNOWA and OSES
into UNOWAS, the Special Representative gave assurances that steps were being
taken to move forward with the merger. A technical assessment team had just
returned to New York and would continue to work on the d raft recommendations
that would be validated by the leadership of the Department of Political Affairs and
the Department of Field Support of the Secretariat, in consultation with the mission.
He expected that in the coming weeks the new unified structure would be formally
adopted. In the meantime, the team was already working towards the merger.
83. On the implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
he informed the Security Council that a liaison cell to the Group of Five for t he
Sahel was being established in Nouakchott. He emphasized that the work would be
continued in synergy on issues of governance and security resilience in the Sahel
with other international partners, including the European Union, which also had its
own Sahel strategy, and with the United Nations Development Programme. On
efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism, he recognized that good
initiatives were being undertaken by the countries concerned, but that resources
were a challenge. He therefore called for renewed support from international partners.
84. On the impact of corruption on the development of countries in the region, he
referred to the report of Transparency International, according to which the
countries in West Africa were still ranked very low. He commended the efforts made
by some countries, such as Nigeria, to combat corruption, stressing that the success
of Nigeria would serve as an example for other countries and, given the importance
of that country in the region, it would reverberate. At the regional level and through
ECOWAS, there were some initiatives aimed at learning from one another’s
experiences, such as the example of the development of more transparent
procurement processes.

16-09089

17/27

S/2016/511

4.

Piracy
85. On piracy and maritime security, the Special Representative indicated that he
and the Special Representative for Central Africa had attended a high -level meeting
on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé in February. The
meeting had brought together ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission and, among international
partners, France, the European Union and the Group of Seven Group of Friends of
the Gulf of Guinea, to move forward with operationalizing the internationa l
coordination centre on the safety and security in the maritime area of Central and
West Africa. At the continental level the African Union would organize a summit in
Togo in October on maritime security to examine the adequate ways and means to
curb criminal activities that constituted a serious breach of peace and security to
navigation throughout the African maritime space, including in the Gulf of Guinea.

5.

Operationalization of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security
86. Regarding the operationalization of resolution 1325 (2000) within the
UNOWAS mandate, the Special Representative highlighted that women were
continuously engaged in mediation and in peacebuilding efforts. He mentioned the
annual open day that was focused on discussing the involvement of women on
issues relating to development and peace in the region. In that regard, he stressed
that UNOWA had worked with ECOWAS to train 32 women mediators across the
region, and that discussions were continuing to engage with those women to support
national initiatives and institutions in promoting peace, security and stability.

6.

Regional role of Senegal
87. The diplomatic corps highlighted the strategic importance and positioning of
Senegal in the region, which served as an example for its democratic institutions
and its role in preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding in Africa. They pointed out
that its specific religious system and culture of tolerance had made Senegal a stable
country in a troubled region.

7.

Political tensions in Guinea-Bissau
88. On the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the Special Representative mentioned
the efforts made by the former President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo, the
President of Guinea, Alpha Condé, and the President of Senegal in his capacity as
Chair of ECOWAS. He stressed that the international community should remain
engaged in Guinea-Bissau, given the regional implications of the political crisis.

D.

Observations
89. The members of the Security Council commended the tireless and successful
efforts at preventive diplomacy made by the Special Representative and his team
and reiterated their support for UNOWAS. Notably, the representatives of Angola
and France emphasized the importance of UNOWAS activities that represented a
model for preventive diplomacy and reiterated that the presence of such an office
was complementing the response of the Council to the threats posed by Boko Haram
in the region.

18/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

90. The members of the Security Council acknowledged that they shared the same
views and had the same messages on Mali and Guinea-Bissau, where they had
spoken with a common voice. They were particularly pleased with the positive —
albeit slower-than-anticipated — trend in the peace process in Mali that they had
noticed. They stressed that, at the end of their mission, they were deeply concerned
about the political stand-off in Guinea-Bissau and would remain seized of the
question.
91. The members of the Security Council acknowledged that security threats in
West Africa and the Sahel had to be dealt with from a perspective of regional
conflict prevention. They noted that the multidimensional nature of the challenges
faced by West Africa and the Sahel, especially transnational organized crime and
terrorism, together with the root causes of those challenges, required the United
Nations and the international community to adopt multidimensional and creative
approaches, including for the strengthening of the rule of law and security
institutions at the regional level. They stressed that economic development and
social services should be made available to the population to contain the growing
frustration that promoted terrorism and violent extremism. They also noted that
efforts should be made to prevent Africa becoming similar to the Syrian Arab
Republic or Iraq. They acknowledged that, despite the evident destabilizing effect
from jihadist infiltrations coming not only from Libya, but also from Al -Shabaab
from Somalia and the Sahel itself to Boko Haram, sufficient resources had not been
mobilized to confront the level of threat.

16-09089

19/27

S/2016/511

Annex I
Composition of the Security Council mission to Mali,
Guinea-Bissau and Senegal
Ambassador Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins (Angola)
Mr. Zhao Yong (China)
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta (Egypt)
Ambassador Francois Delattre (France)
Ambassador Yoshifumi Okamura (Japan)
Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim (Malaysia)
Ambassador Phillip Taula (New Zealand)
Mr. Petr V. Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Fodé Seck (Senegal)
Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain)
Ambassador Volodymyr Yelchenko (Ukraine)
Ambassador Peter Wilson (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Ambassador David Pressman (United States of America)
Ambassador Luis Homero Bermúdez Alvarez (Uruguay)
Ambassador Henry Alfredo Suárez Moreno (Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of)

20/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

Annex II
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission to Mali,
Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, March 2016
Mission to Mali, 4 to 6 March 2016,
led by France and Senegal
References:
Security Council resolution 2227 (2015)
Security Council press statement of 12 January 2016 (SC/12198-AFR/3300-PKO/555)
Effective implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
1.
To recall the primary responsibility of the Government of Mali, the Platform
and Coordination armed groups for achieving lasting peace in Mali and to reaffirm
its intention to facilitate, support and follow closely the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
2.
To welcome the first positive steps taken to implement the Agreement and to
urge the Government of Mali, the Platform and Coordination armed groups to
continue to engage constructively with sustained politi cal will and in good faith to
fully and effectively implement the Agreement without further delay.
3.
To urge the Government of Mali, the Platform and Coordination armed groups
to prioritize the implementation of key provisions of the Agreement on Peace a nd
Reconciliation in Mali in order to bring concrete peace dividends to the populations
of Mali and to urge them, in this regard, to take without delay the necessary
measures to advance the deployment of joint security patrols in the North of Mali
and the cantonment, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of armed
combatants, as well as the decentralization process, consistent with the provisions of
the Agreement.
4.
To reiterate the Security Council’s full support to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to support the Government of Mali, the
Platform and Coordination armed groups in the implementation of the Agreement.
5.
To reiterate the Security Council’s request to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali, through his good offices mandate, to play a key role to
support and oversee the implementation of the Agreement, notably by heading the
secretariat of the Comité de suivi de l’Accord (CSA) and to assess the fulfilment by
MINUSMA of its mandate to support the implementation of the Agreement,
including the ceasefire arrangements and defence and security measures, and to
exercise good offices and facilitation at the national and local levels.
6.
To urge the Government of Mali, the Platform and Coordination armed groups
to cooperate fully and to coordinate with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali and MINUSMA, in particular on the implementation of
the Agreement.

16-09089

21/27

S/2016/511

7.
To reiterate its call on the members of the Comité de suivi de l’Accord and
other relevant international partners to support the implementation of the Agreement
and coordinate their efforts with the Special Representative of the S ecretary-General
for Mali and MINUSMA, as well as to stress the need for clear, detailed and
concrete oversight mechanisms to support the implementation of the Agreement.
8.
To assess the capacities of Malian Defence and Security Forces and the
contribution of international partners, including the European Union through its
missions, the European Union Training Mission (EUTM) in Mali and the European
Union Capacity Building Mission in Mali (EUCAP Sahel Mali), to provide training
and advice to the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
9.
To assess the contribution of Malian civil society, notably through women’s
organizations, in the Malian peace process and in the implementation of the
Agreement, including through the actual representation and full and effective
participation of women at all levels in the monitoring committees of the Agreement,
as well as in the peace, reconciliation and electoral processes, in line with relevant
Security Council resolutions and the minimum gender representation quo ta voted by
Mali in 2015.
10. To assess the performance of MINUSMA to assist the Malian authorities to
ensure that conflict-related violence, in particular sexual violence crimes, is taken
into full account: (a) in the implementation of the peace agreemen t; (b) in the
context of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform; (c) in any cease reverification mechanism; and (d) in any transitional justice
arrangements.
11. To assess the performance of MINUSMA to provide specific pr otection for
women and children, including through the monitoring and reporting of conflict related sexual violence and grave violations against children by child protection
advisers and women protection advisers, and to take into account gender
considerations and child protection as a cross-cutting issue throughout its mandate.
Security situation
12. To receive a briefing on the security situation in Mali and in the Sahel region,
to express the Security Council’s concern about the security situation, including the
expansion of terrorist and criminal activities into central and southern Mali, as well
as its support to the French forces who support MINUSMA, and to stress that the
full implementation of the Agreement can help to contribute to improving t he
security situation across Mali.
13. To assess the level of cooperation of Mali and countries in the region to tackle
the terrorist threat in the Sahel region, in particular through the Group of Five for
the Sahel, and to consider the prospects for further cooperation, including the
African Union proposals for the establishment of a counter -terrorist force in Mali
and in the region.
14. To assess the fulfilment by MINUSMA of its mandate to protect, without
prejudice to the primary responsibility of the Malian authorities, civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence.
15. To assess the fulfilment by MINUSMA of its mandate, in support of the
Malian authorities, to stabilize the key population centres and other areas where

22/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

civilians are at risk, notably in the North of Mali, including through long-range
patrols, and, in this context, to deter threats and take active steps to prevent the
return of armed elements to those areas.
16. To stress the importance of ensuring adequate protection of MINUSMA
personnel, in the light of the evolution of security threats MINUSMA faces, to
effectively implement its mandate, to assess the level of equipment and training of
MINUSMA personnel in this regard and to reiterate its call on the Secretary -General
and all MINUSMA troop- and police-contributing countries, as well as bilateral
donors, to continue their efforts to ensure that MINUSMA contingents have the
necessary equipment and training to fulfil their mandate.
Peace dividends to the populations of Mali
17. To reiterate its call upon the Malian authorities to address immediate and long term needs, encompassing security, governance reform, development and
humanitarian issues, to resolve the crisis in Mali and to ensure that the Agreement
translates into concrete benefits for the local populations, notably through the
priority projects outlined in the Agreement.
18. To assess the impact of the Agreement on the living conditions of the
populations of Mali, especially in the north, to assess the efforts of the Government
of Mali to restore basic services to the populations in the north of Mali and to call
for the immediate fulfilment of the commitments made during the International
Conference for the Economic Recovery and Development of Mali, held on
22 October 2015 in Paris.
19. To assess the fulfilment by MINUSMA of its mandate, in support of the
Malian authorities, to contribute to the creation of a secure environment for projects
aimed at stabilizing the north of Mali, including quick -impact projects.
20. To assess the further need of institution-building and development projects
with a view to consolidating the peace process.
21. To assess the fulfilment by MINUSMA of its mandate to support cultural
preservation, in collaboration with the United Nations E ducational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization.

Visit to Guinea-Bissau, to be co-led by Senegal and Angola
1.
The Security Council will carry out its mission to the Republic of Guinea Bissau, within the framework of Council resolution 2267 (2016) , the press statement
of 12 August 2015 (SC/12005-AFR/3195), the press statement of 14 August 2015
(SC/12007-AFR/3196) and the press statement of 21 September 2015
(SC/12054AFR/3212).
2.
The Security Council will meet with the President of the Republic of GuineaBissau, the Prime Minister and his government, the President of the Parliament and
his Vice-President, leaders of the political parties with seats in the Parliament and
leaders of the political parties without seats in the Parliament, as well as ci vil
society organizations and the leadership of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), among others.

16-09089

23/27

S/2016/511

3.
In line with the framework set out in paragraph 1 above, the Security Council
will deliver the following messages:
(a) To express deep concern with the continuous rise of political tensions in
Guinea-Bissau among the President, the Prime Minister, the Parliament and the
heads of the political parties, which are blocking the country’s progress;
(b) To make a strong appeal to the parties involved to respect the country’s
laws and Constitution while endeavouring to solve the current impasse;
(c) To reaffirm its strong commitment and respect for the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity, unit y and consolidation of peace in
Guinea-Bissau;
(d) To call on leaders to seek dialogue and consensus in resolving the crisis
in order to preserve the interests of the people of Guinea -Bissau;
(e) To call on the President to work with the Government to complete the
appointments of ministers to head the only remaining ministries without leadership
(Interior and Natural Resources);
(f) To stress that the judiciary should resolve the status of the 15
parliamentarians expelled from the ruling party and barred from their National
Assembly seats;
(g) To invite the President to accept the Stability Pact facilitated by the
United Nations as a tool for focusing dialogue and negotiation among political
players as they build a framework for the proper functio ning of government
institutions;
(h) To commend the important efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and encourage the Community to continue extending its
political support to the authorities and political leaders of Guinea -Bissau through
the use of good offices and mediation (see Council resolution 2267 (2016), para. 8);
(i) To encourage ECOWAS and the Community of Portuguese -Speaking
Countries (CPLP) to take the necessary steps towards organizing a meeting of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau, in consultation with the United
Nations, the European Union and all stakeholders (see resolution 2267 (2016),
para. 9) and, in that regard, to urge the Bissau-Guinean authorities to demonstrate
the necessary commitment to re-establish momentum for progress in key areas (see
resolution 2267 (2016), first part of paragraph 18);
(j) To reiterate its call for the non-interference of the army and security
forces in the political situation;
(k) To commend the crucial role of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB) in securing the state institutions and in supporting security sector
reform, supports its continuation, in accordance with the expressed will of the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau and urges bilateral, regional and international partners
to consider providing financial assistance to support ECOWAS in sustaining the
deployment of ECOMIB, as requested by the 48th ordinary session of the Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African
States (see resolution 2267 (2016), para. 13);

24/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

(l) To deliver a clear message on the importance of maintaining peace and
preventive diplomacy, and express the intention of the Security Council to follow
the situation closely and respond appropriately in ca se the current situation becomes
a threat to peace and security in Guinea-Bissau.
4.

Council members will also perform the following tasks:

(a) To assess the consequences of the political tensions on the living
conditions of the populations in Guinea-Bissau;
(b) To access the progress achieved in the reforms sectors, such as in
security sector reform, justice reforms, and so on;
(c) To assess the fulfilment by UNIOGBIS of its mandate, in support of the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau, to contribute to the creation of a secure environment
for the implementation of the priority projects aimed at stabilizing the country;
(d) To assess efforts made by the authorities of Guinea-Bissau to implement
and review national legislation and mechanisms to more effectively combat
transnational organized crime, including drug trafficking and money -laundering,
which threaten security and stability in Guinea -Bissau and in the subregion (see
resolution 2267 (2016), para. 15);
(e) To reiterate the Council’s support for the key role and active engagement
of Miguel Trovoada, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), including his good offices and close coordination with
the international community;
(f) To reiterate the Council’s support to the subregional, regional and
international organizations that are actively engaged in the stabilization of Guinea Bissau.

Visit to Senegal, to be led by Angola
I.

Meeting with the Senegalese authorities
• Role as the Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS):
References:
Security Council press statement of 15 January 2016 (SC/12207)
Presidential statement of 11 June 2015 (S/PRST/2015/12)
– To raise the political and security situation in West Africa and actions of
goodwill and mediation undertaken by Senegal, including the African Union
visit to Burundi and in view of the upcoming ECOWAS summit meeting to be
held in mid-2016.
– To welcome the positive political developments in West Africa, in particular
the holding of free and peaceful elections in Nigeria, Togo, Burkina Faso,
Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire.

16-09089

25/27

S/2016/511

– To stress the importance of free, fair, peaceful, inclusive and credible
presidential elections in the Niger, Benin, Cabo Verde, Ghana, the Gambia and
Chad.
– To reiterate the Security Council’s strong condemnation of the recurrent
terrorist threat in the region, in particular in Mali and the Sahel, as well as in
the Lake Chad Basin region, notably by Boko Haram and to assess the efforts
of ECOWAS and other regional organizations, including the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, to combat the terrorist threats. To reiterate the need for the
region to adopt a comprehensive approach in order to successfully tackle the
threat presented by Boko Haram to the region.
– To express the support of the Council to encourage cooperation between
ECOWAS, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, and other relevant multilateral and regional
organizations to assist the region to address its political and security challenges.
– To consider the presence of ECOWAS in Guinea-Bissau, particularly the
future of ECOMIB.
– To discuss the preparation by ECOWAS of the meeting of the International
Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau.
II.

Meeting with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel
References: Presidential statement of 8 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/24)
Letter dated 28 January 2016 from the President of the Security Council addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2016/89)
– To exchange views on the political and security situation in West Africa and in
the Sahel region, including the preventative diplomacy engagement of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
– To express its full support to the Special Representative and welcome the
activities undertaken by UNOWAS in the areas of good offices, the
enhancement of subregional capacities to address cross-border and crosscutting threats to peace and security, as well as the promotion of good
governance, respect for the rule of law and human rights, and gende r
mainstreaming.
– To encourage the continued engagement of UNOWAS with regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Group of Five for the
Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Mano River Union, in order
to promote peace and stability in West Africa and the Sahel region.
– To reiterate its support to the Secretary-General to proceed with the full
and immediate merger through a unified management and structure of
the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the Sahel.

26/27

16-09089

S/2016/511

– To receive an update on the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel and to encourage UNOWAS to make further progress
towards the implementation of the strategy and to continue to work closely
with the States of the region, including the Group of Five for the Sahel, to
tackle the threats to peace, security and development in the Sahel, as well as
their root causes.
– To stress the efforts to strengthen subregional capacities to fight against crossborder and cross-cutting threats to peace and security, promote good
governance, the rule of law and human rights and take into account the gender
issues.

16-09089

27/27
