S/PV.9263

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9263rd meeting

Monday, 20 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05179 (E)
*2305179*

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

“The Security Council reiterates that continuing
Israeli settlement activities are dangerously
imperilling the viability of the two-State solution
based on the 1967 lines;

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Israel and Qatar to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process; and Ms. Leni Stenseth, Deputy
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.
“The Security Council reaffirms the right
of all States to live in peace within secure and
internationally recognized borders and stresses that
both the Israeli and Palestinian people are entitled
to equal measures of freedom, security, prosperity,
justice and dignity;
“The Security Council reaffirms its unwavering
commitment to the vision of the two-State solution
where two democratic States, Israel and Palestine,
live side by side in peace within secure and
recognized borders, consistent with international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions;
“The Security Council expresses deep
concern and dismay at Israel’s announcement
on 12 February 2023 of further construction and
expansion of settlements and the ‘legalization’ of
settlement outposts;
2/23

20/02/2023

“The Security Council strongly underscores
the need for all parties to meet their international
obligations and commitments; strongly opposes all
unilateral measures that impede peace, including,
inter alia, Israeli construction and expansion of
settlements, the confiscation of Palestinians’
land, the legalization of settlement outposts,
the demolition of Palestinians’ homes and the
displacement of Palestinian civilians;
“The Security Council condemns all acts
of violence against civilians, including acts of
terrorism; calls for the strengthening of ongoing
efforts to counter terrorism in a manner consistent
with international law, and for all parties to clearly
condemn all acts of terrorism and refrain from
incitement to violence; reiterates the obligation of
all parties regarding the pursuit of accountability
for all acts of violence targeting civilians; and
recalls the obligation of the Palestinian Authority
to renounce and confront terror;
“The Security Council calls on all parties to
observe calm and restraint and to refrain from
provocative actions, incitement and inflammatory
rhetoric, with the aim, inter alia, of de-escalating
the situation on the ground, rebuilding trust and
confidence, demonstrating through policies and
actions a genuine commitment to the two-State
solution, and creating the conditions necessary for
promoting peace;
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the safety and well-being of all
civilians and calls for full respect for international
humanitarian law, including the protection of the
civilian population; calls for the facilitation of
access for humanitarian workers to populations in
need; and reiterates the need to take appropriate
steps to ensure the safety and well-being of civilians
and their protection;
“The Security Council notes with deep concern
instances of discrimination, intolerance and hate
speech motivated by racism or directed against
persons belonging to religious communities,
in particular cases motivated by Islamophobia,
anti-Semitism or Christianophobia;
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

“The Security Council calls for upholding
unchanged the historic status quo at the holy sites in
Jerusalem in word and in practice, and emphasizes,
in that regard, the special role of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2023/1.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: We are witnessing a surge in
violence, including some of the deadliest incidents in
nearly 20 years. I am concerned that developments on
the ground are continuing their negative trajectory,
gaining in both pace and intensity. At the same time,
unilateral actions are moving the parties still further
apart, exacerbating tensions and driving the conflict.
Immediate efforts are required to reduce tensions, but
restoring calm is not, on its own, a recipe for progress.
The United Nations, along with regional and
international partners, has engaged intensively with
all parties to de-escalate the situation. I appreciate in
particular the Council’s efforts to focus its attention
on the situation here, as reflected in the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2023/1). I call upon the parties to
match security efforts with political steps that can halt
the negative slide and restore hope in an end to the
conflict and prospects for a viable two-State solution.
Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.9246),
we have seen an alarming number of fatalities. Forty
Palestinians, including one woman and seven children,
have been killed in the occupied West Bank. In the
same period, 10 Israelis, including one woman, three
children and one security personnel, as well as one
woman foreign national, have been killed.
A significant number of Palestinian casualties
have occurred in the context of Israeli security forces
search and arrest operations and clashes with armed
Palestinians, including in Area A of the occupied
West Bank. On 26 January, 10 Palestinians, including
militants and a 61-year-old woman, were killed in the
Jenin refugee camp. A few days later, on 30 January,
Israeli security forces killed five armed Palestinians
during an arrest operation that led to an exchange of
fire in the Aqbat Jabr refugee camp, near Jericho. Those
killed were later claimed by Hamas as members of its
armed wing.
Two terrorist attacks were carried out in occupied
East Jerusalem. Six Israelis, including a child and

S/PV.9263

one foreign national, were killed in a shooting attack
perpetrated by a Palestinian outside a synagogue on
27 January, and three Israelis, including two children,
were killed in a ramming attack on 10 February. Two
Palestinians were killed by settlers in the occupied West
Bank, one while attempting to carry out a stabbing
attack on 21 January and one shot in a confrontation
with a group of settlers near a Palestinian village on
11 February. On 13 February, a 13-year-old Palestinian
boy stabbed a member of the Israeli security forces in
East Jerusalem, during which a second Israeli security
forces member was shot and killed in a friendly
fire incident.
As the Secretary-General noted last month, the
current escalation of violence is deeply worrisome.
There can never be any excuse for acts of terrorism or the
targeting of civilians, which must be clearly condemned
and rejected by all. The celebration or glorification of
such attacks is abhorrent and must be unequivocally
condemned. I reiterate that the perpetrators of all acts of
violence must be held accountable and swiftly brought
to justice. Security forces must exercise maximum
restraint and use lethal force only when strictly
unavoidable to protect life. I am particularly appalled
that children continue to be the victims of violence and
involved in violent incidents. Children must never be
the targets of violence, used or put in harm’s way.
Amid the mounting violence, there has also been
a concerning deterioration in relations between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority (PA). Following the
26 January Israeli search and arrest operation in Jenin,
the Palestinian Authority announced that security
coordination with Israel “no longer exists”. Following
the 27 January terrorist attack in Jerusalem, the Israeli
Security Cabinet announced a series of measures,
including steps to reinforce security and strengthen
Israeli settlements, as well as punitive measures
against the perpetrators of the attacks in Jerusalem and
their families.
On 2 February, Israel’s Finance Minister announced
an increase in monthly deductions from clearance
revenues that Israel collects on behalf of the PA. The
deductions — carried out in line with an Israeli law
mandating the Government to withhold the equivalent
of what it says the PA pays to Palestinian perpetrators
of attacks against Israelis or to their families — will
be doubled from approximately $15 to $30 million per
month. In the light of those deductions, the PA said
that it expected to maintain and potentially increase

23-051793/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

measures, such as paying partial salaries for PA
employees, which will severely impact the delivery
of health, education and social support services. The
financial implications of those various factors clearly
contribute to undermining the stability of the PA.
Significant decisions were announced by the
Government of Israel related to settlement advancements
and settlement outposts. On 12 February, the Israeli
Security Cabinet announced that it had decided to
authorize nine illegal outposts in the occupied West
Bank. It also said the Civil Administration’s Higher
Planning Committee would convene in the coming days
to advance housing units in settlements, and that police
and border police units in Jerusalem would be reinforced
and their operations expanded. Such outposts increase
the settlement footprint and create friction points in the
occupied West Bank. The announcement was met with
widespread opposition from the Palestinian Authority
and members of the international community. Many
emphasized that such unilateral moves exacerbate
tensions and undermine prospects for a negotiated twoState solution.
Israeli settlements, including outposts, are illegal
under international law and remain a substantial obstacle
to peace. Demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned property also remain a serious concern. During
the reporting period, Israeli authorities demolished,
seized or forced owners to demolish 52 Palestinianowned structures in Areas B and C and 46 in occupied
East Jerusalem, displacing 130 Palestinians, including
68 children. The demolitions were carried out owing to
the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
On 7 February, Israel’s High Court of Justice
instructed the Government to submit by 2 April its
response to a petition seeking a forced implementation of
standing demolition orders against the Bedouin village
of Khan Al-Ahmar. The Government had requested a
postponement until 1 June. Also on 7 February, Israeli
authorities said they would postpone the demolition
of a multi-story structure housing approximately 100
Palestinians in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Silwan. The postponement came a day after the police
had told residents that they would move forward with
the demolition. I am concerned about the significant
increase in demolitions, particularly in East Jerusalem.
I urge Israel to cease that practice, in line with its
obligations under international humanitarian law.
4/23

20/02/2023

Turning to Gaza, the relative calm of the past few
months was interrupted by exchanges of fire during the
reporting period, once again demonstrating the fragility
of the ceasefire. Palestinian militants in Gaza fired
rockets from the Strip towards Israel on six occasions.
A total of 11 rockets were fired: five were intercepted
by the Iron Dome system, two landed in open areas and
one fell short in Gaza. In retaliation, Israeli security
forces carried out air strikes on 14 occasions against
what it said were Hamas militant targets in the Strip,
causing damage. I reiterate that the indiscriminate
launching of rockets towards Israeli population centres
violates international law and must stop immediately.
The United Nations has continued to deliver
vital humanitarian and development assistance to
Palestinians in Gaza and remains engaged with all
the parties to reduce access restrictions to support the
Gaza economy and basic service delivery. Increasing
the movement of goods, in particular between Gaza and
the West Bank, is vital for the Gaza economy to grow
and generate employment opportunities. Such linkages
can help sustain a vision for a political solution to
Gaza’s challenges.
I welcome the important regional and international
diplomatic efforts during the reporting period aimed at
preventing a deterioration on the ground. In January,
United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken
visited Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory,
meeting with Israeli and Palestinian leaders in an effort
to advance concrete steps by both parties to lower the
temperature, foster greater cooperation and bolster
people’s security. The visit coincided with a visit
by senior officials from Egypt and Jordan, who met
together with President Abbas on 31 January.
Turning to the region, on the Golan, the ceasefire
between Israel and Syria has been generally maintained
despite continued violations by both parties of the 1974
Agreement on Disengagement of Forces. On 28 January,
the Israel Defense Forces fired at two individuals from
the Bravo side in the vicinity of the ceasefire line,
injuring one man who later succumbed to his injuries.
In Lebanon, the situation along the Blue Line remained
mostly calm. The United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon interposed between the Israel Defense Forces
and the Lebanese Armed Forces on 18 and 19 January
near Sarda and on 23 and 24 January near Markaba in
connection with vegetation-clearing works by the Israel
Defense Forces.
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We have seen ominous signs of what awaits if we
fail to address the current instability. Preventing more
violence is an urgent priority that requires not only
coordinated security measures but also considerable
political efforts. As such, I urge both sides to refrain
from taking unilateral steps that could further inflame
the situation. I reiterate my appeal to the parties to
rein in violence and incitement and hold perpetrators
accountable. In particular, there is a need to address
instability in the West Bank, characterized by spiralling
tensions between Israeli security forces and armed
Palestinian factions and friction points between settlers
and Palestinians, which drives more violence and
emboldens extremists. Restoring security coordination
and ensuring that Palestinian security forces can operate
effectively is key. At the same time, I urge a halt to all
settlement expansion, demolitions and evictions, which
fuel those tensions.
With the holy month of Ramadan once again
coinciding with the Passover and Easter holidays this
year, joint efforts are needed to ensure that this period
passes safely and peacefully for all. Provocations,
disinformation and efforts by extremists to stoke
violence must be addressed swiftly and effectively. In
that context, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call
for all parties to refrain from steps that could escalate
tensions in and around the holy sites, and for all to
uphold the status quo, in line with the special role of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
As we continue to work with the parties and
regional and international partners to calm tensions, we
must identify and pursue every opportunity to advance
our long-term goal: an end to the occupation and the
establishment of two States, living side by side in peace
and security, on the basis of the 1967 lines, in line
with United Nations resolutions, international law and
previous agreements.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Stenseth.
Ms. Stenseth: Let me begin by thanking you, Madam
President, for your invitation to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) to brief the Security Council. I
wish to convey the warm regards of the CommissionerGeneral, Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, and his regret at being
unable to meet with you, Madam, and all members of
the Security Council today.

S/PV.9263

A growing number of Palestine refugees in the region
stand on the brink of despair. Multiple crises, conflicts,
the never-ending occupation, the socioeconomic
ramifications of the coronavirus disease pandemic
and the rising global food and fuel prices caused by
the conflict in Ukraine have pushed a growing number
of Palestine refugees into poverty. Competing global
priorities and shifting regional dynamics have almost
annihilated any remaining attention to the plight of
Palestine refugees today.
Meanwhile, the political, socioeconomic and
security conditions that surround the refugees continue
to deteriorate. In the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, this year has already witnessed a
record-high number of deaths among Palestinians,
including Palestine refugees. Casualties among Israelis
are also of grave concern. We can almost anticipate
that coming weeks will likely bring more violence,
deaths and more life-changing injuries, including
for bystanders and children in the West Bank. I echo
the Special Coordinator’s call to reduce tensions and
prevent further loss of life. This cycle of violence must
end before it is too late.
For UNRWA, the violence in the West Bank
hampers our operations and exacts a heavy toll on the
Palestine refugees whom we serve. Palestine refugees
living in the northern West Bank, including in and
around Jenin and Nablus, are particularly vulnerable
to surrounding violence and tensions, which have at
times forced UNRWA to interrupt its critical services,
including its health centres. Urban spaces within, and
around, densely populated refugee camps should not
be venues for clashes with automatic weapons and tear
gas. Children, including refugee children, have been
far from immune to the spiralling violence, which has
created an explosive and dangerous environment of
fear, anger, desperation and hopelessness.
In Gaza, years of blockade and conflict have
isolated the population from the rest of the world,
creating a human tragedy that is hard to describe.
More than 80 per cent of Palestine refugees in the
Strip are poor, and nearly all of them rely on food
assistance from UNRWA. Nearly half of the children
attending UNRWA schools in Gaza have shown signs
of trauma — scars that may be with them for the rest
of their lives. In Gaza, we must always be prepared for
an outbreak of conflict, not least because our schools
are usually the only safe havens for people who flee
their homes. We repeatedly call on all parties in Gaza

23-051795/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the West Bank to respect our neutrality and the
inviolability of our premises.
In Syria, the recent devastating earthquake is adding
to the hardship and despair of a population already
grappling with the shattering 12-year-old conflict
and its aftermath. Approximately 62,000 Palestine
refugees living in four camps have been affected by
the earthquake, with 90 per cent of them in need of
emergency assistance already prior to the earthquake.
In Lebanon, the collapse of the economy has hit
the most vulnerable the hardest, among them Palestine
refugees, 93 per cent of whom are now living in poverty.
Children in Palestine refugee camps are exposed to
multiple forms of violence, exploitation, abuse and
neglect, as their caregivers and communities have
exhausted their resources and ability to create a safe
and protective environment for children. The situation
is so desperate that Palestine refugees are increasingly
willing to risk their lives at sea in a desperate attempt
to lead a dignified life.
In Jordan, despite overall stability, Palestine
refugees struggle with socioeconomic conditions
that are worsening with the declining national
economy. Gender-based violence and negative coping
strategies, including early marriage and child labour,
are on the rise in all our fields of operation. Across
all fields, Palestine refugees feel abandoned by the
international community.
UNRWA has continued to deliver on its mandate
against the challenging background. By providing
public-like services, including education, health and
social services, UNRWA has contributed to the human
development of Palestine refugees and has helped
maintain a relatively stable environment around them.
As we look at the Middle East, UNRWA remains one
of the few standing pillars of stability — a pillar of
stability for Palestine refugees, for the countries that
host them and for the region. UNRWA is, in fact, one of
the most successful multilateral and collective efforts of
the past 75 years. As we speak, half a million children
are going to our 700 schools throughout the region. The
schools are a beacon of hope for Palestine refugee boys
and girls and often the only hope that they have in what
is otherwise a desperate situation. UNRWA schools
produce the future partners for peace that the region
needs and that the Council is constantly seeking.
The lack of adequate, sustainable and predictable
funding has put UNRWA in an impossible situation.
6/23

20/02/2023

We have reached the limit of what we can do with the
resources we have available today. Our total income in
2022 was approximately the same as in 2013, while the
needs and costs are exponentially greater today. The
status quo is no longer sustainable. And, as the quality
of our services declines, so will our ability to contribute
to the region’s stability. Avoiding UNRWA’s implosion
is in our collective interest and should be our collective
responsibility. In the absence of a political solution,
UNRWA remains irreplaceable, including in terms of
its stabilizing role. UNRWA’s contribution to peace and
security is extraordinarily cost-effective, helping to
secure the present and future of millions of people in a
highly fragile region.
There can be no peace or security in the region
without the fulfilment of the basic rights of all, including
Palestine refugees. We call on the Council today not to
abandon them. We call on the Council today to give
them back hope by redoubling efforts to find a political
solution. And we on the Council and all Member
States to continue supporting UNRWA politically and
financially, ensuring that it has the resources it needs
to deliver on its mandate. As we approach the seventyfifth commemoration of the UNRWA mandate, let me
conclude by reiterating our Commissioner-General’s
invitation to reflect on how the international community
should live up to its commitment and responsibility to
Palestine refugees while a just and lasting solution to
their plight is found.
The President: I thank Ms. Stenseth for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
and Deputy Commissioner-General Stenseth for
their briefings.
We are deeply troubled by the spiralling violence
across Israel, the West Bank and Jerusalem. We strongly
condemn the recent terrorist attacks in Israel, including
the horrific attack outside a synagogue in East Jerusalem
on 27 January and the attack on civilians, including
children, at a bust stop in Jerusalem on 10 February.
The deliberate targeting of innocent civilians is
unconscionable, and the United States supports Israel’s
right to self-defence. Terrorist attacks on religious
sites, attacks by settlers, attacks on security services,
rockets launched against civilian areas and other forms
of violence create a cycle of increasingly dangerous
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

escalations. This concern is raised by the upcoming
period of religious holidays in Jerusalem. We urge all
parties to take steps to restore and maintain calm. And
we underscore that all visitors and worshippers should
respect and maintain the historic status quo of the
holy sites in word and in practice. It is essential that
Israelis and Palestinians immediately break the cycle
of violence, de-escalate and refrain from any unilateral
or divisive actions that will take us even further from
peace and stability.
Let me now add a clear and unequivocal statement.
We strongly oppose Israel’s announcement that it
will advance thousands of settlement units, and we
strongly oppose Israel’s announcement that it began a
process to retroactively legalize nine outposts in the
West Bank that were previously illegal under Israeli
law. Such unilateral measures exacerbate tensions.
They harm trust between the parties. The undermine
the prospects for a negotiated two-State solution.
The United States does not support those actions,
full stop. The clear and long-standing position of the
United States is that settlement activity is unhelpful
and distances us further from a negotiated two-State
solution. Such actions are simply detrimental to Israel’s
long-term security and to our vision of a sustainable
end to the conflict. We therefore call on all parties
to work towards the conditions necessary for direct
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians, which
is the only path to a sustainable end to the conflict and
a two-State solution. That is why we strongly support
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/1) put forward
by the United Arab Emirates, which demonstrates the
Security Council’s unanimous, collective voice on those
issues. The presidential statement is real diplomacy at
work, and we believe that it signifies to all parties how
seriously the Council takes those threats to peace.
The United States joins the other members of
the Council in asking Israelis and Palestinians alike
to take the urgent and necessary steps to restore
calm and improve the quality of life for their people.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, by virtue of its
special role over Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem, has
an indispensable role to play in helping to preserve
stability, which could be tested by the impending
convergence of Passover, Ramadan and Easter, when
tensions tend to run high. Ultimately, the parties
themselves are the ones that can and must prevent a
further downward spiral. In that regard, the United
States stands ready to support the parties as they work

S/PV.9263

to rebuild trust and create a foundation for an eventual
return to negotiations.
At this moment of heightened tensions, we must
be sure to support the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNWRA), which serves as a lifeline to Palestinians
and plays an important stabilizing role in the region.
For its part, the United States has already announced
nearly $50 million in support for UNRWA this new year.
We call on our partners to provide early, predictable
and flexible funding to UNRWA to ensure that the
vital services it provides to the Palestinian people
continue uninterrupted.
Let us continue to do everything we can to extend
the horizon of hope and push for peace.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, and the Deputy
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNWRA), Leni Stenseth, for their briefings.
We encourage their further efforts for peace and in
addressing the plight of the Palestinian people.
We also welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the representatives of Israel and Qatar, as
well as the Observer of the State of Palestine.
As we know, the Security Council has a historical
responsibility for the situation in Palestine. When
we hear briefings such as we received this morning,
the Council must be united around its established
positions on the question of Palestine. The concerning
situation that the briefing conveys should reinforce
our unyielding commitment to upholding the twoState solution to address the deteriorating security
and humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and to redress the reversal of the peace and
security gains achieved for the region after the ceasefire
in May 2021. It is in that context that we support the
presidential statement just agreed to by the Council
(S/PRST/2023/1).
As most other members of the international
community, Ghana is seriously, and understandably so,
concerned about the recent Israeli Government policy
intent and actions that expand the illegal settlements
in occupied Palestinian territory, including through
the retroactive approval of settlement outposts, the
further expansion of Jewish settlements in the West
Bank and the demolition of Palestinian-owned homes

23-051797/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and structures in the West Bank. Those actions,
besides violating Palestinian rights, portends a de facto
annexation of the West Bank and contravenes Israel’s
obligation under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
We are seriously concerned about the consequences
that the recent steps of the Israeli Government have
on the viability of the two-State solution and the
impact it has on the security of the region. We urge
the Government of Israel to situate its actions within
the limits of its obligations under international law,
international humanitarian law and the prescriptions
established through the resolutions of the Council. Its
actions must help to abate the violations of the basic
human rights of Palestinians, including the forceful
demolition of their properties, transfer or forced
evictions, arbitrary arrests, administrative detention,
torture, unlawful killings and the denial of their basic
rights to free movement and economic opportunities.
We remain cognizant of Israel’s security concerns
and condemn all incidents of attacks against its
population and territory, including recent violent
attacks such as stabbings, kidnappings and the launch
of rockets from Gaza into Jerusalem and other Israeli
civilian settlements. We encourage the active security
cooperation of the Palestinian Authority with Israel
in order to address the negative actions of Palestinian
militant groups.
We remain concerned about the sharp increase in
violent attacks in the West Bank and Jerusalem and
other Israeli settlements, which resulted in several
fatalities on both sides during the reporting period,
with many injured and others in critical condition.
Besides the physical damage and destruction to civilian
infrastructure, the interminable cycle of violence
also negatively affects the economies, health and
sociopolitical lives of millions of people in the Middle
East region. We urge all parties to observe calm and
exercise restraint and deem it important to prioritize
the protection of civilians. We particularly find it
regrettable that children, who deserve to live in peace
and exploit their God-given talents, are being made
victims of violence and used as tools of violence.
Given that the experiences of children have a
lasting impact on their physical, mental, emotional
and psychosocial development, a departure from such
a healthy and sound environment has serious and
enduring negative consequences on their cognitive
and emotional development. We therefore deplore the
recent increase in the spate of violent clashes involving
8/23

20/02/2023

children in the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially in the West Bank.
The international community’s muted reaction to
the need for investigations into systematic violations
of human rights and other crimes by the parties has
not been helpful in stabilizing the volatile situation
on the ground. We urge a reconsideration of that
position and remind the parties of their obligations
under international law and several resolutions of
the Council. We urge them to refrain from unilateral
actions that obstruct and undermine efforts aimed
at achieving a comprehensive and just peace to the
decades-old conflict.
We call on the leadership of both Israel and
Palestine, as well as regional stakeholders, to continue
engaging in a meaningful and transparent manner in
order to effect significant policy changes that support
the efforts for durable peace through a political
resolution, based on equal rights and justice.
We note the sensitivities of the holy sites in
Jerusalem and call for upholding the status quo ante.
The object of religion, which is peace, should not be the
basis for violence.
We encourage further financial and relevant
support for the activities of UNRWA, whose continuing
existence in support of the needed services by
Palestinian refugees is a reflection of how much more
needs to be done to achieve the goals of a just and
durable solution to the Palestinian question.
Finally, I reiterate Ghana’s continuing commitment
to reinvigorating the Middle East peace process through
renewed and constructive dialogue on a political horizon
that leads to a peaceful resolution of the conflict and,
ultimately, the realization of the two-State solution,
on the basis of the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the
shared capital.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks
Mr. Wennesland for the comprehensive update and for
his tireless work and continuous engagement with all
parties and stakeholders while working to de-escalate
tensions and open avenues for dialogue. I also thank
Deputy Commissioner-General Leni Stenseth for
her contribution.
Brazil has been following, closely and with great
concern, the fast-forwarding events in Israel and
Palestine, which have been aggravating tensions,
especially in the West Bank and Jerusalem, and taking
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

us to a very dangerous point. As the level of violence
increases, so does the number of civilian casualties,
including children, as well as the suffering and trauma
that so many years of conflict have caused.
The fragility of the situation highlights the urgency
of a renewed commitment to resolving this longlasting conflict. We must act to prevent the conflict from
spilling out of control, because it could end up affecting
the entire region. In that sense, as Mr. Wennesland has
frequently reiterated, addressing the root causes of the
current tensions is key. The continuing expansion of the
Israeli settlements is a well-known source of tensions
and violence. In that regard, Brazil and other countries
of our region have publicly stated their deep concern
about the Government of Israel’s recent decision to
legalize nine outposts and build 10,000 houses in
existing settlements in the West Bank. Those unilateral
measures constitute serious violations of international
law, including resolution 2334 (2016), the Council’s
last adoption in this area. Besides constituting
flagrant violations of United Nations resolutions and
international law, settlements systematically erode the
possibility of establishing a contiguous, independent,
viable and sovereign Palestinian State and thereby
undermine the prospects of achieving the desired
outcome of a two-State solution. We therefore point
to resolution 2334 (2016), whose provisions clearly
state that Israel’s establishment of settlements in the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal validity for the reasons I
just mentioned, and should cease immediately.
Brazil urges all the parties to exercise maximum
restraint and avoid provocations and unilateral actions,
including heated rhetoric, which could further aggravate
tensions. At this point it should not be necessary to
remind them of their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including the various Security
Council resolutions adopted over the years. And that
applies both to the question of settlements and to the
other violations of international law that are contributing
to the current crisis. Civilians must be protected in
times of conflict. Distinguishing between civilians and
combatants is at the core of international humanitarian
law. All the parties must work without fail to uphold
that crucial foundational principle of international
humanitarian law if we are to reverse the terrible
trend of violence. Cooperation aimed at the security of
civilians, besides preventing loss of life, could serve as
an important confidence-building measure.

S/PV.9263

The recent attacks on religious sites, such as
the vandalism on 2 February of the Chapel of the
Flagellation in Jerusalem, are equally concerning. We
urge all political leaders and authorities to promote a
culture of peaceful coexistence and religious freedom.
Brazil also condemns any actions linked to the idea
of changing the historic status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem. In that regard, we should not undermine
the crucial custodial role that the Kingdom of Jordan
has played in preserving peace at the holy sites over
the years.
We want to emphasize that peace also depends
on a commitment to the promotion of human rights
for all. Poverty, food insecurity, hopelessness and a
general sense of injustice create a perfect breeding
ground for extremist forces to flourish. In that context,
we stress the need for improving the living conditions
of the Palestinian people by working to strengthen
the Palestinian economy and address the challenge
of governance. The situation in Gaza is particularly
concerning, as the blockade continues to hinder
development efforts.
Brazil remains concerned about the chronic
financial challenges facing the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which has been providing much-needed
humanitarian assistance to Palestinian refugees. We
must not undermine the role that UNRWA has played
over the years in maintaining stability on the ground.
Brazil reaffirms its long-standing commitment to a
two-State solution, with Palestine and Israel living side
by side in peace and security within mutually agreed
and internationally recognized borders. We also remain
committed to the idea of peace and to the speedy
achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East on the basis of international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions. We therefore
stand ready to engage constructively in initiatives
aimed at a more proactive contribution by the Security
Council to the cause of peace. And in view of all of
this, Brazil expresses its full support for presidential
statement S/PRST/2023/1, delivered at this meeting.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for today’s briefings, which once again
describe a worrisome and difficult situation. In that
regard, and in line with the presidential statement that
we just adopted (S/PRST/2023/1), the first in nine years
on this subject, I would like to focus on four points of
particular importance.

23-051799/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

First, I should point out that a deterioration of
the situation will only cause more suffering, death
and destruction for the parties. It is inconceivable
that there is anyone who is not aware of that reality.
Every effort must be made to avoid greater violence.
In that regard, we appreciate and express our gratitude
and full support for the work of Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland and hope that his efforts can produce
the results we all want to see. We also appreciate the
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), its
commitment to easing the humanitarian situation and
its efforts to mitigate the effects of the earthquake that
has affected the entire region. We urge for continued
support for its vitally important work.
Secondly, in accordance with its foreign policy,
Ecuador condemns in the strongest possible terms any
kind of violence against civilians or acts of terrorism
and their unacceptable glorification. The kind of acts
that caused the death of three civilians, including two
children, in East Jerusalem on 10 February, must be
condemned by all. We call for safeguarding people’s
lives and safety and emphasize that the norms of
international humanitarian law must be respected at all
times, without excuses.
Thirdly, we condemn the unilateral decisions
hindering the prospects for reaching a final settlement
founded on the concept of the existence of two States on
the basis of the 1967 borders. The announcement of the
legalization of settlements in the occupied territories
and the construction of more buildings in them is a
unilateral decision that contravenes international law
and Security Council resolutions. Those decisions
exacerbate tensions and make the path to peace and
security more difficult.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate my call to the
leaders concerned to show true courage and act in
the long-term interests of their peoples, prioritizing
actions that can ease tensions and lead to a resumption
of negotiations by all parties with the aim of reaching
a definitive solution. That is the only way their peoples
will be able to live in peace, security and dignity.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for
his briefing on the situation in the Middle East region in
the context of a settlement. We listened carefully to the
Deputy Commissioner-General of the United Nations
10/23

20/02/2023

Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), Ms. Leni Stenseth.
The latest escalation in violence in the PalestinianIsraeli conflict has once again demonstrated the
danger and destructiveness of the absence of a peace
process, which has been blocked by our colleagues
on the Security Council in the interests of one side.
Amid the increasing Israeli occupation and military
activity, Palestinian news coverage has become a
series of reports of killings, arbitrary detentions, the
inhumane treatment of prisoners, forced evictions
and the expropriation and destruction of property.
We already presented the corresponding statistics at a
previous meeting.
The beginning of this year was marked by further
destabilizing provocative steps: the visit by the Israeli
National Security Minister, Mr. Ben-Gvir, to the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, a bloody raid by Israeli
military personnel in Jenin, which was followed by
terror attacks in East Jerusalem, and the decision by
the Israeli authorities to legalize nine outposts and
approve plans to build approximately 10,000 houses in
settlements in the West Bank.
Against that backdrop, the Israeli intention to
double the number of settlers living in the Jordan
Valley, as well as in the Syrian Golan Heights, by 2026
can be seen as a de facto annexation of most of the
occupied Palestinian, as well as Syrian, territory. We
support presidential statement S/PRST/2023/1, adopted
on this issue today by the Security Council.
We also strongly condemn Israeli strikes against
Syria, which further seriously destabilize the situation
in the Middle East region. We view such developments
with deep concern. We call on all sides to exercise
maximum restraint and prevent the further escalation
of tensions, especially in view of the fact that tensions
unfortunately tend to erupt at times of religious
holidays, in particular the upcoming Muslim holy
month of Ramadan.
Recent events clearly underscore the need for the
urgent resumption of a constructive Palestinian-Israeli
dialogue and for avoiding unilateral action. An end to
the cycle of violence can be brought about only through
a negotiating process, based on the principles of
international law, that results in the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the 1967 borders,
living in peace and security with Israel. The lack of
a political horizon, combined with Israel’s increased
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9263

unilateral steps, undermines not only the basis for a
settlement but also the credibility of the peace process
as such, leading to radicalization on both sides.

Special Coordinator. I welcome the presence among us
of the Permanent Representatives of Israel and Qatar
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine.

Against that background, there has been a consistent
degradation of the overall social and humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories despite
Israel’s professed efforts to provide economic assistance
to the Palestinians. In that context, there is a need to
ensure that UNRWA continues its effective efforts
to provide comprehensive humanitarian assistance
in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well as in
neighbouring Arab countries. In that regard, we call
on international donors to support the Agency’s flash
appeal for $2.7 million to assist Palestinian refugees
affected by the earthquakes in Türkiye and Syria.

The deterioration of the security situation, both in
Jerusalem, as we have seen since the beginning of this
year, and in the Gaza Strip, and now in the occupied
West Bank, requires the special attention of the Security
Council. The Israeli raid on Thursday, 26 January, on the
Jenin refugee camp and the subsequent attack targeting
a synagogue in Jerusalem, both of which resulted in
loss of life and dozens of injuries, illustrate the deadly
escalation seen since the beginning of January.

In that alarming context, we believe that the primary
task is to achieve a lasting stabilization of the situation
on the ground and to restore the political horizon for
reviving the peaceful Middle East settlement process
on a universally recognized international legal basis,
with the core element of a two-State solution. It is also
necessary to achieve intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
which is the most important condition for reviving the
peace process.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a member of the international Middle East Quartet
mediators, Russia is ready to make a significant
contribution to a comprehensive settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We view attempts to
usurp external support of contacts between the sides
as counterproductive and contrary to the fundamental
interests of the two peoples. In particular, we view the
actions of the United States, blocking all international
formats in support of a settlement in the Middle East
and trying to substitute a genuine political peace with
an economic one, as destructive. We are convinced
of the extreme danger of attempts to promote ArabIsraeli normalization by circumventing a just solution
to the Palestinian issue. We regret that such a trend
is being transferred by Washington to the platform of
the Security Council, where the United States is doing
everything possible to prevent the adoption of any
solutions that the Palestinians need.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
and the Deputy Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, Ms. Leni Stenseth, for their
briefings. I reaffirm my delegation’s support for the

My country condemns all such violence, which
contributes to the suffering of the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples. We recognize Israel’s right to security.
However, it is important to respect international law.
In the same vein, the increase in demolitions,
compounded by the recent decision to legalize nine
settlements in the West Bank and to build new housing
units in the existing settlements, are factors that
exacerbate the tensions on the ground.
I would also like to draw the Council’s attention
to the particularly worrisome economic situation of the
Palestinian Authority, exacerbated by the freezing of
tax funds collected by Israel from Palestinian Authority
workers on its behalf. Urgent measures must be taken
for its economic recovery. There can be no prosperity
in the region unless such prosperity is shared. That
is also one of the factors for peace that must be taken
into account.
It is now more than ever time for de-escalation.
The parties must show restraint and prioritize dialogue
through direct negotiations. The countries of the region
and those with influence on the parties must redouble
their efforts to achieve that goal. The vicious circle of
violence must not be allowed to continue and further
compound to the tragic human, material, economic and
humanitarian toll of this conflict.
In conclusion, we support presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/1, read out by the President.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Japan welcomes the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2023/1 as a united
message of the Security Council.
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland and
Deputy Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees

23-0517911/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/02/2023

in the Near East (UNRWA) Leni Stenseth for their
informative briefings.

two-State solution and achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace and stability in the Middle East.

Since the beginning of this year, there have been
a number of developments that risk an escalation of
violence in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
international community has been intensifying its
efforts aimed at easing tensions. For our part, in the
telephone conversation with Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu on 13 February, Prime Minister Kishida
expressed concern about the rising tensions between
Israel and Palestine and the unilateral measures taken
by both sides.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to join others in starting by thanking Special
Coordinator Wennesland and Deputy CommissionerGeneral Stenseth, not only for their briefings, but also
for the work of their teams on the ground.

It is troubling to witness the deteriorating security
situation in the West Bank. The dangerous trajectory
of violence from last year continues its alarming
trend, including in the recent attack by Israeli forces
against the Jenin refugee camp, which led to the highest
number of Palestinians killed in a single operation in
the West Bank since 2005, according to a report by
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
Japan also calls for the reversal of the Israeli
Government’s recent announcement to declare nine
settlement outposts in the occupied West Bank as
legal under Israeli law as well as plans to advance
new settlement construction. Israeli settlement
activities are in violation of international law and must
end immediately.
At the same time, we condemn terror attacks in
all their forms and manifestations. Recent escalatory
actions committed by Palestinians in Jerusalem, such
as the terrorist attack outside a synagogue and the
car ramming into a bus stop, are deeply deplorable,
as they only intensify violence in the area. As the
situation surrounding Israel and Palestine manifests
continued clashes and violence resulting in casualties,
Japan calls for refraining from unilateral actions that
exacerbate tensions.

I would also like to thank members of the Security
Council for our work to come to a consensus on a
presidential statement. This statement (S/PRST/2023/1)
sets out the international community’s continued
commitment to a two-State solution based on 1967
lines and urges an end to Israeli settlement activities
and the prevention of terrorism. All parties must desist
from unilateral measures that further undermine peace,
stability and the two-State solution.
Violence and instability in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories has led to further loss of life. Ten
Israelis have been killed in two abhorrent terror attacks
in 2023. The United Kingdom condemns all forms of
terror, for which there is no justification. Since the
start of the year, 44 Palestinians have been killed by
Israeli security forces. This includes 11 children. Israel
must exercise maximum restraint in the use of live fire,
and the Palestinian Authority must urgently resume
full security cooperation and renounce and confront
terror. We also condemn the indiscriminate rocket
fire from Gaza on 11 and 12 February towards civilian
populations. This escalating cycle of violence must be
brought to an end as swiftly as possible, particularly
ahead of upcoming religious festivals.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
Japan-UNRWA partnership. I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate Japan’s enduring commitment
to assisting UNRWA to ensure that Palestinian
refugees continue to receive life-saving assistance and
basic services.

Secondly, the United Kingdom condemns Israel’s
announcement to legalize 10 outposts and advance
up to 10,000 units in settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories. As set out by the British Foreign
Secretary and our partners in the Quint statement, the
United Kingdom strongly opposes these unilateral
actions, which exacerbate tensions between Israelis
and Palestinians. Settlements and outposts are not only
contrary to international law, but they also undermine
the prospects for peace. The United Kingdom calls
on Israel to reverse these decisions. I also condemn
increasing settler violence, including the killing
of Mithqal Rayyan on 11 February. Perpetrators of
violence must face justice.

In conclusion, there is no alternative to direct
negotiations between the parties. Japan expresses
its strong determination to revive the prospect of a

Thirdly, the United Kingdom urges Israel to avoid
measures that could amount to collective punishment
against Palestinians, particularly punitive demolitions.

12/23

23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

These cause unnecessary suffering and contribute to
the cycle of violence; four Palestinians have been killed
during punitive demolition operations so far this year.
In conclusion, restoring stability and securing
peace is still possible, but it will require effort from
all sides. The United Kingdom stands ready to
facilitate discussions and dialogue between Israel and
the Palestinians and remains firm in its belief that a
negotiated two-State solution, based on 1967 lines
with Jerusalem as a shared capital, is the only way to
ensure a lasting peace, security and prosperity between
the parties.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, and Ms. Leni Stenseth,
Deputy Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), for their comprehensive briefings
on the current situation in the region. We reiterate our
full support for their efforts towards a just and durable
peace in the region and towards the well-being of the
Palestinian people.
We note that since the last time the Security
Council considered the issue before us (see S/PV.9246),
the Palestinian question has registered no progress. On
the contrary, the vicious cycle of violence tends to grow
at an alarming pace. In this regard, we wish to reiterate
our strong support for the presidential statement just
read out by the President of the Council and adopted by
it this morning (S/PRST/2023/1).
We continue to express our deep concern over
the unilateral actions and excessive use of force by
the Israeli Government against refugees in Jenin,
including women and children. We hold the view that
peoples of both Israel and Palestine deserve a peaceful
and prosperous life and future. They should be able,
in the words of the Preamble of the Charter of the
United Nations, “to practice tolerance and live together
in peace with one another as good neighbours...”. In
that context, we want to underline once again that
the construction and expansion of settlements are
totally contrary to international law and undermine
the prospects for peace and for the establishment of a
Palestinian State. We urge all the contending parties
to exercise restraint and to halt all acts of provocation
and hostility in order to create favourable conditions
that can lead to a resumption of the long-stalled direct
dialogue between Palestinians and Israelis. We welcome
the efforts by international partners aimed at exerting

S/PV.9263

positive influence regarding respect for the rule of law
and democracy in Palestine by creating the conditions
necessary for holding presidential and legislative
elections in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
We reiterate our urgent and strong appeal for
increased, predictable and sustainable support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as well as for the World
Food Programme, which will enable both organizations
to continue to alleviate human suffering and ensure a
level of dignity for the refugees and internally displaced
persons in the region.
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 2334
(2016), among others, as well as various General
Assembly resolutions and decisions, form the political
and legal basis for a two-State solution, and our efforts
for peace in the region must therefore align with them.
We must continue encouraging the parties to pursue
that path. We strongly urge Israelis and Palestinians
to work constructively together to lay the groundwork
for a lasting peace based on the full and immediate
realization of the right to self-determination of the
Palestinian people and the right to existence of the
State of Israel.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator and the Deputy CommissionerGeneral for their briefings.
I would like to begin by welcoming today’s
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2023/1. It is
important for the Security Council to be able to express
itself unanimously on the recent unilateral measures
and to reiterate its commitment to a two-State solution.
I have three messages today.
First, the recent Israeli announcements represent
steps towards annexing Area C. France reiterates its
firm condemnation of Israel’s settlement policy, which
moves us ever further from the possibility of a twoState solution. France is very concerned about the
Israeli Government’s announcement of its intention
to advance plans for the construction of nearly 10,000
housing units in the settlements and to begin a process
of legalizing nine outposts previously considered to be
in violation of Israeli law. Those unilateral measures are
contrary to international law, including several Security
Council resolutions, such as resolution 2334 (2016). We
strongly oppose them and call on the Israeli authorities
to reverse their decision, which if implemented will
create the risk of a progressive annexation of Area

23-0517913/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

C in the West Bank. In the Palestinian territories, as
elsewhere, France will never recognize the illegal
annexation of territories.
We are also concerned about the growing and
worrisome violence perpetrated by settlers, which
we condemn, and which targets both Palestinians and
Israeli civil society. Those responsible for the violence
must be held accountable for their actions. France
reiterates its commitment to respect for international
humanitarian law and to Israel’s obligation to protect
civilians in the occupied territories.
Secondly, in the face of a highly inflammatory
situation, the Council must do everything possible
to prevent an escalation. As the Special Coordinator
indicated, the beginning of this year has been marked by
a very high level of violence in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. The cycle of
violence is unsustainable for both Palestinians and
Israelis and must end. As President Macron told Israel’s
Prime Minister on 3 February, France firmly condemns
the terrorist attacks committed in recent weeks, which
have cost the lives of several civilians, including
children. Our unwavering commitment to the security
of Israel is well known. Israelis, like Palestinians, have
the right to live in peace and security. France calls on
the parties to show restraint and to refrain from any
action that could be perceived as a provocation in the
current context.
The cycle of violence can be explained, above
all, by the total absence of a political horizon. France
therefore calls on all members of the Council, as well
as the States of the region, to contribute actively to
relaunching the peace efforts, and stands ready to
contribute to that end.
Thirdly and finally, the international community
must mobilize to support the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). France supports the Agency, which has
played a crucial role since 1949 in helping Palestinian
refugees. We contributed €33.5 million in 2022 and
will continue our support this year. The international
community must mobilize to ensure that UNRWA
can continue its activities, which the lives of many
Palestinian refugees depend on. Most of them live
below the poverty line and are facing new challenges,
including the recent earthquake in Syria. We therefore
call on all Member States, especially the countries of
the region, to contribute financially to the Agency’s
activities in 2023.
14/23

20/02/2023

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would also like to join others in thanking the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Tor Wennesland, and the Deputy
Commissioner-General, Ms. Leni Stenseth, for their
briefings and for their work.
Switzerland welcomes the exchanges in the past
few days between the parties aimed at promoting
de-escalation. We are concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation and the real risk of escalation,
and we therefore welcome the fact that today the
Security Council managed to put together a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2023/1) by consensus, which we
fully support. We remain concerned, however, about
the Israeli Government’s announcement on 12 February
that it wants to build nearly 10,000 new housing
units in settlements and to retroactively legalize nine
outposts in the occupied Palestinian territory. We call
on Israel to refrain from those unilateral measures,
which risk further exacerbating tensions and endanger
the prospects of a negotiated two-State solution. The
measures also include the demolition of the village of
Khan Al-Ahmar, which is located in a strategic area
that is essential to ensuring the contiguity of Palestinian
territory. Switzerland urges the occupying Power to
respect its obligations under international humanitarian
law, including with regard to the issuance of building
permits to the Palestinian population.
We condemn the attacks on civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, as well as those in recent weeks on
settlements in East Jerusalem. Switzerland expects the
parties to respect their obligations under international
law and to strengthen measures to protect civilians.
Accountability is also vital to preventing such violence.
In the face of the increasing humanitarian needs in
the region, the services provided by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) are all the more essential today.
By providing health, education and social safety-net
assistance, UNRWA makes a significant contribution
to stability in the region. It is essential for UNRWA to
be able to continue to provide effective and efficient
assistance in accordance with humanitarian principles,
including neutrality. To that end, Switzerland calls
for adequate and predictable financial support for
the Agency.
In the current volatile context, Switzerland is
concerned about the continued weakening of the
Palestinian Authority, including as a result of measures
taken by Israel. We reiterate our call for elections to
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

be held throughout the Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. That is an indispensable step towards
restoring the legitimacy of its institutions and
re-establishing the political unity that is required for
a two-State solution. With the religious holidays of
Ramadan, Pesach and Easter just a few weeks away, we
reiterate our call on all the parties to engage with strict
respect for the historic status quo of Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount in Jerusalem. Preventing further loss
of life and reversing the negative trends on the ground
remains a priority. Switzerland is ready to support
peace efforts, including through its good offices,
aimed at restoring a political horizon based on a twoState solution.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland. I would also like to
thank the Council members for their warnings on the
question of Palestine. And I thank Mr. Wennesland
and Deputy Commissioner-General Stenseth for
their briefings.
The tensions in Palestinian-Israeli relations
have continued for some time now. Israel’s unilateral
actions keep escalating and are pushing the situation
to a point where it is close to spinning out of control.
We note with concern that the violence in the West
Bank has been intensifying. Search-and-arrest
operations, settler violence and clashes and attacks
have continued to cause serious civilian casualties,
including among children. The solemnity and sanctity
of Jerusalem’s holy sites have been repeatedly violated
and their historical status quo frequently challenged.
Provocative acts and inflammatory speech of all kinds
have continued to intensify conflict and confrontations.
Moreover, Israel keeps advancing its settlement
activities. Earlier this month, it announced its decision
to legalize nine West Bank outposts and a plan to build
10,000 settlement units, which have been met with
widespread condemnation and concern. Those negative
developments run counter to international law, the
resolutions of the Security Council, the repeated calls
by all the parties for a de-escalation of the situation and
the efforts of the international community to preserve
the possibility of a two-State solution.
At this critical juncture and over the past few days,
at the initiative of the United Arab Emirates, Council
members have conducted intensive consultations on
a draft resolution and reached a broad consensus. As
the Council prepares to adopt that draft resolution,
we are finally seeing the parties concerned making

S/PV.9263

efforts towards conducting emergency diplomatic
mediation. According to media reports, yesterday
Israel pledged to suspend unilateral actions that would
undoubtedly undermine the prospects for a two-State
solution. However, it must be pointed out that the
vitality of diplomatic commitments depends on their
implementation. Now is definitely not the time to
breathe a sigh of relief. The international community,
including the countries with major influence, should
continue to focus on the issue, increase the level of
commitment and play a genuinely constructive role
aimed at ensuring that Israel actually implements its
promises on the ground.
At the same time, more needs to be done. In the
wake of its promise to suspend hostilities, Israel
should refrain from any more rounds of unilateral
activities but should rather completely change course
and truly return to the track of a two-State solution.
The presidential statement that we just adopted
(S/PRST/2023/1) is a major step towards managing the
current crisis, and it also reflects the determination and
desire of the vast majority of members to maintain and
implement a two-State solution. China commends the
leadership demonstrated by the United Arab Emirates.
The Council should be ready to take meaningful action
whenever necessary in order to genuinely fulfil the
responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations.
Deputy Commissioner-General Stenseth just briefed
us on the work done by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). Palestinian refugees are one of the earliest,
largest and longest-lasting such groups in the world.
The Agency’s critical services, such as education,
health care and social assistance, have ensured the
basics of Palestinian refugees’ lives, demonstrating the
international community’s solidarity with them and
fulfilling its collective responsibility towards them.
China fully recognizes and highly commends UNRWA’s
work. In recent years, UNRWA has repeatedly sounded
the alarm about its funding crisis, emphasizing the fact
that the Palestinian refugees’ situation keeps getting
worse and their humanitarian needs are growing. We
call on Israel to stop demolishing refugees’ homes and
schools, end its blockade of the Gaza Strip and cease
creating obstacles to UNRWA in fulfilling its mandate.
Next year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the work of the Agency, which has continued without
a stop for more than 70 years. That means that after

23-0517915/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

more than 70 years, the Palestinian question has yet to
be resolved. In the face of such protracted injustice and
suffering, the international community should reflect
deeply and correct its mistakes without delay, including
by abandoning piecemeal crisis management and
promoting a comprehensive, just and durable solution
to the Palestinian question. The Palestinian people
are eagerly waiting for the day when their homeland
is no longer under occupation and an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine can live side by side
with Israel while enjoying common security and
development. It is our shared responsibility to make
sure that day comes as soon as possible.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland and Deputy Commissioner-General
Stenseth for their briefings. It is unfortunate to note
that since our most recent meeting on this topic (see
S/PV.9246), the situation on the ground has not
improved. In fact, the overall climate has worsened.
The absence of a political horizon looms large and
continues to directly affect the safety and the security
of both Israelis and Palestinians on a daily basis by
dimming hopes for a peaceful, comprehensive solution
to the conflict.
We are appalled by the terrorist attacks on Israel
and deplore the loss of innocent life in Jerusalem. We
condemn those attacks strongly and unequivocally.
The use of acts of terror, the glorification of terror,
and incitements to violence and hate speech of any
kind, including antisemitism, are deplorable and
unacceptable, and must stop. We are also deeply
worried about the worsening situation in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. We reiterate our position that
the expansion of settlements is wrong and must stop.
Equally, violence against the Palestinian people in
breach of international humanitarian law, in addition to
evictions and the demolition of their private properties,
cannot become standard practice.
In that context of alarming, heightened tensions,
the key word is de-escalation. Both parties must engage
without delay to de-escalate and resume security
cooperation, because if we do not break the spiral
of violence, more innocent people will be harmed
and the already huge divide between the parties will
only grow. There should not be another deadly year
for the civilians, the children and the innocent women
and young people of Israel and Palestine. The death toll
from past events is already dreadful. We will not tire of
repeating that the parties must refrain from unilateral
16/23

20/02/2023

steps and actions that erode trust, fuel tensions and
breed violence, with the familiar consequences, over
and over again. If there is one aspect that this, the
longest crisis in modern history, has continued to
confirm, it is that one-sided measures have never been
helpful and have never contributed to peace efforts.
They only trigger animosity between the sides, not
only creating more insecurity and instability for those
concerned but making the entire region more volatile.
That is why we welcome this morning’s adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2023/1 and the active
efforts deployed in the past few days. We hope they will
serve as reflections on the need to find other and better
ways to address concerns by common consent.
Next month, believers from the three monotheistic
religions will observe their yearly rituals based on the
values of family, charity and respect for others. It is a
moment of profound reflection and spiritual fulfilment,
and everything must be in place for people to exercise
their freedom of religion and belief in the most peaceful
and harmonious manner possible. Peaceful religious
coexistence is a core contributing factor to the potential
for comprehensive peace in the Middle East. In that
regard, Albania would like to emphasize the particular
significance of respect for the status quo of the holy
sites and express its support for the special role of the
custodianship of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in
that regard.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Albania’s full
support for a just, negotiated two-State solution that
can make it possible for a secure and safe Israel to
live side by side in peace and security with a viable
and democratic Palestinian State, with Jerusalem
as their future shared capital. Let us not forget that
nothing can be built without hope; nothing is possible
without continued and genuine efforts; and nothing is
sustainable without trust. That is what is needed to keep
violence away, bring about change and ensure that both
Israelis and Palestinians live as neighbours in safety
and security while enjoying freedom, dignity, justice
and the benefits of democracy.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his thorough
briefing and his constant efforts in pursuit of peace
between Israel and Palestine. I also thank Deputy
Commissioner-General Stenseth for her valuable
remarks. The United Arab Emirates is grateful to
the Council members for their constructive approach
to the adoption of today’s presidential statement
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PRST/2023/1 — the first decision on this file in
more than six years. It is especially important for the
Council to be united and unequivocal in affirming
that continued Israeli settlement activity dangerously
imperils the possibility of a two-State solution. We also
welcome the text’s strong emphasis on the protection of
civilians and counter-terrorism.
After a year in which escalating provocations,
tension and violence further eroded the prospects
for a two-State solution, the Council’s reiteration
of its unwavering commitment to the vision of an
independent Palestine, living side by side with Israel
in peace, is absolutely essential. Still, the past few
weeks have demonstrated the potential consequences
of the continued lack of a credible peace process. We
cannot go on mistaking the absence of a breakdown for
a sustainable status quo. The sustained deterioration
of conditions on the ground will require a far more
concerted effort by the parties and indeed by the
Council. As we discuss ways to promote and sustain
constructive engagement, I would like to stress
three points.
First, de-escalation is key. That must include
reversing, in addition to suspending, unilateral actions
such as settlement activities, which undermine the
prospects for a two-State solution and constitute
a clear violation of international law and the
Council’s resolutions.
Secondly, this is a time for political and moral
leadership, specifically by refusing to yield further
ground to extremism in all its forms. That is critical,
as the followers of the three Abrahamic religions will
be celebrating the holy month of Ramadan, Passover
and Easter in the coming weeks. The holiday period
has too often been marred by avoidable violence. The
United Arab Emirates is firm in its condemnation and
rejection of all forms of Islamophobia, antisemitism and
Christianophobia, and we call for respect for all religious
sites, including mosques, churches and synagogues. In
the light of the alarming rise in extremist hate speech
and incitement, it is vital that the Security Council has
addressed those issues in a product for the first time.
We reaffirm the need to maintain the historical and
legal status quo of the city of Jerusalem and its holy
sites. The United Arab Emirates once again stresses the
importance of respecting the Hashemite custodianship
of the holy sites, as expressive of the special role of the
Kingdom of Jordan.

S/PV.9263

Thirdly, the demolition of Palestinian property
must stop. According to the Office for the Coordination
for Humanitarian Affairs, 155 demolitions took place
between 1 January and 12 February alone, 28 per cent
of them in East Jerusalem. Those are not just statistics.
Behind each of the 155 demolitions are uprooted
families, destroyed livelihoods and communities
scarred by the ensuing violence and dislocation. We
once again underscore to all parties the need to abide by
their responsibilities under international law, including
international humanitarian law, especially with regard
to the protection of civilians.
The Security Council’s responsibility in the conflict
cannot be reduced to a last-resort effort to prevent a
complete breakdown. The Council must revitalize
its role as the international custodian of a two-State
solution whereby an independent Palestinian state, built
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
lives side by side with Israel in peace, security and
mutual recognition. That requires actively facilitating
a return to direct final status talks. What hangs in the
balance is nothing short of the legitimate hopes and
aspirations of nearly 15 million people — Israelis and
Palestinians — for normal, peaceful, stable, secure and
prosperous lives.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland and Deputy Commissioner-General
Stenseth for their insightful briefings. I also recognize
the presence of the Permanent Observer of the Observer
State of Palestine and the Permanent Representatives of
Israel and Qatar. I am pleased that the Security Council
acted in a united manner and adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2023/1 this morning. We continue
to monitor the latest developments in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict with deep concern.
The significance of maintaining calm and avoiding
unilateral inflammatory actions by all parties cannot be
overstated. A resumption of dialogue and coordination
between the parties on the ground, including on
security cooperation, is essential if the conflict is not
to escalate further. In the context of the stalled peace
process, Malta strongly reiterates its commitment to a
just and comprehensive resolution of the Middle East
conflict based on a two-State solution along the pre1967 borders, addressing the legitimate aspirations of
both sides, with Jerusalem as the future capital of two
States living side by side in peace and security, in line

23-0517917/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with all the relevant Security Council resolutions and
internationally agreed parameters.
Settlement activities are a clear violation of
international law and the Council’s resolutions and
an obstacle to peace. The Israeli Government’s recent
decision to advance settlement units and to legalize
settlement outposts in the occupied West Bank under
Israeli law takes us further away from a viable twoState solution. We call on the Israeli authorities to halt
settlement expansion and reverse the latest decisions.
We also remain concerned about the increases in
demolitions, forced evictions and related settler violence
in the occupied Palestinian territories. At the same
time, Malta underlines the importance of ensuring that
the Palestinian Authority holds the postponed national
elections without further delay. We were encouraged by
the signing in October 2022 of the Algiers Declaration
and continue to urge the Palestinian factions to engage
in good faith in the reconciliation process. Malta also
calls for a broadening of support and the establishment
of a safe environment enabling Palestinian civil society
to be actively engaged in the peace process.
In 2023 we have continued to witness violence,
with casualties suffered by both sides. The protection
of civilians must be ensured at all times. While
recognizing Israel’s legitimate right to defend itself
against all attacks, Malta underlines that any operation
must be proportionate and in line with international
humanitarian law. We equally condemn the terrorist
attacks committed against Israel. The status quo must
not be allowed to continue. Both parties must find a
way to engage in a meaningful dialogue that aims to
create two States, living side by side. That is the only
path that can lead to long-term de-escalation.
Malta is deeply troubled by the number of victims
of violence, especially as a result of the marked
increase in incidents involving children, including
acts of terrorism. In that regard, following her recent
visit to Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict also underscored the
disproportionate impact of the conflict on children.
Malta echoes her call for all parties to take measures
that ensure the protection of all Palestinian and
Israeli children.
We should not mention the plight of children
without commending the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) as a pillar of support to Palestinian
18/23

20/02/2023

refugees in the region. We also welcome UNRWA’s
tireless provision of schooling for more than half a
million children and the maintenance and operation
of hundreds of schools for Palestinian refugees. We
equally condemn the actions of any party that seek
to bring the Agency’s reputation into doubt. UNRWA
remains the strongest pillar of support and humanitarian
aid for the Palestinian people, and a stabilizing force in
the region. Malta reiterates its call for the international
financial support that the Agency badly needs to ensure
its realization of its new strategic plan.
There is no alternative to a negotiated two-State
solution. It is important to reverse the negative cycle
of violence and prevent any further loss of life. We
underscore that a recommitment to the peace process
by all parties is imperative. The work of restoring
stability and securing peace, thereby safeguarding the
lives of Palestinian and Israeli people, should continue
to guide our efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, Madam
President, allow me to congratulate Malta on steering
the work of the Security Council this month. We share
deep bonds of friendship and common values with your
country. It is fitting for the Council to be meeting and
adopting a presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/1) under
your presidency. I would also like to thank the Special
Coordinator and the Deputy Commissioner-General
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for their
briefings. UNRWA’s work is extremely important and
should be maintained, protected and financed. Finally,
allow me to express our appreciation to the Group of
Arab States, represented by my sister the Ambassador
of Qatar, for joining today’s important meeting.
The year 2023 is still young but an old wound
continues to bleed. Watching the news coming from
Palestine, many may feel that it is more of the same,
that we have been here before and that it is tragic, but it
is what it is. But this is not just any moment in time, and
while the killing, pain, displacement and demolitions
are the same, we are fast approaching a breaking point
that no one should care to explore. It is mounting with
every child killed, every house demolished and every
family displaced. Amid the recurrent headlines, people
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

may miss it. But for those who know our region or have
visited it recently, it is obvious, glaring and undeniable.
One of the signs is an acceleration of events. The
deadliest year for Palestinians in the West Bank, which
has just gone by, may well be surpassed by the deadliest
year currently under way. All the ingredients are there
for us to reach a point of no return. I do not agree with
those who say that we have already reached it, as we
do not have the luxury of fatalism. Every action we
take now matters. Every word we utter matters. Every
decision we delay matters.
Watching the news coming from Palestine, many
may feel that it is more of the same, but for the mother
who has lost a child and fears for the ones still alive;
for the family that can find no safety in the sanctity of
its home; for the millions who endure dispossession,
displacement and the denial of rights, the pain hits
differently each time. I ask the Council members,
collectively and individually, not to become numb.
I ask them not to grow accustomed to the status quo
or to accept defeat. Our people will not. They will not
accept coexistence with oppression and occupation.
Humankind has elaborated rules. The Council has
adopted resolutions. The global community has
endorsed a vision. They should not relinquish them.
They must defend them. The Council must defend them.
The year is still young, but Israel persists in
pursuing old recipes with objectives that are no longer
hidden — colonization and annexation, which have
predictable implications, including gross human rights
abuses, human suffering, violence and instability. The
Israeli Government has announced its unlawful plan and
is acting on it. It is time for the international community
to announce its own plan in defence of international
law and to act on it. It is time for the Council to act.
It must not remain paralysed. The international plan
should start with Jerusalem, where Israel’s colonial and
discriminatory policies find their ultimate expression;
where Israel’s annexation, announced 43 years ago,
continues to be met with defiance by the Palestinian
people as a whole, and by Jerusalemites in particular;
where Israel hopes, through collective punishment and
political and geographical suffocation, to subdue our
people, to no avail. In that connection, I would like to
say a few words in Arabic.
(spoke in Arabic)
They will not succeed in breaking the will of our
great Palestinian people, in particular in Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. Those are our heroic people, who have been

S/PV.9263

steadfast in Al-Quds Al-Sharif today and always. From
this rostrum, I salute them warmly and shake their
hands. They are keeping their heads and ours high.
They are a crown for our heads in their symbolization
of our pride and dignity.
(spoke in English)
The international mobilization we have witnessed
in the past few days must be sustained and amplified.
Today the Council expressed its clear opposition to
those policies yet again, in a united, unequivocal
manner, in the first presidential statement it has
adopted on Palestine in almost a decade. And while we
condemn in the strongest terms the illegal unilateral
settlement policies and practices, many countries,
including many Council members, have expressed
condemnation of those illegal acts as well. I want to
take this opportunity to thank the United Arab Emirates
and my sister Mrs. Nusseibeh for putting forward the
presidential statement and for all their efforts towards
its adoption, and I thank Council members for their
engagement and support. The Council has thereby
once again confirmed its long-standing position in no
uncertain terms. That message has to be advanced and
translated into a time-bound action plan, a concerted
effort by the United Nations and its Member States to
set us on a different path — one that leads to freedom,
justice and peace.
Every action we take now matters. Every word we
utter matters. Every decision we adopt matters. We do
not have the luxury of fatalism. The Palestinian people
deserve freedom and an end to the historic injustice of
the Nakba they endured 70 years ago and that is still
ongoing today. All peoples in our region and beyond
deserve to live in peace. They deserve freedom, not
occupation, coexistence, not supremacy, and peace,
not apartheid.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): A few weeks ago, a young
Palestinian girl recited a poem:
“Daddy gave me a present, a machine gun and
a rifle. When I am big, I will join the Liberation
Army. The Liberation Army taught us how to
defend our homeland. We will achieve victory over
America and Israel.”
Amal, the Palestinian girl in question, recited that
moving poem on air, and it was publicly broadcast on

23-0517919/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

an official Palestinian Authority television channel.
Tragically, little Amal is only one of countless other
young people whom the Palestinian Authority has
indoctrinated to hate and murder. The Palestinian
Authority runs a monstrous propaganda campaign that
would make Goebbels and Hitler very proud. They have
poisoned the minds of generations, teaching them that
violently murdering Jews means infinite glory. They are
taught from a young age that the Jewish State has no right
to exist. Their evil seeps into kindergartens, educating
them in the belief that martyrdom is the only way. The
members of the Council can see that for themselves.
Yet none of the dismay and concern expressed in the
Council’s joint presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/1)
is directed at that Palestinian incitement.
The Palestinian Authority is a terrorist entity that
in 2022 alone rewarded killers and their families with
$175 million for killing Israelis, to which I draw the
attention of the representative of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East if she needs money. The members of
the Council are all familiar with the Palestinians payfor-slay system, yet they are willing to let it continue
without condemnation. The Palestinian Authority under
Arafat and today under its malicious President Abbas
has incentivized the murder of innocent Israelis while
rejecting every peace agreement that has been brought
to the table. Those are the facts. The members of the
Council all understand that the Palestinian authorities’
support and incentivization of terror are fundamental
breaches of the agreements and international law in
question, and that they are the main roadblocks to peace.
Until Palestinian children are no longer brainwashed
into hating and murdering Israelis, sadly, blood will
still be needlessly spilled in our region.
The Palestinians’ most fundamental commitment
was their obligation to combat terror. Yet today the
Palestinian Authority not only refuses to take real
action to prevent terrorism, for many years now it
has also actively stoked the flames of violence. By
glorifying terrorists and paying them money, the
Palestinian Authority is breeding a culture of hatred
and evil that makes reconciliation impossible. The
evidence is irrefutable. The Palestinian culture of hate
and terror is real. How can the Council justify ignoring
it and never addressing it? And despite the horrific acts
of Palestinian terror carried out in recent weeks, the
Holocaust-distorting Mr. Abbas refused to issue even
one word of condemnation — not one word — after
innocent Jewish worshippers were murdered outside
20/23

20/02/2023

a synagogue. While President Abbas continued to
say nothing, officials of Fatah, his party, praised the
attack. We all saw the photos. As candies were being
distributed to crowds of Palestinians celebrating the
dead Jews, Ata Abu Rumeileh, the Fatah Secretary
of Jenin, referred to the attack as a heroic operation.
Where are Council members’ concern and dismay for
those celebrations of murder? Where are they?
It was not by chance that Amin Al-Husseini and the
Palestinian leadership at the time were close allies of
Hitler and later led the rejection of the United Nations
partition plan in 1947. Nothing has changed since
then. The Palestinians’ main goal has remained the
same — preventing the existence of a Jewish State. It is
difficult to understand what the Council truly expects
Israel to do when faced with a terror authority that
constantly strives to delegitimize it and that in many of
its areas, including of course Gaza, has lost control to
Hamas, a designated terror organization.
The members of the Council continue to sit here
expressing concerns and dismay only about Israel’s
response to Palestinian terror, while the most significant
violator of any agreement is sitting right here across
from me. How did the Palestinians achieve the status
of an observer State? Is the Council not aware that
the Palestinians committed to refraining from taking
any unilateral steps to change their status without
negotiations and agreement? They have violated all
the agreements, despite not meeting even the most
basic necessary requirements. How many times has
that violation been condemned here in the Security
Council? Zero. This institution is merely another means
for the Palestinians to unilaterally try to impose their
twisted demands on Israel without any negotiations or
dialogue, in order to bring about Israel’s destruction.
Israel will not complacently come to terms with another
terror entity on our borders that aims to obliterate us.
We will never accept that.
Over the past weeks, Israel has been mourning
the deaths of 11 recent victims of terror and injuries to
dozens of civilians, not terrorists. Shockingly, however,
we are not here today to condemn the Palestinian acts
of terror that led to that loss of life. This meeting
was once again initiated to condemn Israel, this
time for issuing building permits in already existing
communities — already existing. Building permits in
our homeland spark international uproar, while dead
Jewish children elicit nothing. That is an utter disgrace.
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council members are all aware of the huge extent
of illegal Palestinian construction throughout Area C in
Judea and Samaria, in flagrant violation of international
agreements. One can see it on the ground. Why is that
never discussed by the Council?
Today’s meeting should have been wholly
dedicated to the innocent Israelis recently murdered:
Ilya Sosansky, Shaul Hai, Irina Koroleva and Rafael
Ben Eliahu, murdered in cold blood by a Palestinian
terrorist as they were exiting a synagogue on the holy
Sabbath. Fourteen-year-old Asher Natan, who had just
finished Friday night dinner with his family, was also
brutally murdered in the attack. Eli and Natalie Mizrahi,
a recently married couple, heard the gunfire and went
rushing to the scene in order to treat the victims. The
terrorists murdered them at point-blank range.
A week ago, 20-year-old Shlomo Lederman stood at
a Jerusalem bus stop with his wife. They had just gotten
married two months earlier. Metres away from the
couple was Avraham Paley and his little boys, 6-yearold Yaakov and 8-year-old Asher. Suddenly, a bright
blue sedan, driven by a Palestinian terrorist, crashed
full speed into the bus stop. Shlomo’s young wife is
now a widow, and Avraham, who is currently in critical
condition on a ventilator, still does not know that his
wife had to bury little Yaakov and Asher without him.
Those two beautiful children were murdered just for
being Jews.
Today’s meeting should have been convened to
condemn the price paid by innocent Israelis for the
Palestinian authorities’ incitement and hate. I will not
allow the victims to be forgotten. I will now rise for
a minute of silence in their memory and the memory
of all the other victims of Palestinian terror. I pray for
their memory, and I pray that Council members think of
them in the future when discussing the true obstacles to
peace in our region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the States members of
the Group of Arab States in New York. I would like
to start by congratulating you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. We thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and the Deputy
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief

S/PV.9263

and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East for their briefings.
The Arab Group welcomes today’s adoption
by the Security Council of presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/1, prepared by the sisterly United Arab
Emirates, and believes that it is an important and timely
step. We thank the Council members for speaking in
one voice on a very dangerous issue that deserves the
Council’s full attention and that the Council remain
seized of it.
The Arab Group expresses its grave concern over
the extremist acts by the new Israeli Government
in flagrant violation of all its obligations under
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and Security Council resolutions. Such
violations have fuelled tensions in the occupied
Palestinian territory and threaten regional and
international peace and security. In that regard, the
Arab Group stresses the pivotal role that the Security
Council must play in addressing such violations and in
holding the perpetrators accountable by implementing
the rules of accountability and transparency applied to
all except Israel.
The Arab Group highlights in particular the situation
in Jerusalem, the capital of the future Palestinian State
in implementation of the two-State solution, which
threatens to trigger dire consequences as a result of
Israel’s ongoing deliberate implementation of policies
and measures that are inconsistent with international
legitimacy. The Group stresses the centrality of the
final communiqué of the Al-Quds Conference on
Resilience and Development, convened by the Arab
Summit in Algeria on 12 February. The communiqué
includes in its political part, among other things, the
following main points.
First, the just Palestinian question will remain
central for the Arab nation and those who adhere to
international law and human rights across the world.
Just and comprehensive peace, security and stability in
the Middle East will not be achieved until the Palestinian
people obtain their legitimate and inalienable rights,
foremost of which are the right of return, compensation,
self-determination, independence, an end to the
illegal Israeli occupation and the establishment of an
independent and fully sovereign State of Palestine
on the Palestinian territory occupied in 1967, with
Jerusalem as its capital. The communiqué calls on the
countries of the world to stand in solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their struggle, support their just

23-0517921/23

S/PV.9263

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

cause, recognize the State of Palestine and grant it its
right to full membership in the United Nations.
Second, the communiqué calls on the international
community to take practical action to provide
international protection for the Palestinian people and
to address the ongoing Israeli aggression, including
the Israeli colonial settlement activities, the apartheid
regime and its discriminatory measures. It also calls on
the Security Council to assume its responsibilities to
ensure the effective implementation of its resolutions
related to the question of Palestine, and to work to
stop the illegal Israeli policies and practices against
the Palestinian people. It also calls for the removal of
illegal settlements with the annexation and expansion
wall. All of that constitutes violations of international
law, United Nations resolutions, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice issued in 2004.
Third, the communiqué affirms that all systematic
and illegal Israeli policies and plans that seek to
legitimize the annexation of East Jerusalem are null
and void and that they distort its Arab identity, change
its demographic composition, undermine population
growth, harm its people and isolate it from its Palestinian
surroundings, including intensifying the policy of house
demolitions and the forced displacement of citizens
from the neighbourhoods and towns of the occupied
city of Al-Quds, including the residents of Silwan,
Sheikh Jarrah and other neighbourhoods and areas of
the city, as part of the systematic Israeli campaign for
ethnic cleansing and strengthening apartheid. Those
are all flagrant violations of the relevant international
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions.
Fourth, the communiqué also stresses the
protection of Islamic and Christian holy sites in the city
of Al-Quds and putting an end to the Israeli attempts
to alter the historical and legal status quo of the city
of Al-Quds and the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, changing its name and dividing it temporally
and spatially, as well as undermining the freedom of
worship by Muslims there in addition to undermining
its foundations and falsifying its history by Israel
excavating under it. The communiqué condemns the
repeated and escalating attacks on the holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque, its sanctity and the peaceful worshippers in
it by officials of the Israeli occupation Government
and extremist settlers. It stresses the rejection of the
Israeli systematic and illegal measures to undermine
churches and weaken the Christian presence in the holy
22/23

20/02/2023

city, and warns that such grave violations of the legal
and historical status quo of the holy sites of the city
of Al-Quds constitute serious violations of the relevant
international conventions and commitments and will
have serious consequences for international peace
and security.
Fifth, the communiqué calls for the implementation
of resolutions on the Palestinian question adopted by
the United Nations and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, which stress
that the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
in its entire area is a place of worship solely for
Muslims and an integral part of the world’s cultural
heritage sites. It affirms the sovereignty of the State
of Palestine over the city of Al-Quds and its holy
sites and supports the Hashemite custodianship of the
Islamic and Christian holy sites in Al-Quds and its role
in protecting the Arab, Islamic and Christian identity
and preserving the historical and legal status quo
of Al-Quds and its holy sites. The communiqué also
stresses that the Jerusalem Awqaf and Al-Aqsa Mosque
Affairs Department is the only Jordanian entity to have
competence to administer, maintain and control entry
to the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Sixth, the communiqué calls upon the international
community to assume its legal, moral and humanitarian
responsibilities to immediately put an end to Israeli
settlement activity in the city of Al-Quds and to
abolish Israeli racist laws that empower the occupation
authorities to withdraw the identity cards of thousands
of Jerusalemites and seize their property through the
so-called absentee property law. Those racist measures
seek to steal more Palestinian land and property in the
Old City and its vicinity and wipe out traces of Arab
culture in the occupied city of Al-Quds.
Seventh, the communiqué condemns and rejects
the Israeli policy designed to systematically distort
and change the identity and culture of the Arabs and
Muslims in Al-Quds through the closure of Palestinian
national cultural institutions, rob the Palestinians of
their heritage, replace Palestinian school curricula in
the city of Al-Quds with distorted curricula and impose
financial and administrative sanctions on Palestinian
educational institutions that fail to comply with that
malicious policy, which will lead to their closure.
Eighth, the communiqué condemns Israel’s
arbitrary-detention
and
administrative-detention
policies as well as intentional denial of medical
treatment for prisoners, leading to their death.
23-05179

20/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Prisoners are not permitted to get support for seeking
released. The occupation Government must ensure the
implementation of international humanitarian law and
human rights law while pressing Israel to immediately
release all prisoners and the bodies of martyrs. Israel
must end its deportation and house-arrest policy.
Ninth, the communiqué rejects any decision
that breaches the legal status of the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, including by opening offices or diplomatic
missions in the city in violation of Security Council
resolutions. Such decisions constitute an aggression
against the Palestinian people, a violation of their
rights, and a provocation of the sentiments of the
Arab nation, Muslims and Christians alike. It is
a breach of international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Tenth, the communiqué welcomes General
Assembly resolution 77/247, which requests an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice on the
existence and impact of the Israeli colonial occupation
and its effects on the State of Palestine’s territory. The
communiqué calls on States Members of the United
Nations and all countries that seek to uphold justice to
support the State of Palestine by providing written and
oral legal statements to the Court by 25 July 2023.
Eleventh, the communiqué calls on the International
Criminal Court to conduct a criminal investigation and
hold accountable perpetrators of war crimes and crimes
against humanity and other crimes being committed by
Israel against the helpless Palestinian people, including
the crimes of settlement, annexation, aggression and a
continued blockade imposed against Gaza, as well as
coercive deportation and field execution of civilians,
first responders and journalists.
Twelfth, the communiqué calls on the international
community to provide protection to Palestinian
civilians and implement relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. It urges States and the
international community to participate in providing
protection for Palestinian civilians and establish
an effective mechanism for implementing General
Assembly resolutions and reports of the Secretary-

S/PV.9263

General that include actionable recommendations for
the protection of Palestinian civilians.
Thirteenth, the communiqué values the role
of Jordan in the protection and maintenance of the
Islamic and Christian holy sites in Al-Quds under the
Hashemite custodianship of King Abdullah II. It also
commends the role played by the Al-Quds Committee
chaired by King Mohammed VI of Morocco, applauds
the efforts of the Al-Quds financial sub-committee of
the Al-Quds Committee and salutes the role played by
Algeria under President Tebboune in supporting the
Palestinian question through its historical political
stance and continuous financial support for the
Palestinian budget. It also values the role played by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia under the Custodian of
the Two Holy Mosques, King Salman Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud, in support of the Islamic Awqaf in the city
of Al-Quds. The communiqué also thanks Egypt under
President Al-Sisi for its historical role in addressing the
Palestinian question, while thanking all Arab efforts
aimed at preserving the city of Al-Quds as the capital
of the State of Palestine, protecting its Arab, Islamic
and Christian identity and its holy sites, and supporting
its heritage and institutions in the face of the systematic
policies of settlement and Judaization.
In conclusion, the Group of Arab States stresses
that the Council should observe the application of the
same rules of international justice on all issues before
it without discrimination, in particular in cases of
occupation by force of territories of other countries
in violation of rules of international legitimacy.
The Group also stresses its full conviction that the
Security Council, by adopting presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/1, is sending a clear message to the Israeli
Government that the international community will
not be silent in the face of Israel’s repeated violations
and that it will strongly address these violations and
hold the perpetrators accountable. We also look
forward to the Special Coordinator’s briefing next
month on the implementation of all the provisions of
the presidential statement and of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

23-0517923/23
