asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6847

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6847th meeting
Monday, 15 October 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosenthal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Guatemala)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-54722 (E)

*1254722*

S/PV.6847

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada,
Ecuador, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Norway, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 October 2012 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2012/762 and which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of the
Security Council which will be held on Monday,
15 October 2012, on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in
the meeting in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

2

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: While the world’s gaze of concern
points elsewhere in the Middle East, the IsraeliPalestinian conflict drifts dangerously in a direction
that must be avoided. Both sides maintain their
rhetorical commitment to a negotiated peace; however,
the creeping realities on the ground and the stalemated
diplomacy portray a more worrying situation. Stated
intentions to adhere to a two-State solution are not
translating into meaningful steps to renewed dialogue
on the core issues to be resolved, and this should be a
matter of great concern to the Council.
We heard a restatement of these intentions during
the speeches of both Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas to the General Assembly on
27 September (see A/67/PV.12). At the same time, citing
the absence of a political process, President Abbas
announced his intention and initial consultations to seek
an upgrade of Palestine to non-member State observer
status — a move that Israel rejects as unilateral and
an impediment to resuming negotiations. We hope that
this development can be addressed in a constructive
manner, and we remind everyone that a negotiated twoState solution, to which both leaders are committed,
must remain the highest priority. We fear, however, that
the door for such a solution may be closing before our
eyes.
The
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
(AHLC) meeting of 23 September brought into sharp
focus the severe financial crisis that the Palestinian
Authority is experiencing as a result of combined
shortfalls in domestic revenue, tax income and donor
contributions. In his message, the Secretary-General
reiterated the United Nations view that the vision of the
two-State solution and the institutional achievements
of the Palestinian Authority are key elements of
stability. Let me repeat today his call for preserving
those achievements and for ensuring the Palestinian
Authority’s fiscal viability by helping to bridge its
immediate funding gap. As we have said before, all
those States that verbally support the Palestinian people
can demonstrate their commitment in a tangible way
by offering financial help that provides the Palestinian
people with jobs, services and security.

12-54722

S/PV.6847

The figures speak for themselves. As of 11 October,
the Palestinian Authority had not yet set a date for the
payment of Government employees’ salaries for the
month of September. While recent contributions from
Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Japan, the Netherlands and France
are welcome, they do not suffice. A predictable and
immediate injection of new funds is required in order
to finance the deficit, which is currently projected to
reach $1.3 billion by the end of the year.
The AHLC also called upon Israel to help facilitate
the sustainable growth of the Palestinian economy
by taking further steps to improve the movement of
people and goods, development and trade and exports
in Gaza and the West Bank, including in Area C and
East Jerusalem. Such steps ought to include measures
to address the lack of adequate planning for Palestinian
communities, as well as measures to develop
socioeconomic infrastructure, such as support to the
agricultural sector in Area C — an area fundamental
to the contiguity of the West Bank and the viability of a
future Palestinian State.
The United Nations welcomes the recent approval
by the Government of Israel of 15 schools and health
centres in Area C, and hopes to see similar action in the
processing of the 32 master plans submitted to the Israeli
authorities. Indications that plans for six Palestinian
localities may soon be published for ultimate approval
are also encouraging. Yet further progress to address
the planning needs of over 200 Palestinian communities
in Area C remains essential.

We urge the Government of Israel to take effective
measures to curtail such acts in the lead up to the
harvest season and, more generally, to hold accountable
those responsible for violence.
Settlement activity continued. Of note, the outpost
of Migron was evacuated to a nearby settlement and
the outpost is now used by the Israeli Defence Forces.
The United Nations position remains that settlement
construction in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, whether on private land
or elsewhere, is illegal under international law and
contrary to Israel’s obligations under the Road Map,
and should be put to a halt.
On five occasions between 27 September and
7 October, Israeli extremists entered the Temple Mount/
Haram al-Sharif compound, intending to perform
religious rituals. Clashes with Muslim worshippers
resulted in injuries to five Palestinians, while Israeli
forces arrested a number of Palestinians and Israelis
for violation of visiting regulations and disturbance
of public order. Also, on 4 October over 1,000 Israelis
entered Joseph’s Tomb near the city of Nablus to
perform religious rituals. Despite prior coordination,
this move resulted in clashes with Palestinians. The
status of Jerusalem and the religious sites are sensitive
issues that will be fully resolved only in final status
negotiations. In the meantime, we strongly urge all
sides to exercise restraint and safeguard the sanctity of
religious sites.

Violence and other sources of tension on the ground
make it all the more difficult to overcome the political
stalemate. We remain concerned about security in the
West Bank. Twenty-nine incidents involving settler
violence resulted in injuries to 10 Palestinians, as well
as damage to property. The Dormition Abbey in East
Jerusalem was desecrated with graffiti on 2 October as
part of so-called price tag activities.

Palestinian attacks against Israelis were,
comparatively speaking, on the rise during the reporting
period. Four Israelis were injured and material damage
was caused. Incidents of stone and Molotov-cocktail
throwing at Israeli vehicles travelling in the West Bank
were recorded on four occasions. On 10 October, an
Israeli was stabbed and injured near the Gush Etzion
settlement by a Palestinian, who was subsequently
arrested by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF).

The annual olive harvest, which has just begun,
is an important economic, social and cultural event
for Palestinians. However, in recent years, the Israeli
military has limited access of Palestinian farmers to
their olive groves next to settlements to mitigate the risk
of violence. In a particularly disturbing development,
approximately 7,000 Palestinian-owned olive trees
have been destroyed, damaged or harvested by Israeli
settlers since the beginning of 2012. We note that on
4 October, the Israeli police arrested three settlers
allegedly involved in so-called price tag activities.

Citing security concerns, the Israeli Defense Forces
had conducted 226 operations in the occupied West
Bank as of 9 October, which resulted in 87 Palestinians
being injured and 182 arrested. On 25 September, Israeli
forces uncovered a weapons cache near Hebron. Almost
daily clashes were reported between Israeli forces
and Palestinians at the Qalandiya checkpoint. Most
injuries took place during Palestinian demonstrations,
including against the barrier, which deviates from the
Green Line in contravention to the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice (see A/ES-10/273).

12-54722

3

S/PV.6847

Allow me to say that the right of peaceful protest must
be upheld and that all protests should be kept strictly
non-violent.
Demonstrations also took place on 2 October
to protest the plight of Palestinian hunger strikers in
Israeli jails. The United Nations continues to call for
a reasonable resolution to those cases and recalls its
position that the use of administrative detention must
be exceptional and of short duration.
Palestinian security forces continued their efforts
to preserve law and order in the West Bank. Between
18 and 19 September, they arrested 57 militants affiliated
with Hamas throughout the West Bank, which led to the
discovery, on 23 September, of a Hamas underground
bunker in the village of Urif, near Nablus.
Palestinian local elections are on schedule
for 20 October. The Palestinian Central Elections
Commission has been carrying out preparations in
accordance with the local electoral law and calendar.
Some 4,700 candidates were nominated, nearly a fourth
of them women, and electoral campaigning commenced
on 6 October. Elections will take place in the West Bank
only, as the de facto authorities in Gaza have not allowed
the Central Elections Commission to proceed with
voter registration and related electoral preparations in
Gaza. Meanwhile, in Israel, Prime Minister Netanyahu
recently announced that he will be presenting a bill to
dissolve the Knesset in preparation for early elections.
Turning to Gaza, sporadic eruptions of violence
were recorded during the reporting period. A serious
escalation occurred when, on 7 October, an Israeli air
strike killed an alleged militant and seriously injured
another, as well as eight civilians. Some 50 rockets
and mortars were fired from Gaza into Israel the
following day. Another serious escalation took place
this past weekend when, on 13 October, an Israeli air
strike killed a Salafi leader and his assistant, while
two civilians were injured. Yesterday, two Israeli air
strikes resulted in three Palestinian militants killed and
three injured, including two critically. Overall for the
reporting period, a total of 72 rockets and mortars were
fired into Israel, resulting in some material damage.
During the same period, Israeli forces conducted
three incursions and 11 strikes into Gaza, resulting
in the death of 8 alleged Palestinian militants and
1 civilian, as well as injuries to 5 Palestinian militants
and 17 civilians, including 4 children. That latest
episode demonstrates the continuing fragility of the

4

situation in Gaza and highlights the vulnerability of the
civilian population. We continue to condemn all rocket
attacks from Gaza into Israel. The de facto authorities
have the responsibility to prevent and stop all such
attacks. We also urge Israel to show maximum restraint.
We must all work to ensure that calm is realized,
the closure regime is lifted and the Palestinian divide
ends. Regrettably, there is no new progress to report in
ending that divide.
Lifting the closure regime in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009) and Gaza’s recovery and longterm economic growth remain fundamental objectives
of the United Nations. In that regard, we note the recent
transfer of an order of school furniture from Gaza to the
West Bank commissioned by the Palestinian Authority.
On 19 September, the World Food Programme (WFP)
transported 1.2 million fortified date bars produced
in Gaza to its West Bank school meals initiative. That
WFP initiative was the first such delivery from Gaza
to the West bank in five years. Those are positive
steps towards reinstating commercial transfers to the
West Bank. However, much more is required. Lifting
restrictions on the entry of aggregate, iron bar and
cement would not only enable the growth of private
sector but also provide an additional source of revenue
for the Palestinian Authority.
In the meantime, a steady flow of approvals
for works involving dual-use material should be
maintained. We welcome the recent approval by the
Government of Israel of an additional $38 million worth
of project work, including schools, shelters and solidwaste treatment infrastructure, raising the value of
United Nations implemented works involving material
subject to approval to approximately $400 million since
May 2010.
Turning to the region, tensions on the border
between Israel and Egypt raised concern when, on
21 September, three terrorists attacked an IDF position
on the Sinai border, and were killed in the ensuing
exchange of fire. One IDF soldier was also killed, and
another seriously wounded.
A worrying development took place on 6 October,
when a drone penetrated Israeli airspace in the northern
Negev before being shot down by Israeli forces.
Hizbullah Secretary-General Nasrallah has since
claimed responsibility for that incident. We note that,
in comments reported in the Lebanese media, Lebanese
Foreign Minister Adnan Mansour stated that “Lebanon

12-54722

S/PV.6847

will definitely assume responsibility for Hizbullah’s
recent action, because the country is in a confrontation
with Israel”.
The conflict in Syria, now entering its twentieth
month, has reached new and appalling heights of
brutality and violence. Available estimates, which
the United Nations is not in a position to verify, put
the number of people killed at more than 30,000.
Syrian cities and villages — some of which are part
of our world’s heritage — are turning into ruins, and
archaeological treasures have been looted and destroyed.
Such violence is creating fertile ground for terrorism
and criminal actions of all kinds. Human rights abuses,
including arbitrary detentions, torture and summary
executions, continue unabated. That includes the
continued captivity by the armed opposition of Iranian
pilgrims abducted in August. The voices of the peaceful
protests that emerged so proudly last year have receded
in the tremor of fighting.
Long-standing predictions of the conflict spiralling
beyond its borders are coming true, as illustrated by
the recent escalation along the Syrian-Turkish border,
rounds of small arms fire in the occupied Golan,
exchanges of fire into northern Lebanon, as well as a
surge in belligerent rhetoric. The Secretary-General
has expressed his alarm at the heightened tension
between Syria and Turkey following a wave of crossborder shelling that resulted in the death of several
Turkish nationals, including children. He has called on
the Syrian Government to respect fully the territorial
integrity of its neighbours, as well as on all concerned to
abandon the use of violence and exercise the maximum
restraint.
The Secretary-General has expressed his utmost
concern at the continuing militarization of the conflict.
He has urged the Syrian Government to declare a
ceasefire, to be reciprocated by the opposition armed
groups. To succeed, that must be a collective effort
by all inside Syria, in the region and beyond. All
Governments should desist from supplying arms and
military assistance to any party in the conflict, some
of which may violate Security Council resolution 1747
(2007). After all the deaths and destruction Syria has
suffered, it is plain to see that the conflict cannot be won
militarily. And if it were, it would be at an excruciating
cost unlikely to lead to a lasting solution that respects
the will of the Syrian people.
Our priority remains a political solution, and that
is what Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi
12-54722

is trying to help bring about. The Council heard his
assessment three weeks ago. He is back in the region as
we speak, continuing his discussions with a great sense
of urgency and trying to identify the path to a political
solution. In his current trip, which has taken him so
far to Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iraq and Iran, he is
reiterating the Secretary-General’s call for a ceasefire
and an end to arms transfers to all parties.
Despite growing insecurity and significant
challenges on the ground, the United Nations continues
to expand aid deliveries. We must press all parties to
allow unhindered humanitarian access. As winter
approaches, we are very concerned at the continued
shortfalls in our appeals for funding. As of 11 October,
the $348 million United Nations revised humanitarian
plan for Syria was only 40 per cent funded. We urge
donors to contribute more generously to address the
growing needs of over 2.5 million civilians inside
Syria, including over 1.2 million internally displaced
persons. Those numbers are increasing by the day.
Resources are also urgently required to assist the over
330,000 refugees in Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq.
It is important to preserve calm in the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
area of operations, where there is a risk of increased
tensions, as illustrated by several security incidents
since our last briefing. UNDOF observed an exchange
of weapons between groups crossing the border into
Syria from Lebanon on 27 September. Deadly incidents
involving armed elements from Lebanon and Syrian
security forces were also observed by UNDOF in its
area of operations on 20 and 29 September.
Finally, on 9 October, soldiers from the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces fired shots at two members of Observer
Group Golan in a clearly marked United Nations vehicle
in the northern part of the area of limitation. Syrian
authorities were informed and are investigating the
incident. Separately, while the situation in the occupied
Syrian Golan has remained relatively stable, the Syrian
Arab Republic has sent an official letter complaining
about several incidents, including injuries sustained
by Syrian children from a landmine explosion on
4 October.
Despite overcoming a spate of security incidents
and tensions over the summer, Lebanon continues to
be dangerously exposed to spillover from the conflict
in Syria. Areas bordering Syria remain volatile, with
regular cross-border shelling, including close to
Lebanese villages in the northern region of Akkar,
5

S/PV.6847

some of them several kilometres from the border. The
Lebanese Armed Forces stated that it would not allow
any side to use Lebanese territory to draw Lebanon into
neighbouring tensions, and reaffirmed its determination
to confront any violations of Lebanese territory.
However, there continue to be reports of crossborder arms smuggling. On 25 September, for example,
a truckload of weapons and military equipment was
seized by the Lebanese Armed Forces en route to
the Lebanese-Syrian border. After the release on
25 September of a second member of the group of
Lebanese pilgrims abducted in Syria in May, nine still
remain held.
Of great concern are fresh reports suggesting
involvement by Lebanese political forces in support
of the parties to the conflict in Syria. Moreover,
the explosion on 3 October of an arms depot in the
Beka’a Valley town of Al-Nabi Shayth, in which three
Hizbullah militants were killed and several other people
wounded, was also a reminder of the risk posed by the
presence of arms held by non-State actors.
Lebanese public opinion is deeply polarized
regarding developments in Syria. Against that
backdrop, it is all the more important that the Lebanese
Government and political leaders across the spectrum
continue to work to preserve Lebanon’s unity and
stability. Prime Minister Mikati’s reaffirmation on
27 September before the General Assembly of Lebanon’s
policy of disassociation was welcome (see A/67/PV.14).
We hope that Hizbullah, too, will fully respect the
disassociation policy of the Government in which
Hizbullah participates.
We also welcome President Sleiman’s initiative
in the national dialogue on 20 September to present a
first vision for a national defence strategy, including in
respect of Hizbullah’s arms, which participants agreed
to consider as a basis of discussion. The next session
of the national dialogue is set for November. We hope
that all Lebanese leaders will seize the opportunity
to overcome outstanding divergences with a view
to realizing such a strategy in the national interest.
In the current regional context, it is in the interest of
Lebanon’s continued stability that all Lebanese parties
continue to exercise restraint and work cooperatively in
preparation for the 2013 parliamentary elections.
In contrast with the ongoing volatility in the
region, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) area of operations remained generally calm.

6

The number of air violations and mostly inadvertent
ground violations of the Blue Line, however, remained
relatively high. Despite the temporary redeployment of
units of the Lebanese Armed Forces from the UNIFIL
area of operations to address security requirements
elsewhere in Lebanon, the level of cooperation between
the two forces has remained broadly the same. Both
parties have an interest in building on this period of
calm to protect the achievements along the Blue Line
from regional tensions and to take steps to strengthen
the cessation of hostilities.
Let me conclude with a reminder that, amid the
seismic shifts being felt throughout the Middle East,
we cannot afford to be complacent to the persisting
deadlock between the Israelis and Palestinians. Despite
their apprehensions, understandable in part, neither
the parties nor the Council can be impervious to the
warning signs of a fading two-State solution. We were
all sobered by last month’s events in the West Bank.
The window of opportunity for taking constructive
action to preserve the two-State solution may now
be becoming more limited. There is no alternative,
sustainable and just solution to negotiated peace. We
must therefore continue to make every effort to work
towards the fundamental goal. We now collectively
need to rediscover with the parties the determination to
forge a credible political path forward. We must not let
the urgency elude us.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his complete and worrying briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, and your friendly country,
Guatemala, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also express our appreciation
to Germany for its wise stewardship of the Council last
month.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing to the Council today and reiterate
our appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations
Special Coordinator and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing last month (see
S/PV.6835) and for his efforts on the ground on behalf
of the United Nations and within the Quartet.
Let me also add that we agree with the conclusion
of the statement by Mr. Feltman.

12-54722

S/PV.6847

Let me also welcome the new Ambassador of
Pakistan among us, His Excellency Mr. Masood Khan.
We regret, once again, that we are unable to report
any positive developments to the Security Council.
Since our last open debate, in July (see S/PV.6816),
the political process has remained deadlocked and
the situation on the ground has sharply deteriorated.
Israel’s flagrant flouting of the law has obstructed
the resumption of peace negotiations and intensified
hardships for the Palestinian people in all aspects of
life. It has also thwarted the Palestinian leadership’s
efforts to strengthen national institutions and realize
the legitimate aspirations and rights of our people. That
has, in turn, diminished hopes in the peace process and
in the prospects for achieving the two-State solution,
as indicated by Mr. Feltman, the physical and political
viability of which is being severely, if not permanently,
undermined by the illegal measures being carried
out by Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Alarming developments in this period have sharply
raised tensions and further destabilized the situation on
the ground. Extremist Israeli settlers continue to wreak
terror and destruction. Military attacks and raids by
the Israeli occupying forces, in particular against the
Gaza Strip, including over this past weekend, continue
to cause civilian casualties and the destruction of
property, threatening to fuel another deadly cycle of
violence. Thousands of Palestinians remain captive
in Israeli jails, subject to deplorable conditions and
gross human rights violations, with recurring hunger
strikes a matter of the utmost concern. All the while,
Israel has continued its illegal colonization of the
occupied Palestinian territory, further fragmenting its
unity and contiguity and gravely impairing the efforts
for socioeconomic rehabilitation and development,
compounding the humanitarian crisis.
Despite all the appeals and demands by the
international community, including by the Security
Council in numerous resolutions and by the Quartet,
for an immediate and complete halt to settlement
activities, Israel has not only continued but intensified
its expansionist, colonial drive in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around occupied
East Jerusalem. In grave breach of numerous provisions
of international humanitarian law, the occupying
Power persists with its expansion of settlements and
construction of so-called outposts, with thousands more
units built and planned this year alone; its construction

12-54722

of the wall, which is dissecting and isolating East
Jerusalem and walling in Palestinian communities in
separated enclaves; its confiscation of vast tracts of
Palestinian land, especially fertile agricultural land and
areas above water wells and basins; and its demolition
of Palestinian homes and displacement of Palestinian
families, in particular from East Jerusalem and other
vulnerable communities, such as in the southern hills
of Al-Khalil and villages in what is often referred to as
Area C of the West Bank, including the Jordan Valley.
That deliberate land grab continues, under the same old
and some arrogant new, empty pretexts, all aimed at the
de facto annexation of more Palestinian land and the
further blurring and breaching of the pre-1967 borders,
on which the two-State solution is founded.
Occupied East Jerusalem in particular remains
a central target of that illegal settlement campaign,
as the occupying Power persists with attempts to
artificially and forcibly alter the natural demography,
historic character, legal status and Palestinian-Arab
identity of the city in order to cement its illegal de
facto annexation, which remains unrecognized by the
entire international community to this day. We reject
all such illegal Israeli measures in the Holy City and
demand their immediate cessation, while we reaffirm
once again that East Jerusalem is an integral part of the
Palestinian land occupied since June 1967 and is the
heart and capital of the State of Palestine.
At the same time, we draw the Council’s attention
to the rising instability and pressure in occupied East
Jerusalem following an escalation of attacks on Muslim
and Christian holy places by Israeli settlers and other
extremist Jewish groups. Recent months have witnessed
repeated attempts by extremists to take over Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, which houses the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
Dome of the Rock, as well as acts of violence and
desecration against mosques and churches in the city.
Those vile actions have led to several confrontations,
including between Jewish extremists and Palestinian
worshippers at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, raising alarm
throughout the region and the Islamic world, as stressed
by His Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas and His
Majesty King Abdullah II of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan before the General Assembly. Those serious
concerns have led the Palestinian leadership to call for
an emergency high-level meeting of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, as well as of the Al-Quds
Committee, chaired by His Majesty King Mohammed
VI of Morocco, to determine the necessary measures to
address those deplorable actions and to protect the holy
7

S/PV.6847

sites in occupied East Jerusalem from acts of aggression
by the occupying Power and its extremist settlers.
Illegal, destructive actions by the settlers have, of
course, not been confined to occupied East Jerusalem.
Regrettably, fanatical settlers also continue to rampage
throughout the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory.
They constantly terrorize and harass Palestinian
civilians, including school children, elderly persons
and farmers. They launch attacks against Palestinian
property and agricultural land, with particular ferocity
unleashed against olive groves and orchards, with
hundreds upon hundreds of trees being torched and
uprooted, destroying the livelihoods of thousands
of families. Moreover, settlers continue to commit
violent acts of desecration against mosques, churches
and monasteries in our land, defiling those properties
with racist, hateful and provocative slogans that are
inflaming tensions and inciting religious enmity. The
potential for an escalation of settler terror remains
dangerously high, as Israel continues to provide excuses
and protection for that depraved lawlessness, rarely
holding settlers accountable for their vicious crimes.
The recent period has also witnessed another series
of Israeli military assaults against the Gaza Strip. Missile
airstrikes and artillery bombardment of Palestinian
civilian areas have continued, killing and injuring
dozens of people, including children and women, and
destroying homes and infrastructure. Such attacks are
traumatizing our people, who also continue to suffer
the multitude of social, economic, humanitarian and
psychological impacts stemming from the continuing
illegal blockade and Israeli military aggression against
Gaza. We reiterate our demands for the lifting of the
inhumane Israeli siege on our people and for respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law and
the protection of the Palestinian civilian population.
In sum, the political, humanitarian and security
situation being faced by the Palestinian people under
Israeli occupation remains grave. We remain adherent
to our conviction that action by the international
community is imperative to preventing the crisis from
deepening. Serious efforts must be made to overcome
the paralysis in the international community, including
in the Security Council, especially with regard to
ending Israel’s impunity and compelling its compliance
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. This is a matter of urgency because, in
the midst of turbulent crises wracking the region

8

that are also affecting our refugees in the diaspora,
the instability and steep decline of the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, portend an explosive situation that must be
prevented at all costs.
On its part, the Palestinian leadership has
continued to act with utmost responsibility to serve its
people, uphold its legal obligations and international
commitments, and preserve security and calm. It has
consistently acted in good will for the sake of peace,
repeatedly reaffirming its adherence to the longstanding parameters of the peace process embodied in
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map,
and to the two-State solution on the basis of the pre1967 borders.
All of this has been steadily pursued despite the
countless illegal actions to the contrary by Israel,
the occupying Power, and the serious obstructions
it has imposed. Those include Israeli actions that
have debilitated economic activity and development,
including continuing restrictions on the movement
of persons, goods and commercial flows, which have
undermined the Palestinian Authority’s efforts on
the ground, undermined donor support for crucial
development projects, and contributed to the grave
financial crisis we now face.
Indeed, despite all these challenges, as reaffirmed
by President Abbas before the General Assembly
(see A/67/PV.12), the Palestinian leadership remains
committed to the pursuit of a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement by peaceful political,
diplomatic and non-violent means. Thus, our efforts
have continued to salvage the two-State solution and to
create an environment conducive to the resumption of
credible, fair negotiations between the two sides.
In early September, President Abbas once again
met with Arab foreign ministers in Cairo to consult on
the way forward. That resulted in Arab endorsement
of Palestinian efforts to secure non-member State
observer status for Palestine in the General Assembly
during the sixty-seventh session as an interim step, in
light of the obstacles before Palestine’s application for
full membership, due to the situation in the Security
Council. We have now embarked on wide consultations
towards that end, including the establishment of an
Arab ministerial committee and a similar committee
here in New York, to assist with consultations with the
geopolitical groups.
12-54722

S/PV.6847

It is our intention to engage all concerned Member
States as we seek the broadest support for this important
multilateral initiative, and we hope that it can be acted
on by the Assembly as soon as possible. We believe
that this effort is positive and constructive, in line
with relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and consistent with the goal of the peace
process — that is, the two-State solution of Palestine
and Israel living side by side in peace and security on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders. In fact, we believe
that this effort constitutes a significant contribution to
actually preserving the two-State solution, at a time
when Israel is incessantly and recklessly undermining
that solution and the prospects for achieving a just
peace.
Furthermore, we stress that this initiative is neither
an alternative nor contradictory to the peace process,
to which we remain committed. We believe that
enhancement of the status of Palestine in the United
Nations system is our right, consistent with the longstanding historic international covenant with Palestine.
Yet, at the same time, we fully understand the need
for, and remain ready for, negotiations between the
two sides to achieve a just resolution of all final status
issues, Jerusalem, the Palestine refugees, settlements,
borders, security and water. Thus, last week President
Abbas publicly declared the Palestinian leadership’s
readiness to proceed to peace negotiations with the
Israeli Government immediately following the adoption
of such a resolution by the General Assembly.
We therefore reiterate our call on the international
community, including the Security Council, to do its
part to uphold the Charter, to uphold international law,
to uphold United Nations resolutions and to uphold the
collective responsibility to Palestine. The Palestinian
people continue to await justice and to seek their
independence and freedom, the fulfillment of their
inalienable human rights, and peace and security — the
same desires shared by all peoples of our region and
the world. At this very critical juncture, we renew our
appeal to the international community to support our
legitimate efforts to achieve the national rights of our
people, including to self-determination and to return,
and realize the independence of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital — achievements that
will undoubtedly usher in a new era in a Middle East
that has long sought peace, stability and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

12-54722

Mr. Prosor (Israel): First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt,
one of the architects and earliest champions of the United
Nations, wrote, “One’s philosophy is best expressed not
in words, but in choices”. Today, the Middle East is at a
critical moment — a moment that calls for leadership.
And history will judge today’s leaders not by the words
they speak but by the choices they make.
I am here today to issue a warning to the world. At
this time of turmoil and transition for our region, the
stakes are very high. The decisions that are made in
these halls in the coming weeks could echo for years to
come, well beyond the Middle East.
The duty is clear. It is to support democratic
institutions and aspirations, to promote negotiation
as the road to resolving conflict and to ensure that all
in our region abide by the agreements that they have
signed. These are founding principles of the United
Nations — principles that are now being put to the test.
Today there is a clear choice between constructive
solutions and destructive resolutions. In April, Israel
put a serious and comprehensive proposal on the table
before the Palestinians in Amman. We spelled out
our position. Most people in this Chamber know that.
The Palestinians never responded. They walked away,
and the world said nothing. Many of the countries
represented in this Chamber today did not utter a
single word calling on the Palestinians to respond to
Israel’s offer. They have stood idle as that proposal
gathers dust. Instead of sitting with Israel in direct
negotiations, the Palestinian leadership is pursuing the
path of unilateralism at the United Nations. This is no
road to real statehood. It is a march of folly.
Peace must be negotiated. It cannot be imposed
from the outside. There are no shortcuts, no quick fixes
and no instant solutions. The Palestinians’ unilateral
actions are a clear breach of every agreement that they
have signed with Israel, including the Oslo Accords,
the interim agreements and the Paris Protocol. These
agreements form the basis for 40 spheres of IsraeliPalestinian cooperation.
I know that some in this Chamber think that the
Palestinians can breach these agreements with no
consequences. Some think that, afterwards, we will
be able to go back to business as usual. Well, they
are mistaken. Every Member State that lends it hand
to supporting Palestinian unilateralism at the United
Nations will be responsible for the grave consequences
that follow. How can Israel be expected to abide by the

9

S/PV.6847

same agreements that the Palestinian leadership ignores
whenever it is convenient? How could anyone expect
the Israeli public to trust this Palestinian leadership
when it signs future agreements? Would anyone make
painful sacrifices or give up tangibles in exchange for
pieces of paper that the other side has proven more than
willing to throw into the garbage?
Symbolic declarations will change nothing on the
ground. They will only raise expectations that cannot
be met. This is a recipe for instability and, potentially,
violence. A General Assembly resolution will not pave
the road to peace. No, it will encourage the Palestinians
to drive recklessly towards conflict, with both feet
on the gas, no hands on the wheel and no eyes on the
road. Member States will not be planting the seeds of
peace, but fanning the flames of conflict. They will be
encouraging the Palestinian leadership to intoxicate
its people with fantasy when it needs to sober them
up with reality, inflating a dangerous bubble that will
inevitably burst. They will be responsible for affixing
a seal of approval onto an entity that does not meet the
most basic requirements for statehood.
Make no mistake. We in Israel hope that the day
will come when they meet those requirements. But let
me be clear — today the Palestinians are a very long
way from meeting the basic criteria for statehood.
The Palestinian Authority has absolutely zero
authority in the Gaza Strip, an area where nearly half
the population of the proposed State resides. President
Abbas has not seen Gaza, even through binoculars,
since 2007. The mandate for his presidency expired
in 2009. Three years later, President Abbas continues
to personally extend his term, with no regard for any
democratic process.
I am sure that many people from the countries
represented around this table might be just a little
concerned if their politicians decided to personally
extend their terms of office for years on end. Yet we do
not hear the leaders of many great democracies — some
of which are represented around this table — uttering a
word publicly about the fact that the Palestinian people
have not seen the inside of a voting booth since 2006.
Palestinian leaders claim that they are building the
institutions of a modern and peace-loving State. Yet,
these same leaders name public squares after suicide
bombers, fill textbooks with incitement and seek unity
with Hamas, an internationally recognized terrorist
organization committed to Israel’s destruction — the

10

same organization that fired 40 rockets into Israel in
just the past week.
Now, the speakers in this debate thus far have
forgotten to mention anything about a human rights
report on Hamas abuses. I am sure that these omissions
were accidental, mere oversights, but for the sake of
clarity, I would like to highlight a few of the findings
that were released just last week.
The human rights report documented how Hamas
police arbitrarily arrest, torture and in some cases
execute innocent people, with absolutely zero judicial
protection. Indeed, the report documents 147 instances
of torture by Hamas from just 2011. It makes clear that
Hamas brutally subjugates anyone who dares to dissent
from its extended political agenda: political opponents,
human rights activists, criminal defence attorneys and
women who go out in public unaccompanied by a man.
The only crisis on the ground in Gaza is Hamas, a crisis
that is too often overlooked in this Chamber.
The Palestinian Authority claims that it is
peace-loving, but dedicates $54 million in its annual
budget to sponsor convicted terrorists and mass
murderers with blood on their hands. This year, as
the Palestinian Authority threatened to delay payroll
for many employees, it tripled its monthly payments
to convicted terrorists. Talk about priorities. The
Palestinian Authority devotes 6 per cent of its budget
to terrorist salaries and less than 1 per cent to higher
education. What message does this send? Instead of
investing in their children’s future, they offer incentives
for future terrorists. Instead of using their funds for
nation-building, they use them for nation-sinking.
The money the Palestinian Authority lavishes on
terrorists does not materialize from out of thin air. It
comes from many donor countries that are represented
in this Chamber. The European Union (EU) sends more
than €500 million in annual EU aid to the Palestinian
Authority. How many taxpayers in London, Paris,
Berlin and Lisbon know that some of their money is
going to convicted terrorists with blood on their hands?
The unrestricted flood of international aid to the
Palestinian Authority will not bring us any closer
to peace as long as it is used to sponsor, encourage
and elevate terrorists. It is time for the international
community to finally speak publicly about this reality
and to acknowledge the many unresolved questions
about the future Palestinian State. These issues cannot
be swept under the carpet. They go to the core of

12-54722

S/PV.6847

resolving our conflict. They are critical to ensuring
lasting peace.
Today, there is a clear choice in the Middle East
between peace and conflict, between reconciliation
and provocation. During the opening of the sixtyseventh session of the General Assembly, Israel’s
Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu demonstrated
once again that he chooses peace (see A/67/PV.12). He
extended his hand to President Abbas. He reaffirmed
Israel’s desire to resume direct negotiations with the
Palestinians, without preconditions and without delay.
He reiterated his vision of two States for two peoples.
On the same stage, President Abbas made a very
different choice. Once again, he used the platform of
the United Nations to demonize the State of Israel and
deny the Jewish people’s historic connection to their
ancient homeland. He said that the presence of Jews in
Jerusalem is altering“the city’s historic character and
the glorious image of the Holy City as etched in the
minds of humankind” (A/67/PV.12, p 31).
The truth is plain and simple. Jerusalem had a
Jewish character long before most cities in the world
had any character. It was the capital of the Jewish people
long before Homer composed The Iliad before Romulus
and Remus founded Rome, and before the armies of
Alexander the Great swept through the Middle East.
Jews have lived continuously in Jerusalem for 3,000
years, from the time that King David built his great
palace in the city’s rolling hills.
By denying the history of the Jewish people, the
Palestinian leadership plants the seeds of intolerance
in their next generation. They raise doubts about their
commitment to peace. It is time for the international
community to speak clearly, openly and publicly against
this incitement. It is time for all in this Chamber to say
that Israel is the nation-State of the Jewish people and
Jerusalem, our capital, is its beating heart.
Mutual recognition is the key to securing lasting
peace. I often point out during these debates that one
will never, ever hear any Palestinian leader say “two
States for two peoples”. You will not hear them say “two
States for two peoples” because today the Palestinian
leadership is calling for an independent Palestinian
State but wants millions of its people to flood the Jewish
State. That would mean the destruction of Israel. No
one who believes in peace could ever accept it. It is a
non-starter.

12-54722

Since the Palestinian leadership refuses to tell
the Palestinian people the truth, the international
community has the responsibility to tell them the truth.
It has a duty to stand up and say that the so-called claim
of return is a non-starter. Yet many who are so vocal
in telling Israel what it needs to do for peace stutter,
mumble and lose their voices when it comes time to tell
the Palestinians this basic truth.
Today there is a clear choice between complacency
and leadership. Over the past 30 years, the Hizbullah
terrorist organization has killed tens of thousands of
men, women and children in attacks spanning dozens of
countries and five continents. Working with its Iranian
patrons, Hizbullah has killed families on vacation,
peacekeepers sleeping in their barracks and diplomats
carrying out their official business.
Iran has provided Hizbullah with funds, training
and advanced weapons to hijack the Lebanese State
and transform it into an outpost for terror. Just last
week, Hizbullah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, publicly
admitted that Iran had provided the military drone that
his organization sent over Israel. One does not need any
further evidence that Hizbullah is a direct proxy of the
Iranian regime.
Hizbullah’s continued provocations could have
devastating consequences for the region.
I want to make this perfectly clear, so that no one in
this Chamber can say that they did not hear me or did not
understand me: Hizbullah’s continued provocation and
military buildup could have devastating consequences
for the region.
Not all Lebanese are so happy that Hizbullah
is using their country as its playground. As former
Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri said last week,
Lebanon is not an unmanned drone. He reiterated “deep
concerns over the uncalculated risks which Hezbollah
wants to drag Lebanon into”.
Nasrallah claims that he needs a private,
independent army — with more missiles than many
NATO members — to defend Lebanon against Israel.
Today, on the streets of Homs, Hama and Damascus, we
see that Hizbullah’s army is far more preoccupied with
butchering their Arab brothers and sisters in Syria.
Ahmadinejad and Nasrallah sit on Bashar
Al-Assad’s advisory board, offering the tyrant of
Damascus guidance on how to butcher the Syrian people
more efficiently. Together they form what I call a trio of

11

S/PV.6847

terror. I know that there is no shortage of those willing
to express their “commitment to Israel’s security” in
these halls. Yet such displays of commitment to Israel’s
security have been difficult to find over the past six
years, as Hizbullah has turned southern Lebanon into a
giant storage facility for 50,000 missiles.
Some countries around this table continue to define
Hizbullah as a charitable and political group, not a
terrorist organization. That is no less ridiculous than
describing the Mafia as a gentleman’s social club. In
many European countries, Hizbullah is raising money
from supporters as if it were the Red Cross. Nasrallah
recently admitted that being placed on a European
terrorist list would “destroy Hizbullah”, drying up
many sources of financial, political and moral support.
How much longer must this absurdity continue?
How many more innocents must fall victim to
Hizbullah’s terror before Europe acts? It is time for all
responsible nations to call Hizbullah exactly what it is:
a global terrorist organization.
In this Chamber today, the need for leadership is
clear. Later in this debate, Iran will speak on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. In other words, the world’s
greatest sponsor of terrorism will speak to the Security
Council on behalf of roughly two thirds of the countries
represented in the United Nations.
What a sham, and what a shame. It is time for all
those Non-Aligned Movement countries that care about
peace and security to realign the Movement. It is time
for the international community to finally act to stop
the Iranian regime from acquiring nuclear weapons.
With every day that passes, the enriched uranium in
Iran piles higher and higher.
One can only imagine what that ayatollah regime
would do with the dangerous combination of extremist
ideology, advanced missile technology and nuclear
weapons. An Iranian nuclear bomb would be the mullahs’
greatest dream and the world’s worst nightmare. And
with the very worst nightmares, sometimes the only
way to stop them is to wake up.
The hour is getting very late. The red line is very
clear. The world must stop Iran before it is too late.
For Israel, the lessons of history are very clear. Real
security — and real peace — can be secured only in the
real world, not in the fantasyland of vague statements
and empty resolutions.

12

To those truly committed to the security of Israel
and the Middle East, to those committed to a two-State
solution, I say: act tangibly, speak out publicly and
show us concretely. The choices are very clear. They
can recognize Israel as the nation-State of the Jewish
people, or allow the Palestinian leadership to deny our
history without consequence.
They can work to end the Palestinian Authority’s
incitement and support for terrorists, or allow hate and
extremism to take root for generations to come. They
can say publicly that the so-called claim of return is a
non-starter, or they can allow this claim to remain an
obstacle on the road to peace.
They can choose to support direct negotiations
and talks around the table or to undermine them with
unilateral resolutions at the United Nations. They can
choose to look the other way at Hizbullah’s terror, or
show the political courage to stop the organization in
its tracks. They can choose to stand idle as an Iranian
nuclear bomb becomes a reality in the Middle East, or
they can take action before it is too late.
Today I say to the leaders of our region, to the
members of the Council and to each and every Member
of the United Nations: these choices are yours. The fate
of the Middle East hangs in the balance. The time to
act is now.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
I will begin with Syria, where the horrifying
situation is getting worse. Escalating violence driven
by the Al-Assad regime has killed tens of thousands
and displaced millions of Syrians. There is no clearer
demonstration of the situation’s threat to regional peace
and security than the Syrian Government’s recent
shelling of Akakali, which the Council rightfully
condemned.
As the violence and atrocities mount, the United
States will not wait for all members of the Council to
get on the right side of history. Together with our allies,
we are supporting the opposition as it moves towards
an inclusive, democratic transition. We are further
pressuring the regime and addressing the growing
humanitarian needs in the region. At the same time,
we continue to support the efforts of Joint Special

12-54722

S/PV.6847

Representative Brahimi to find a durable solution to
the crisis.
As President Obama told the General Assembly last
month, “the future must not belong to a dictator who
massacres his people” (A/67/PV.6, p. 14). The regime
of Bashar Al-Assad will come to an end. Indeed, that
transition is not just inevitable; it has already begun.
Al-Assad’s merciless assault upon the Syrian people
has not cowed them into submission; far from it. The
opposition is getting stronger, and parts of Syria have
slipped from the regime’s control. In those areas, Syrian
citizens are banding together to administer towns,
reopen schools and rebuild their economy. The United
States is helping them do so, providing the unarmed
civilian opposition with help to organize in support of
the transition plan agreed in Cairo last July, with its
vision of a democratic, pluralistic Syria where all of its
people have a say in how they are governed.
More than 1.5 million people have fled their homes
either to neighbouring countries or to safer places
within Syria. As the number of refugees grows, we
commend Syria’s neighbours, including Turkey, Jordan,
Lebanon and Iraq, on their generosity and recognize
their need for additional support. The United States has
committed more than $130 million in food, medical
supplies and other life-saving assistance.
We encourage all Member States to respond to the
needs identified in the United Nations Syria appeals
and to coordinate closely with the United Nations
in responding to the crisis. As the Syrians plan for
transition, we are looking for additional ways to
support Syrian efforts to document serious violations
of international law, including the indiscriminate
bombardment and deliberate targeting of civilians.
No one can deny that Al-Assad’s war against the
Syrian people now poses real challenges to all Syria’s
neighbours, including Lebanon. From deadly attacks
by the Syrian regime across the border to tens of
thousands of refugees, Lebanon is already suffering
the consequences of the conflict. Hizbullah’s active
and growing support for Al-Assad’s war exposes
Hasan Nasrallah’s claims of promoting Lebanon’s
national interest as nothing more than a deadly form of
deception. The group’s leaders may try to change the
subject by invoking hollow rhetoric about a so-called
resistance but the truth is plain to see. Nasrallah’s
fighters are now part of Al-Assad’s killing machine
and Hizbullah leaders continue to plot new measures to
prop up a murderous and desperate dictator with Iran.
12-54722

We encourage the international community to
counter Hizbullah’s terrorist activity and to do more to
expose its deepening involvement in Al-Assad’s war. We
commend the Lebanese Government and the Lebanese
Armed Forces, in particular, for maintaining stability
and law and order at this critical juncture. We welcome
the efforts of President Sleiman and others to promote
dialogue, including with respect to the disarmament of
illegal militias, as called for in resolution 1559 (2004).
We reiterate our firm commitment to a stable, sovereign
and independent Lebanon.
Turning to Middle East peace efforts, as President
Obama said in his address before the General Assembly
last month: “The road is hard, but the destination
is clear: a secure, Jewish State of Israel and an
independent, prosperous Palestine” (ibid., p. 14). We
actively support the creation of a Palestinian State as part
of a two-State solution as a result of direct negotiations,
without preconditions, between the Israelis and the
Palestinians. Unilateral actions, including initiatives
to grant the Palestinian Authority non-member State
observer status at the United Nations, would only
jeopardize the peace process and complicate efforts to
return the parties to direct negotiations. Any efforts to
use international forums to prejudge final status issues,
which can only be resolved directly by the parties, will
neither improve the daily lives of Palestinians nor foster
the trust essential to make progress towards a two-State
solution.
We remain focused on helping Israelis and
Palestinians to improve the environment between them
and to address the Palestinian Authority’s chronic fiscal
crisis, in particular. We recognize the serious financial
challenges facing the Palestinian Authority and its
vital efforts to sustain the institutions of governance
that it has built. The Palestinian leadership has taken
several steps to address its financial challenges but it
needs our help. We appreciate the support of Israel and
of the wider donor community to provide the financial
resources to meet the basic needs of the Palestinian
people.
We all understand the severity of the current
economic situation in the Palestinian territories and the
consequences of inaction. In parallel, we urge continued
international support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in order to further its efforts to provide the necessary
assistance for Palestinian refugees in the West Bank,

13

S/PV.6847

Gaza and elsewhere until a final negotiated solution is
reached.
Lasting peace between Palestinians and Israelis
requires both parties to take meaningful steps.
Palestinians should continue their security cooperation,
further strengthen public institutions and end
incitement. The onslaught of rockets fired by terrorists
in Gaza must cease immediately. We condemn those
attacks in the strongest terms. Israel should step up its
efforts to deter, confront and prosecute anti-Palestinian
violence and extremist hate crimes, including vandalism
at religious sites. We agree with President Peres that
“holy sites must not be harmed”.
In the West Bank, the recent and repeated
destruction of Palestinian olive groves, which are a
critical source of income for the local population, is
deplorable. We look to the Israeli authorities to act
decisively to protect those resources and to investigate
such acts.
Like every United States Administration for
decades, we do not accept the legitimacy of continued
Israeli settlement activity. We continue to oppose
any efforts to legalize outposts. The fate of existing
settlements must be dealt with by the parties, along
with other permanent status issues.
Indeed, the road to peace is long and hard, but the
United States remained fully committed to helping the
parties to reach peace through a negotiated two-State
solution.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing. I
also listened carefully to the statements made by the
representatives of Palestine and Israel.
China is deeply concerned about the long-standing
stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks and
the economic and humanitarian difficulties facing the
people of Palestine. In September 2011, the Quartet
set the end of this year as the deadline for reaching an
agreement between Palestine and Israel. The Middle
East peace process is now once again at a crucial
crossroads. The question of Palestine has always
remained the crux of the Middle East issue. The longstanding stagnation of the Middle East peace process is
not conducive to peace and stability in that region. The
regional turbulence should not divert the international
community’s attention from the Palestinian question.

14

China has always advocated that the parties
concerned should, on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the road map for peace
in the Middle East, resolve their differences through
dialogue and negotiation and achieve the ultimate goal
of establishing an independent Palestinian State living
side by side in peace with the State of Israel.
China urges the two sides to take practical steps
to remove barriers to the peace talks in order to seek
an early resumption of the peace talks and subsequent
progress. Israel should assume the responsibility for
taking the first step. We urge Israel to immediately stop
the building of settlements, to lift the blockade on Gaza,
to release Palestinian prisoners and to improve their
living and medical conditions. We urge Israel to actively
cooperate with the international community in such
efforts towards peace in order to create the conditions
for relaunching the peace talks with Palestine.
The international community should increase its
sense of responsibility and urgency for advancing the
Middle East peace process. It should work actively to
bring the two sides back to the negotiating table and
to promote measures by both sides to rebuild their
mutual trust. China hopes that the Quarter will play an
effective role and come up, as soon as possible, with a
proposal for the resumption of the peace talks between
Palestine and Israel.
China supports a greater role for the Council in
helping to restart the Middle East peace process. We have
always backed Palestine’s just pursuit of the restoration
of its legitimate rights as a nation and its establishment
as an independent State with full sovereignty on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We also support Palestine’s membership in the
United Nations and other international organizations.
China is extremely worried about the continuing
tension in Syria, as the Syrian issue has a bearing on
peace and stability in the Middle East. Any solution to
the question of Syria should be based on observation
of the purposes and principles of the Charter and
on the basic standards governing international
relations. It should also be based on respect for Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and on continuing
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, Kofi Annan’s six-point plan and the final
communiqué of the Geneva meeting.

12-54722

S/PV.6847

China is against any external imposition of a
settlement on Syria and any efforts towards so-called
regime change. A political settlement is the sole viable
way of defusing the crisis in Syria; military means
would only lead to more pressure and greater conflict.
It is urgent that all forms of terrorism or violent acts in
Syria and any efforts to encourage or abet a resort to
military means be halted forthwith and that a political
transition, led by the people of Syria, be started
instead. China calls on all of the parties in Syria and the
international community to cooperate with and support
Joint Special Representative Brahimi in performing his
good offices in the effort to reach a political solution to
the Syrian question.
China is concerned about the impact of the current
Syrian situation on its neighbours. We call on the
parties concerned to bear in mind the overall interest
of regional peace and stability, to respect one another’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, to continue to
exercise restraint and to refrain from any action that
could lead to an escalation of the situation, so that
everyone can work together to maintain regional peace
and stability.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are deeply disturbed by the present
momentum of affairs in the Middle East peace process,
or, rather, the lack of it. Trust between Palestinians and
Israelis is close to zero. Israel’s settlement activities are
reaching alarming levels. Acts by Jewish extremists
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, are
also intensifying. The desecration of both Christian
and Islamic religious sites is unacceptable, especially
under conditions where interreligious and intercultural
relations in the region are already tense.
There are periodic rumblings around the Gaza
Strip. We condemn the shelling of Israeli territory,
which threatens the lives of the civilian population,
as well as the actions from the Israeli side that injure
peaceful Palestinians. Both sides must show restraint
and respect the ceasefire. In such a fragile situation,
when simply maintaining the status quo cannot prevent
the eruption of new crises, the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations must be resumed.
In that regard and in close cooperation with the
League of Arab States, the Quartet must step up its
efforts. We believe it would be a mistake not to convene
a ministerial meeting of that group on the sidelines of
the general political discussion at the sixty-seventh

12-54722

session of the General Assembly. Another important
aspect is the restoration of Palestinian unity. Without
concluding that process, based on the platform of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization, arriving at a full
Palestinian-Israeli settlement, let alone putting it into
practice, is impossible.
Our support for Palestine and its participation in
the work of international organizations is well known.
We therwfore believe that initiatives to gain broad
international recognition of Palestinian statehood,
including in the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the specialized United Nations bodies,
dhould be seen as complementing the efforts to achieve
a negotiated solution to the conflict with Israel, rather
than serving as an alternative. They should absolutely
not be used by the Israeli side to turn the screws on
the occupied territories or put any other pressure on the
Palestinian Authority, and that call also applies to the
other actors in the area of Israel and Palestine.
Alongside its political and diplomatic work, Russia
will continue its efforts to provide the Palestinians with
donor assistance. In the past few years Palestinians
have received Russian humanitarian financial support
for education and health amounting to three tranches
of $10 million each. We are continuing our tradition
of financial assistance to the Palestinians in education,
whereby Palestinian students receive 150 Government
stipends annually. More than 500 students are currently
studying in Russia. This year, we plan to open a middle
school for Palestinians in Bethlehem. In addition,
Russia is providing food aid to Palestine through
the World Food Programme and in 2013 will make a
one-time voluntary contribution of $2 million to the
budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
It has become a tradition during meetings on
Middle Eastern issues to discuss the situation in
and around Syria. We cannot but be perturbed by
the unending bloodshed in that country. Among the
armed opposition, the impact of those forces using
the bloodiest means — acts of terror and attacks on
peaceful citizens — grows ever louder and more
frequent. The most recent examples are the terrorist acts
in Aleppo on 3 October, in the suburbs of Damascus on
9 October, and the massacre of the civilian population
in the villages of Al-Heydariya and Al-Hassaniya,
near Homs. Support for the fighters from abroad is
not only continuing but, based on everything we have
heard, seems to be growing. Illegal shipments of arms

15

S/PV.6847

have been sent, and the world media are increasingly
talking about the presence, in the opposition’s ranks, of
mercenaries, trainers and jihadists linked to Al-Qaida
and other international terrorist networks.
Russia’s approach to dealing with Syria is
unchanged. Violence, whatever its origins, must cease.
The Action Group’s Geneva communiqué remains
current and necessary. We call on all clear-thinking
parties to work together on the basis of consensus in
order to arrive at a settlement without delay. The Syrian
authorities have publicly voiced their support for the
Geneva agreements and have appointed a negotiator.
We await similar steps from the opposition. We expect
that they will follow after the upcoming meeting in
Doha. In that regard, our hopes lie with the mediation
capabilities of Mr. Brahimi and his team, as well
as the sincere, constructive involvement of regional
and international actors in the quest for a rapid and
unconditional end to the bloodshed in Syria. That is our
shared and primary task.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Sir, for organizing this debate on
a very important topic. We are also grateful to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
comprehensive and informative briefing.
We would like once again to express our profound
concern about the lack of progress in the Middle East
peace process. In spite of occasional contacts between
the Israeli and Palestinian sides, the prospects for direct
talks have so far been deadlocked. It is clear that there
is no alternative to peaceful negotiations, and we call
on the parties to create the conditions conducive to
their resumption. Mutual confidence and continued
dedication on the part of all the parties and international
actors in the peace process are essential to achieving
tangible results.
We know that the Middle East Quartet has been
maintaining close contact with the parties in an attempt
to bring them back to the negotiation table. However,
we cannot remain oblivious to the fact that the current
situation is going nowhere. In that regard, it is pertinent
to remind the Council that responsibility for the
stalemate and possible failure of the process rests not
only with the parties concerned but, first and foremost,
with the entire international community. It is clear that
success depends on a number of critical factors, among
them the need to ensure that the process and efforts are
guided by the normative standards set by the Charter

16

and as well as by the goal of a comprehensive settlement
based on international law.
We express our serious concern over the continuing
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which place a tremendous burden on
civilians, cause serious obstruction to the peace
process and, more dangerously, threaten the two-State
solution and the emergence of a viable Palestinian
State. The international community must take the
necessary actions to make it clear that violence,
forcible displacements, the demolition of houses, the
construction of settlements and other illegal activities
must cease immediately and without preconditions.
Having said that, it is essential to underline once again
that, in assuming its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council must react adequately in order to
put an end to illegal practices and policies and ensure
that international law, human rights and fundamental
freedoms are observed and respected.
It is alarming that the economic, financial and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories remains troublesome. The issue should be
continuously addressed by the international community,
and urgent measures should be undertaken to alleviate
the suffering of people in need. It is also important
to fully utilize the advantage of cultural diversity by
promoting intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation,
while categorically rejecting and invalidating any
manifestation of ethnic and religious intolerance. We
reiterate our support for the application of Palestine for
admission to membership of the United Nations and
look forward to an early solution to that issue, based on
international law.
International assistance and participation in
tackling the challenges faced by the countries of the
region is vital to securing achievements and working on
shortcomings. The United Nations and its specialized
agencies and field presences, as well as regional
organizations, are best positioned to deliver such
assistance, and their efforts deserve to be adequately
recognized.
Lastly, we believe that, among other valuable
efforts and initiatives aimed at contributing to the
achievement and maintenance of regional peace and
security, the establishment of a Middle East zone free
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction could be a unique opportunity for all States

12-54722

S/PV.6847

of the region to take a collective stand on their security.
In that regard, we welcome the initiatives aimed at
generating relevant discussion and facilitating the work
towards that objective.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
Today’s debate on the Middle East and the
Palestinian question is not a mere ritual on the Security
Council’s agenda. In recent months, we have witnessed
a process of political and social clamor in which
citizens, particularly in the Arab world, have called
for recognition of their fundamental rights and for an
institutional change to pave the way for democratic
practices and the strengthening of the rule of law.
Although significant progress has been made, we also
note that, in some countries, violence and repression
have been imposed. In response to that dynamic, we
believe that this discussion should serve to underline
the increasingly urgent need to engage in dialogue and
actions conducive to establishing peace in the region.
In the case of Syria, the high level of violence and
destruction and the constant flow of arms to all parties
is disturbing. We believe that the militarization of the
conflict is only aggravating the situation and putting
civilians in ever more serious danger.
We regret the ongoing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, not only in Syria, but also
in neighbouring countries, due to the impact of the
thousands of terrorized refugees fleeing the violence.
Despite the appeals of the international community,
Syrian forces continue to attack densely populated areas
and to make indiscriminate use of heavy weapons, tanks
and air assets against civilians, while the opposition
undertakes actions that deepen hostilities.
We maintain our position of support for a political
solution to the situation in Syria, and we therefore
reiterate our support for the work of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to
put an immediate end to the violence and to obtain
humanitarian access in order to facilitate a transition to
a democratic and plural political system, in accordance
with the six-point plan, resolutions 2042 (2012) and
2043 (2012), and the 30 June final communiqué of the
Action Group on Syria (S/2012/522, annex) and with
the support of the international community.

12-54722

We call on the Government and opposition of
Syria to cease their fire and allow for dialogue and
reconciliation, as expressions of coexistence in
search of a better future. This is even more urgent as
we see the impact of the crisis leading to increased
hostilities towards neighbouring countries. That must
be immediately controlled in order to avoid the spread
of disastrous consequences.
I would like to address the question of Palestine,
since we believe that, due to the dramatic developments
in the Middle East, it is urgent to achieve progress in
the peace process between Israel and Palestine. That
is a concept that all members of the Security Council
endorse. It is appalling that the guidelines established
by the Quartet on 23 September 2011 have not yet been
implemented. It is important that the parties resume
meaningful talks with the support of the international
community. We believe that the parties should make
their best efforts to create an environment conducive
to the resumption of direct negotiations for a twoState solution, with a viable Palestinian State living
in peace alongside Israel within defined, secure and
internationally recognized borders.
The fragility of the situation is clear. There have
been repeated incidents, such as the firing of rockets
from Gaza into Israel, some of which have been directed
towards urban centres. Such indiscriminate attacks must
absolutely cease. We insist that all settlement activity
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, is contrary to international law. The status
of Jerusalem requires a negotiated solution. There is an
urgent need to find special arrangements that ensure
full respect for all religious and cultural rights of the
parties and for their holy sites.
From the institutional standpoint, the viability of a
future Palestinian State requires continued international
support for the efforts of the Palestinian Authority
to strengthen its institutions and improve its serious
financial situation in order to revitalize the Palestinian
economy. We must also follow the Palestinian
reconciliation process under the leadership of President
Abbas, as a unified Palestinian Government is essential
to achieving lasting peace.
The international community should contribute to
the creation of a legitimate and balanced framework
that facilitates a viable political process. We must
understand that our efforts will lose credibility if we
continue to fail to take the decisions necessary to enable

17

S/PV.6847

an environment in which human rights and international
humanitarian law serve as the basis for rebuilding
confidence and facilitating serious engagement between
the parties in order to move forward in the negotiations.
My delegation shares concern over rising tensions
in Lebanon, the Syrian-Lebanese border incursions,
dual-track arms trafficking and the increasingly
frequent presence in Syrian territory of elements
associated with Hizbullah. It is urgently necessary to
adopt measures to prevent such practices as kidnapping
and hostage-taking as a means of retaliation against
certain communities in Lebanon.
We highlight the policy of President Sleiman to
dissociate himself from the Syrian crisis, as well as the
actions taken by his Government and other countries
of the region assist the thousands of Syrians who have
sought refuge in those countries. In that regard, we
welcome the talks of the Special Coordinator of the
Secretary-General for Lebanon, Mr. Derek Plumbly,
with Prime Minister Mikati related to the support that
the Lebanese Government provides to thousands of
Syrian refugees who are currently on its territory.
In conclusion, we wish to express our concern
over the recent increase in violence in Iraq, and we
urge all Iraqis to commit themselves to a search
for effective solutions of their differences through
dialogue and reconciliation. In that context, we
welcome the appointment of the members of the Board
of Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral
Commission, which will clear the way for the holding
municipal elections.
We welcome the culmination of the process of
relocating the residents of Camp Ashraf, as it paves
the way for the camp’s peaceful and definitive closure
under the terms of the memorandum of understanding.
We also thank the residents for their cooperation and
the Government of Iraq for providing the guarantees
necessary for their transfer to Camp Hurriya.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East. I also thank the
representatives of Palestine and of the State of Israel for
their statements.
In this debate, I will address the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the Syrian crisis and the situation in Lebanon.

18

As for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
situation on the ground has seen no tangible progress
since the Council’s last meeting to examine the
issue. Concerns persist as the hope for a two-State
solution — Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security — evaporates, due to ongoing
unilateral initiatives and provocations by both parties.
On the one hand, settlement activities have not
halted. Settlement construction and the expulsion of
Palestinian families continue, as does the blockade of
the Gaza Strip. On the other hand, rocket firing and
other provocative acts from the Gaza Strip towards
Israel have not ceased. While Palestinians fight
to regain their confiscated land, Israel defends its
legitimate right to its existence and to security.
My country believes that although both parties clearly
have rights they wish to exercise, the only acceptable
solution should be that of peace, mutual acceptance and
coexistence. That is what the international community,
including the Security Council, has worked towards
for decades. However, given that the lack of success
with regard to the two States is perceived as a failure
on the part of the Council, the situation should prompt
the Council now to review its many resolutions and the
various initiatives by outside players and partners.
In that context, my country believes that the
effective implementation of the Quartet road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative should be firmly
supported — indeed, demanded. At a time when it
is important to relaunch the various initiatives, both
parties equally must show unfailing political will to
begin the negotiations necessary to achieve a lasting
settlement of the question.
In that respect, the Togolese delegation welcomes
the recent proposal by Minister Barak to dismantle
dozens of Jewish settlements in the West Bank. Such
an approach will certainly constitute the beginning
of a disengagement, which my country strongly
encourages. Here my country takes the opportunity to
request that the Israeli authorities ensure an effective
disengagement — in other words, not to free up one
zone simply to occupy another in the West Bank.
Similarly, Togo encourages the continuation of
informal meetings between the Palestinian Authority
and Israel. It calls upon the Quartet to continue its
efforts so as to make progress in the negotiations on
issues that divide the parties. In our view, the resumption
of negotiations is urgent, and any preconditions to

12-54722

S/PV.6847

resumption will only delay a settlement of the issue.
We also believe that the negotiations should include all
parties. That is why we call upon Hamas and associated
groups to renounce violence and to work with the
Palestinian Authority within the framework of direct
negotiations.
Now I will take up the situation in Syria, which
is on the cusp of setting off the entire region if the
Security Council does not take the measures required
by the level of danger. If the worst that all of us fears
were to happen, our Council will have failed in its
responsibilities as defined by the Charter of the United
Nations.
The events of 3 October, including the bombing
of the Turkish village of Akçakale, which claimed five
victims, and the rapid and determined response of the
Turkish authorities have strengthened our fear. The
Council’s firmness in condemning that bombing and
other suicide car bombs in Aleppo are an encouraging
sign, yet they are not enough to put an end to the
determination of all parties to the conflict to use all
violent means.
In the light of the scale of the war on the ground,
Togo believes that the Security Council should use all
means at its disposal to lead all parties to the conflict
to effectively implement Kofi Annan’s six-point plan
and the Geneva Action Group for Syria communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex), while awaiting new proposals to
settle the crisis, which will be presented by the Joint
Special Representative for Syria, Mr. Brahimi. For the
time being, my country calls on all parties in Syria to
halt without delay massacres and massive violations of
human rights, briefly, violence of all types, as well as
the destruction of their own country.
On the issue of refugees and displaced persons,
my country expresses its gratitude to the donors and
humanitarian organizations for their multiform and
ongoing support. Faced with the continuing violence,
the international community will need to further
mobilize to increase the necessary humanitarian aid
for refugees and displaced persons, whose numbers
continue to increase each day.
As for Lebanon, we welcome the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), pursuant to resolution 2064 (2012),
given the role of that Force in maintaining peace and
security in the country. The continuing occupation of
Ghajar by the Israelis and ongoing tensions along the

12-54722

Blue Line justify that measure. I reiterate our gratitude
to the countries contributing troops to UNIFIL and
pay tribute to all of its military and civilian personnel
for their efforts in the service of peace in southern
Lebanon. We also wish to encourage them to work to
strengthen their cooperation with the Lebanese armed
forces and the Israel Defense Forces.
While Lebanon is experiencing internal problems
that it is attempting to resolve through a national dialogue
that is scheduled to resume on 12 November, the war
in neighbouring Syria has exacerbated the situation,
particularly with regard to security. The deadly clashes
in August between Sunnis and Alawites in Tripoli
demonstrated the real impact of the Syrian crisis on
Lebanon. The flow of Syrian refugees, estimated by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to be
close to 80,000, is additional cause for serious concern,
given the growing insecurity caused by the situation at
a time when the Lebanese Government must face many
other security situations in the south of the country,
along its borders with Israel and in the zones where
Hizbullah and other armed groups are carrying out all
types of activity in total impunity.
My country congratulates the Lebanese authorities
for the urgent steps they have taken to put an end to
inter-communal violence in Tripoli and to address the
flow of refugees into their country. We urge them to
work to prevent violence and to further secure their
border with Syria.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his comprehensive briefing. I would also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their valuable
statements.
The Arab world has been undergoing unprecedented
transformation during the past two years. The
democratic aspirations of people in several countries are
being addressed through national political processes.
However, it is regrettable that the Palestinian question
and the related Arab-Israeli issues have remained
largely unaddressed and resolved. Also, the Palestinian
application for full membership of the United Nations,
submitted more than a year ago, has not evinced any
positive action from the Security Council despite the
overwhelming support of States Members.
The issue of Palestine is facing the real danger of
getting relegated to the sidelines. The current period

19

S/PV.6847

of stalemate in the Middle East peace process is
perhaps one of the longest since the signing of the Oslo
Accords 19 years ago. The efforts of the Quartet can
at best be described as feeble and have failed to break
the stalemate. If the current situation continues, the
international community will risk destabilization in the
region.
We therefore call for serious efforts to arrest the
trend. If there is one decision that can help revive the
peace process, it is an end to settlement activity in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The settlement
activity in the West Bank and East Jerusalem is
creating a new reality on the ground and threatens
the very premise of a two-State solution. Settlements,
roadblocks and the related infrastructure of occupation
have also exacerbated the humanitarian problems of
the Palestinian people and adversely affect the normal
functioning of Palestinian State institutions. We join
others in urging Israel to stop its settlement policy
without further delay.
The blockade of Gaza has entered its sixth year
and is causing severe hardship to the population.
The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate,
and essential services, economic activities and
infrastructure development have been disrupted. Israel
should immediately lift the blockade and allow the
resumption of normal socioeconomic activities in Gaza
so that the Gazans can rebuild their lives and reduce
their dependence on external assistance.
The recent measures taken by Israel — including
the transfer of tax revenue, increase in work permits
issued to the Palestinian populations, allowing visits
of Palestinian families to Palestinian prisoners held in
Israeli detention, and so on — are positive. However,
those measures are inadequate to address the magnitude
of the problems and need to be built upon to promote
mutual trust and confidence between the parties. In
that connection, it is important to avoid violence on all
sides and ensure that the legitimate security interests of
all parties are met.
We note the reconciliation process between the
Palestinian factions, which is crucial. We hope that
efforts taken towards the promotion of reconciliation
will bear fruit soon, leading to the formation of a unity
Government, the holding of elections, the reunification
of Palestinian State institutions, and measures for the
reconstruction and development of Palestinian society.

20

The financial crisis that the Palestinian Authority
is currently facing is eroding the significant progress
made by the Authority in building State institutions.
There is an urgent need to support the Palestinian
Authority to meet its budgetary shortfalls. In that
regard, we welcome the commitment shown by the
international community at the recently held meeting
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians on
23 September.
On our part, India has continued to support the
Palestinian State-building efforts. President Abbas
visited India in September. During his visit, three
agreements were signed for the establishment of an
information and communications technology centre
of excellence in Palestine, the provision of technical
and vocational educational training equipment and
services for the Palestinian Ministry of Labour, and the
construction and equipping of two secondary schools.
India will also contribution $10 million to Palestine’s
budget for this year, as we have done in the two previous
years.
During the visit of President Abbas, India reaffi rmed
its firm support for a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living within secure and recognized borders
side by side and at peace with Israel. We strongly
support all efforts towards the realization of that
objective, including Palestine’s enhanced status in the
Organization, as announced by President Abbas during
the general debate of the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly last month (see A/67/PV.12).
We remain seriously concerned at the deteriorating
situation in Syria. We strongly condemn all violence
and violations of human rights, irrespective of who
their perpetrators are. We also condemn in the strongest
terms the terrorist acts that have been and continue
to be committed in Syria. We call upon all parties to
dissociate themselves from terrorist groups and ensure
that no space is provided for such groups. We urge all
parties to cooperate with Joint Special Representative
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi to resolve the crisis without any
further bloodshed through an inclusive Syrian-led
political process that can meet the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people.
Before I conclude, let me state that, while the
Palestinian question remains at the centre of the ArabIsraeli conflict, there are other Arab lands under

12-54722

S/PV.6847

occupation. A final and comprehensive settlement
of all Arab-Israeli issues is necessary for enduring
peace in the region. India stands ready to play its part
in our collective endeavours to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
express our sincere gratitude to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing to the Security Council. We would also like
to thank the Ambassador of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
Since joining the Council some 22 months ago,
we have seen very little progress in the Middle East
peace process, in particular the long-standing IsraeliPalestinian conflict. One year has now since passed since
the Quartet committed to facilitating the resumption of
the much-awaited direct negotiations between Israel
and Palestine. That deadline has come and gone with
no significant progress towards the resumption of
talks. We welcome the ongoing quiet talks between the
parties, which serve as a confidence-building measure
that could help to soften their respective positions as
they seek a window of opportunity to resume direct
talks.
In the absence of any substantive progress in the
peace process, we once again question the value and the
credibility of the Quartet to which the United Nations
has outsourced its responsibility. In our assessment,
it has not proven its strategic worth. Therefore, let
us urgently review the mechanism and either bolster,
adjust or disband it. In reviewing the mechanism, we
could focus, inter alia, on its composition, mandate and
accountability.
There is an urgent need to focus on the plight
of the Palestinians. They expect a lot from us. They
deserve better, and we need not fail them. Political
and economic events elsewhere in the world should be
allowed to derail the peace process, which is by far a
better solution than ongoing confrontation and violence.
The prospects of peace and a two-State solution
are quickly diminishing. The recent reports of violence
by Israeli forces using missiles, air strikes, artillery
bombardment and drone missiles fired against
Palestinians in Gaza are worrying and should be
condemned in the strongest words possible. Equally, we
condemn the indiscriminate firing of rockets from Gaza
into southern Israel. In fact, the Security Council needs
to speak out against those heinous acts of violence.
Having said that, we must also point out that we are not

12-54722

so naive as to think that such a condemnation would
quickly come out of the Council. We are well aware
of the circumstances that may hinder the Council from
doing that.
Israel continues its blockade of Gaza in blatant
defiance of international law with impunity, as the
Council has not been able to ensure compliance with its
own decisions, including resolution 1860 (2009). The
application by Israel of collective punishment on the
population of Gaza is a grave violation of international
human rights and humanitarian law, and should be
denounced by the Council. The latest report of the
United Nations country team in the occupied Palestinian
territory, entitled “Gaza in 2020 — A liveable place?”,
states:
“The people of Gaza remain worse off than
they were in the 1990s, despite increases in real
gross domestic product per capita over the past
three years. Unemployment is high and affects
women and youth in particular ... The challenges
will only become more acute, particularly if the
current political status quo continues”.
Given that reality, it is urgent that the blockade
be lifted. Concerned about the humanitarian plight
of the Palestinian people, South Africa has increased
its donation to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
$2 million.
South Africa once again condemns the continued
settlement construction, which violates international
law and the resolutions of the Council. Those activities
remain the foremost stumbling block to the resumption
of the peace talks. Clearly, the continuation of the
settlement greatly jeopardizes the realization of the
two-State solution on the basis of the 4 June 1967
borders.
Israeli settlers continue their act of aggression
against the Palestinians almost on a daily basis. The
demolition of homes, mosques, churches and cemeteries
cannot be tolerated. The destruction of agricultural
projects, orchards and olive trees and setting fire to
farm produce, which is the means of survival for the
Palestinians, is deeply worrying. Recent evidence of
such acts are the destruction of olive saplings and grape
vines in the village of Al-Khader, near Bethlehem, and
the burning of olive trees in the village of Beitillu, near
Ramallah. Those acts of aggression take place with

21

S/PV.6847

impunity, as the Israeli Government seem unwilling to
hold the settlers accountable.
South Africa regrets that Israel has reneged on
its agreement to improve the living conditions of
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. We call on Israel
to improve their living conditions in order to end the
ensuing hunger strike. Palestinian prisoners have long
lived in appalling conditions in Israeli jails, and the
international community has not done much about their
plight. It is time that meaningful pressure be brought to
bear on the Israeli Government to fulfil its obligations
under international human rights and humanitarian
law with regard to all Palestinian political prisoners by
ensuring their safety, allowing access to them by family
members, and respecting their basic human rights.
The efforts of Egypt to reconcile the Palestinian
parties are indeed commendable. We encourage
the Palestinian parties to forge ahead with their
reconciliation efforts in order to consolidate the
Palestinian gains and to become a formidable and
coherent political force that will robustly advocate for
the permanent liberation of the people of Palestine.
South Africa supports Palestine’s bid for United
Nations membership and the announcement in the
General Assembly a week ago by President Abbas of
his intention to seek non-member State observer status.
We call on the international community to provide
support to a permanent and sustainable political
solution, namely, the implementation of a two-State
solution providing for the establishment of a viable
Palestinian State, existing side by side in peace with
Israel within internationally recognized borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
South Africa is concerned, however, about the
critical financial challenges that the Palestinian
Authority faces. Those challenges have the potential
to reverse the gains made by Palestine in its
institution-building project and to render the country
unstable as service delivery declines. In that regard, we
call on Israel to urgently lift all restrictions to allow for
the development of the private sector, trade and other
economic activities that could stimulate economic
growth and address the Palestinian Authority’s fiscal
sustainability in the short to medium term.
On the situation in Syria, South Africa remains
concerned about the ongoing violence in the country
and pledges its support to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the

22

League of Arab States to Syria. We call on all parties to
stop the violence that continues to claim civilian lives,
including those of women and children, and has led to
a sharp deterioration in Syria’s relations with some of
its neighbours.
In conclusion, South Africa calls on the international
community, including the Security Council, to abandon
the business-as-usual attitude and to design new
intervention strategies regarding the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis. We have waited too long; the time for further
delays and double standards is a luxury that neither the
international community nor the people of Palestine
can afford. We need to act decisively and to do so now.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Allow me to thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his insightful
briefing.
Last month, the Council met for a high-level
debate on peace and security in the Middle East. The
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and of the
League of Arab States both called for a fresh and
united approach by the international community to
a changing Middle East. In that spirit, we adopted a
presidential statement encouraging closer cooperation
between the United Nations and the Arab League
(S/PRST/2012/20) — a joint commitment that must now
be brought to life.
Above all else, we must together address two
pressing issues: the crisis in Syria and the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
Let me start with a few points on Syria. With the
shelling of Akçakale, Turkey last week, the crisis there
has reached yet another nadir. That was not the first
time that Damascus has taken violence beyond its
borders. But this time, the bombs not only killed an
innocent Turkish woman and her four children, but they
also violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
our NATO partner. The Security Council unequivocally
condemned the shelling in the strongest terms. Despite
all divisions, the Council has sent a clear message that
it will not tolerate Damascus threatening regional peace
and security. We continue to hope that the Council will
also soon find unity in supporting a political transition
process to a new post-Al-Assad Syria.
Let me be clear. No matter how many letters the
Syrian delegation sends to the Security Council, and
no matter how much Damascus portrays itself as the
innocent victim of external aggression and terrorism,
its deadly action on the ground speaks for itself. We
12-54722

S/PV.6847

also encourage the opposition in Syria and beyond to
work towards a unified political platform.

We therefore call on all donors to come through on
their commitments of support. For its part, Germany
will continue its significant level of assistance to the
Palestinian Authority.

On Friday, the Council met with the independent
international commission of inquiry the Syrian Arab
Republic. Its findings show a clear pattern of gross
and systematic human rights violations committed
by the Syrian authorities and orchestrated at the
highest level. Abuses are also being committed by the
anti-Government groups, although not comparably in
scale and organization. It is my Government’s firm
conviction that accountability for such grave violations
of human rights has to be ensured. The findings of
the commission will provide a solid basis, including
possible action by the International Criminal Court.

Beyond that immediate need, however, the
financial crisis can only be overcome through economic
development. Such development will not be possible
without a political perspective. Above all, Palestinians
must be able to move freely on their land and have
access to Area C. We need to see increased control
by the Palestinian authorities over those areas, in line
with the Oslo Agreements and the road map. We call on
Israel to work with the Palestinian Authority towards
realizing that objective.

The Syrian people deserve our support. The crisis
of internally displaced persons and refugee will worsen
with the winter approaching, putting further strain on
neighbouring countries. We welcome the efforts of
the relevant United Nations agencies in neighbouring
States in providing support to Syrian families in need.
Germany will continue to be a reliable partner in
providing humanitarian aid to alleviate the suffering.

During the general debate of the General Assembly
this year, both Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Abbas reaffirmed their support for a two-State solution
and their willingness to reach it through negotiations
(see A/67/PV.12). Negotiations are the only way to get
the process back on track. We strongly encourage the
Middle East Quartet to expand its efforts to frame and
support the process.

These days, the Middle East process makes fewer
headlines than most other events in the region. That is
because the process is stalled, not because it is in any
way less urgent. On the contrary, with every day that
goes by, the concerns over the viability of a two-State
solution become more acute. Mr. Feltman highlighted
that in clear words in his briefing. The security and
stability risks posed by the status quo should instil in
everybody a sense of urgency.

We strongly believe that progress on the Middle East
peace process would contribute to regional stability and
offer new opportunities for the region as a whole. Ten
years ago, the League of Arab States showed foresight
and courage in adopting the Arab Peace Initiative. In
this time of transformation in the region, Israelis and
Palestinians must now prove their will to shape their
national destinies.

Since the beginning of this month, dozens of rockets
have been launched from Gaza against residential areas
of southern Israel. Those are terror attacks which we
condemn in the strongest terms. At the same time,
we urge Israel to exercise its self-defence with utmost
restraint.
On 20 October, Palestinians in the West Bank,
except for East Jerusalem, will vote in local elections.
That will be another step towards the consolidation
of good governance and democracy in the future
Palestinian State. Under current conditions however,
the Palestinian authority has no resources to pay
salaries or services for the rest of the year.
What is at stake here is more than a mere budget
problem. The very achievements of a successful
State-building process under the leadership of
President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad are at risk.
12-54722

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his very comprehensive and sobering briefing, as well
as the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.
Portugal naturally aligns itself with the contents of
the statement to be delivered later by the Observer of
the European Union.
Let me first address Syria. As the conflict continues
to spiral out of control at an intensified pace, so does the
enormous human cost it entails. Last Friday, at an Arria
Formula meeting, Security Council members heard a
chilling account from the Independent Commission of
Inquiry of the horrific human tragedy that is taking place
in Syria. The death toll rises every day, and an already
dire humanitarian situation is worsening continuously.
Sectarian tensions are increasing dramatically and
threatening the fabric of the country. Widespread and
23

S/PV.6847

systematic gross violations of human rights proceed
unabated and with total impunity.
Let me once again reiterate that this situation is
totally unacceptable and that all violations of human
rights, war crimes and crimes against humanity must be
investigated and that their perpetrators will be brought
to justice.
The shelling by the Syrian armed forces of Turkish
territory has once again demonstrated the serious threats
the Syrian crisis poses to regional peace and security.
Portugal has condemned those actions in unequivocal
terms. Such violations of international law, which
furthermore victimize innocent civilians, are simply
unacceptable. They must cease immediately, and the
Syrian Government must fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all its neighbours, who
already bear the brunt of assisting many thousands of
Syrian refugees.
As I have often stated in the Chamber, there is
no alternative to a political solution in Syria. Further
militarization would lead to no end, except to yet more
human suffering. Even if one side were to eventually
vanquish the other, long-lasting peace in Syria will only
thrive if based on a political agreement that gathers
support from all segments of Syrian society. The intent
to pursue a military option will only deepen sectarian
rifts, radicalize positions and threaten the unity
and territorial integrity of Syria, while eroding the
conditions of sustainable peace and regional stability.
The violence must stop if the necessary political
space for a genuine inclusive and representative
political tradition that meets the legitimate aspirations
of all Syrian regardless of their affiliation religion or
belief is to be created. As we have often repeated, we
stand firmly behind the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and League of
Arab States. Portugal once again calls on the parties
to view the appointment of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as an
opportunity for them to rethink their options, end the
violence and engage seriously in a peaceful political
resolution to the conflict.
But if the Joint Special Representative is to succeed,
the Council has to exert united, sustained and effective
pressure on all sides, and on the Syrian authorities in
particular, in the light of their primary responsibilities,
and place itself at a centre of efficient, sustainable and
legitimate action by the international community.

24

As we continue to strive to bring an end to
the bloodshed in Syria and support the democratic
transitions under way in the Arab world, we must not
lose sight of the Palestinian question, as my German
colleague just resolved — an issue that remains the core
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Indeed, no comprehensive
and enduring regional peace in the Middle East will
be possible as long as Palestinians are deprived
of their freedom and sovereign State. That is both
their inalienable right and a matter of justice for the
Palestinian people.
Nevertheless, it seems that the two-State solution,
which had become the stated objective of the parties
themselves, not the international community, is
drifting ever further away. Indeed, Israel’s illegal
and intensified settlement activities are eroding the
territorial basis of such an objective — the very land on
which a contiguous and viable independent Palestinian
State is expected to emerge.
Moreover, settlements and unpunished settler
violence, which has spared not even religious sites or
places of worship, evictions of Palestinians from their
homes, the demolition of their property and destruction
of their livelihoods, as we heard from Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman, are not only condemnable, but are also
exacerbating tensions and undermining confidence in
a peaceful process and solution, as well as weakening
moderate voices.
The Security Council cannot continue to shy away
from its responsibilities in this context and remain
impassive while the prospects for a Palestinian State
living in peace and security with Israel are rapidly
withering away and long-adopted Security Council
resolutions continue to be systematically ignored.
The Council must urgently renew efforts with a
view to the swift resumption of meaningful direct talks
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the road map and the agreements
previously reached by the parties. Such talks need
to be completed within a reliable time frame, as the
Palestinian people need a political horizon for the
establishment of their State.
Palestinian achievements in preparing for statehood
are also today at risk due to the Palestinian Authority’s
fiscal crisis and the insufficient easing of Israeli
restrictions. Portugal welcomes the positive steps Israel
has taken in that regard, which have been alluded to

12-54722

S/PV.6847

this morning, but more must be done, as others have
already underlined today.
In the most immediate term, our priorities
should be to ensure that the achievements, for which
the Palestinians have so diligently worked, are not
reversed. I can assure the Israeli Ambassador that
Portuguese taxpayers will carry on, in the framework
of the European Union, to do their share.
However, we cannot ignore that the problem
remains a political one — a continued occupation that
curtails the development of a sustainable Palestinian
economy, thus forcing Palestinians to be donordependent. Palestinians must be able to explore their
resources, including in Area C, without which there can
be no viable Palestinian State.
Portugal fully understands and supports Israel’s
legitimate security concerns and recognizes its right to
self-defence, consistent with international law. We once
again vehemently condemn the rocket attacks from
Gaza, which must stop immediately.
The security of Israel remains a key aspect of any
sustainable peaceful settlement. This is a matter to which
we must all — Palestinians, Israelis, their neighbhours
and the international community — seriously commit
in the framework of a comprehensive settlement.
There is only one way to fully ensure Israel’s longterm security, and that is by ending the occupation,
settling all core issues and claims between the parties,
and fully normalizing diplomatic, political and
economic relations between Israel and the Arab and
Muslim world, as foreseen in the Arab Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, the Middle East is living in a
time of change and uncertainty, of opportunity but
also of danger. Israelis and Palestinians must seize
the opportunity to engage diligently and truthfully
with each other in order to bring about a sustainable
and comprehensive peace in the region. There is no
alternative to a political solution, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman rightly underlined.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Since this is the first time I
am taking the floor in the Security Council, I convey
my warm greetings to you, Sir, and the other Permanent
Representatives in the Council. I look forward to
working closely with all of you. It is a privilege for
Pakistan and for me to be part of this eminent body of
diplomats and statesmen, who focus all the time on the
pressing issues of peace and security.

12-54722

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his useful briefing.
We align ourselves with the two statements to
be delivered later by the Permanent Representatives
of Iran and Kazakhstan, respectively, on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
The debate here today, along with the attention to
the issue of Palestine in the General Assembly, shows
that the discourse on Palestine is not completely frozen.
The Council itself, at its high-level meeting last month
(S/PV.6841), heard world leaders speak about the
compelling reasons to address the Palestinian issue. Yet
there has been no movement towards resumption of the
suspended peace process. In the meantime, the human
rights and humanitarian situation of Palestinians living
under occupation continues to deteriorate.
The Quartet’s inability to meet on the sidelines of
the General Assembly has been seen as a setback. The
global consensus on the goal of the two-State solution
reflects the wisdom and maturity of the international
community. But that goal remains elusive and empty
without constant engagement and practical steps
towards its achievement. Pakistan supports the rights of
the Palestinian people and an independent Palestinian
State and favours the admission of Palestine as a full
member of the United Nations. In the interim, we
endorse the Palestinian Authority’s initiative to achieve
non-member State observer status. We respect the
Authority’s decision about the exact timing of that
initiative.
The Secretary-General’s report pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 66/17 states that there has been little
progress in the past year. That is disappointing. He is of
the view that the current impasse in the peace process is
undermining the viability of a two-State solution. The
Secretary-General expresses his concern that “we are
increasingly moving away from a two-State solution
into a one-State reality” (S/2012/701, para.50). The
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People reached a similar conclusion in
its annual report (A/66/35), which stated that the status
quo may usher in a one-State reality with unpredictable
consequences. Nobody wants such a drift or such an
outcome. There is evidence that the illegal Israeli
settlement policy has remained the biggest roadblock to
the resumption of the Middle East peace process.

25

S/PV.6847

The United Nations country team in Gaza presents,
in its latest report, an extremely bleak picture. The illegal
blockade of the territory and the collective punishment
being meted out to the population of Gaza must cease.
Recent intensification of the military bombardment of
the Gaza Strip threatens to destabilize the situation
further. The lack of political perspective for Palestinian
youth and the continuing settler attacks on Muslim and
Christian Holy sites are fuelling violence. The Security
Council must take note of that growing threat.
On a broader plane, the Security Council must
ensure and monitor implementation of resolution
1860 (2009) and its other resolutions on the subject. As
we have said before, the Secretariat should provide the
Council with a matrix of the implementation status of
the resolutions adopted by the Council on the question
of Palestine.
The State-building efforts of the Palestinian
Authority have been widely applauded. The SecretaryGeneral has said that the steps taken by Palestinian
Authority to build robust State institutions and
revive the economy have brought security and
economic improvements. The admission of Palestine
into UNESCO as a member last year is yet another
recognition of the success of those efforts.
Core issues and questions must be addressed for
a lasting peace. We call for a solution of the question
of Palestine in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Madrid terms of reference and the Quartet road map.
The resolution of the final status issues should lead to
the establishment of an independent and viable State
of Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Pakistan has been a
consistent supporter of the Palestinian cause for more
than six decades. We support lasting peace for all in the
Middle East. Israel should withdraw from all occupied
lands, including those of Lebanon and the Syrian Golan.
Despite other important developments in the
region, the Palestinian issue must retain its primacy. It
should not be allowed to be eclipsed or sidelined. The
Secretary-General has said that peace and Palestinian
statehood are long overdue. To achieve those overriding
objectives, the following steps ought to be taken
with a high sense of urgency. First, the international
community, led by the Quartet, should re-engage and
refocus on the Palestinian issue. Secondly, direct and
meaningful negotiations should resume. Thirdly, the

26

cycle of violence should be stopped. Fourthly, efforts
should be intensified to stem and address the grave
humanitarian situations in Gaza, East Jerusalem and
the West Bank. Fifthly, the Security Council may
re-energize itself with a view to maintaining peace and
security in that sensitive region. Such a path starts with
monitoring the implementation of its own resolutions.
The crisis in Syria continues to be a matter of
serious concern to the international community and the
Council. An early, peaceful solution to the situation in
Syria, with full respect for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, is in the best interests of the people of Syria
and of peace and stability in the region. We support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and Joint Special
Representative Lakhdar Brahimi. The first priority is
to bring about an immediate ceasefire and to create an
environment amenable to promoting diplomatic efforts.
We call on all sides in Syria and all external stakeholders
to extend their full and genuine cooperation to the
Special Representative. Violence should not spin out
of control. Conflict should not expand. And, above all,
diplomacy must prevail.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing on the situation in the Middle
East and the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.
I will first address the situation in Syria and its
consequences for international peace and security, and
then I will turn to the urgency of relaunching the peace
process. First, on the subject of Syria, three months ago
in this Chamber I denounced the victimization of 19,000
civilians in the Syrian crisis. Now the tragic death toll
is over 30,000. Syria is descending into civil war, with
the situation exacerbated daily by the Syrian regime’s
policy of systematically violating human rights and
flouting their humanitarian obligations. Last week,
the Syrian regime once again rejected the SecretaryGeneral and Joint Special Representative’s call for a
unilateral ceasefire. On the contrary, the use of heavy
weaponry by the regime has only increased since July,
along with the systematic use of air assets and increased
indiscriminate bombardment of the civilian population
in Aleppo and Homs and on the outskirts of Damascus.
France reiterates that those responsible for the most
serious crimes, in particular crimes against humanity,
must be held accountable for their actions before the
International Criminal Court.

12-54722

S/PV.6847

The Syrian crisis threatens the security and stability
of the region. The Council reiterated on 5 October that
the Syrian authorities have an obligation to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring
States. We unreservedly condemn the Syrian military
firing on Turkish territory and their incursions into
and bombardments of Lebanese territory. The Council
demanded at that time that the Syrian regime put an
immediate end to its violations of international law.
Likewise, in the Golan, the violations of the areas of
limitation must come to an end.
In that context, we welcome the restraint shown
by Syria’s neighbouring countries and their generosity
in receiving their Syrian brothers. France would
like to express its solidarity with its ally Turkey. We
also welcome the responsible attitude shown by the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the entirety of the political
class, who have shown their desire to preserve stability
in Lebanon. We will not tolerate a return to political
assassinations, which would undermine the stability
there. We encourage all political actors in Lebanon to
continue to invest in the process of national dialogue
relaunched by President Sleiman.
Syria and the region must prioritize a political
transition that reflects the aspirations of the Syrian
people, in particular their demand to be led by a leader
who does not have the blood of the people on his hands.
France supports Mr. Brahimi’s efforts to move towards
that transition and calls on the other members of the
Security Council to give the Joint Special Representative
the tools he needs to succeed despite the intransigence
of Damascus.
France is working to encourage that process. We
support the opposition forces’ efforts to unite and
prepare for the transition. At the local level, the support
that we provide to the civilian revolutionary councils, in
particular the liberated areas, will enable those councils
to lay the foundation for local civilian governance and
to respond to the daily needs of the civilian population.
At the national level, the President of France made a
commitment before the General Assembly to recognize
a provisional Government that is representative of the
new Syria as soon as it is formed. He also recalled that
that process will require that guarantees to be made to
the various Syrian communities so that their security
can be ensured.
There is also an urgent need for an international
humanitarian response that is up to the task of meeting
the needs of those suffering in Syria and that can
12-54722

match the generosity of Syria’s neighbouring countries.
International donors should mobilize to extend the
funds called for by the United Nations, as winter
threatens the most vulnerable civilians. Full access to
all humanitarian actors must be agreed to by the Syrian
authorities. It is particularly intolerable that medical
infrastructure and personnel have been targeted and
that the wounded are denied access to care because they
are from combat zones.
I would now like to mention the Middle East peace
process. The tragic situation in Syria should not cause
us to forget the current impasse in the peace process. A
year after the Quartet reiterated the basis for a process
that should produce, by the end of 2012, a final agreement
and the creation of a Palestinian State, side by side with
Israel, we are further than ever from that goal. Two
months from the deadline, it is the two-State solution
itself that is threatened. Continued settlement policies
by Israel in violation of international law weaken every
day the physical viability of a future Palestinian State
that is contiguous. They also threaten the political
viability of such an entity. Each new settlement makes
it more difficult to establish the climate of trust that is
necessary for the return to dialogue. They also threaten
its economic viability, as the structural restraints on the
Palestinian economy, in particular in Area C, are the
result of the settlement policy.
In that context, the Palestinian Authority fi nds itself
threatened both financially and politically. The reforms
that have prepared the way for a functioning State in
Palestine are being undermined by an unprecedented
financial crisis. Europe alone has maintained its
financial support for the Palestinian Authority.
France has just provided €10 million in additional
budgetary support, but we cannot shoulder alone the
responsibilities of the international community. While
the recent facilitations agreed to by Israel, in particular
regarding tax collection, are welcome, they do not
reflect the structural needs of the Palestinian Authority.
Undermining those who advocate peace, as we
find happening today, opens the door to those who
advocate violence. We condemn without reservation
the indiscriminate firing of rockets from Gaza into
Israel, but we also condemn the violence committed by
the settlers against the Palestinian people and the holy
sites on an ongoing basis.
It has taken this long for all of the actors to recognize
the two-State solution. The international community
cannot remain indifferent to the ongoing undermining
27

S/PV.6847

of that process on the ground. We must act, but how? The
solution is well known, but it must be implemented. We
must first define, based on United Nations resolutions
and previous negotiations, a framework of parameters
that allows for credible negotiations between the parties.
Europe has already made its contribution in that regard.
On that basis, the parties should be brought to make the
necessary compromises with the needed support of the
international community.
We must react, but when? We cannot wait any
longer. The situation I have outlined does not allow us
to. It also requires a clear timetable along with those
parameters.
Who should react? The Quartet has failed. We must
revisit the use of the Security Council, which remains
the natural forum for bringing together the efforts of
the international community that are necessary, given
the scope of the task.
To conclude, I should like to return to the words
of President Abbas to the General Assembly. This is
perhaps our last chance, he said. Yes, it is perhaps our
last chance to implement the two-State solution. It
is perhaps also our last chance to change the bloody
trajectory on which the Syrian authorities are dragging
their people and the region. In both cases, it would be
irresponsible to not seize this last opportunity, and the
Council should contribute to those efforts.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend my thanks to
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his comprehensive briefing
on the developments in the Middle East, including
Palestine. I am also pleased to welcome my colleague
and friend, Ambassador Masood Khan, the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan, to the Council and to wish
him every success.
While the world is attentively following the changes
in the Arab region, which is at a crucial stage that is
paving the way for the construction of democratic
societies in which citizens will enjoy decent lives
and freedom, the peace process in the Middle East is
in an unprecedented and dangerous stalemate. That
constitutes a serious threat and is of concern to us all.
In the midst of those changes and events, the
Palestinian territories are still being subjected to
intensive and expanded settlement activities designed
to destroy the geographical unity of the West Bank
and annex additional land, which will undermine the

28

two-State vision. Al-Quds continues to be the target of
numerous practices and procedures aimed at diluting
its Arab identity and preventing it from being a city of
tolerance and coexistence among religions and peoples.
We followed with concern the recurrent attacks
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, by
settlers under the protection of the Israeli police, who
attacked unarmed worshipers who were defending the
mosque against the attacks. The attacks against those
holy sites constitute for all Muslims new and dangerous
acts of provocation that could, in combination with the
continuing and systematic attempts to Judaize occupied
East Jerusalem and obliterate its spiritual and cultural
character, give rise to a very volatile situation.
Israel’s unceasing attempts to change the
religious, cultural, demographic and architectural
characteristics of the old city include the destruction
of Bab al-Maghariba, the scaling up of archaeological
excavations under and around the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and
the desecration of holy sites. I would like here to recall
the statement made by His Royal Highness the Chair of
the Al-Quds Committee before the General Assembly:
“The Kingdom of Morocco looks forward to seeing
the international community reconsider its methods
of intervention and its modus operandi so as to halt
the Judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif”.
All peace initiatives and terms of reference, in
particular the decisions and resolutions of the United
Nations, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet road map and the Madrid principles, have
acknowledged the legitimate right of the Palestinians
to an independent State, within the borders of 4 June
1967, living side by side with Israel.
In response to international appeals, the Palestinian
side has made many concessions to demonstrate its
resolve to achieve peace through negotiations. However,
those concessions have not sufficed to induce Israel to
reciprocate with a view to ensuring the success of peace
efforts. On the contrary, the flexibility of the Palestinian
side has been met only with Israel’s intransigence and
its continuous blockade of Gaza, using all international
and regional attempts to strengthen the occupation so
as to make a final, internationally agreed resolution
impossible.
The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the fact
that the Palestinian side has opted for negotiations
and for achieving peace on the basis of international

12-54722

S/PV.6847

legitimacy and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. We reiterate once again our support for the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to establish
its independent State, with Al-Quds as its capital — a
State that is recognized by the international community
and contributes, along with other Member States, to the
achievement of the goals of our Organization.

and the indiscriminate destruction of homes and
places of worship and to pave the way for inclusive
and comprehensive political dialogue, with a view to
ensuring the State’s independence, unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity and building a democratic
society that respects all the rights and freedoms of the
Syrian people.

We commend the Palestinian side for its strong
spirit of responsibility in continuing negotiations with
interested international parties aimed at discussing the
form of the Palestinian request that is to be submitted
to the General Assembly to enable it to gain full
membership in this international Organization.

Future generations, and history, will not judge us
on the basis of rhetoric or even good-faith efforts, but,
rather, on the basis of actions that reflect a genuine
desire to conduct constructive negotiations and take
courageous decisions, particularly in terms of putting
an end to settlement activities and occupation by Israel,
with a view to achieving a just and comprehensive
peace.

The policy of blockade imposed by the occupying
authorities on Gaza since 2006 has led to untold
suffering, as witnessed by international governmental
and non-governmental organizations. We would warn
that an escalating humanitarian crisis of unprecedented
proportions is developing in the Gaza Strip and that
the Council and all influential and powerful States
must work to ensure the lifting of that inhuman and
unjust blockade. Despite the innumerable decisions,
resolutions and stances taken by the Council, the
Quartet and the General Assembly and its Committees,
the Israeli occupation continues, as does the suffering
of the Palestinian people and the inability of the
international community to find a feasible solution that
is achievable, ready and documented.
We are not alone in our conviction that there is not
much time left before the two-State solution becomes
inapplicable or impossible, given Israeli policies on
the ground. It is necessary, in the coming few months,
to accelerate the revitalization of the peace process,
bring pressure to bear on Israel to cease its settlement
activities, remove all obstacles and end all practices that
stand in the way of negotiations, contribute to helping
the Palestinians achieve a viable and independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and ensuring the
restoration of the Lebanese and Syrian territory.
Failure to resolve the question of Palestine will fuel
prolong the Arab-Israeli conflict and fuel tension and
violence in the region, which is witnessing a crisis to
which Syrians of all constituencies have fallen victim
in the past two years; neighbouring States are suffering
as well. We look to the Joint Special Representative,
Mr. Brahimi, to convince the parties in Syria to stop
the violence, even temporarily, with a view to creating
circumstances conducive to ending the infighting

12-54722

We sincerely hope that the coming weeks will bring
a glimmer of hope for the Palestinians that their tragedy
is coming to an end and that they are on the road to
peace, which will enable them to realize their dream –
and ours – of achieving a safe, cooperative and peaceful
Middle East.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Many thanks to
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing,
and I join others in welcoming the new Permanent
Representative of Pakistan.
The bloodshed in Syria has now entered its twentieth
month. The facts and figures cited by other Council
members on the human cost of the conflict have sadly
become all too familiar. In July, we again warned about
the consequences of continued inaction by the Council
(see S/PV.6816). We said that if the Council did not act,
there would be further violence and bloodshed and that
the deteriorating situation would spill over the borders,
drawing in the region and clearly posing a threat to
international peace and security.
That, of course, is exactly what we are now seeing.
In particular among recent developments, we strongly
condemn the Syrian shelling across the border into
Turkey. The Security Council press statement of
4 October responding to that outrage (SC/10783) was
welcome, but that alone, of course, has not stopped
the activity, and is unlikely to stop the regime from
pursuing its murderous path.
We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
impact of the conflict. As winter approaches, there
is an urgent need for suitable shelter, fuel and warm
blankets. We, the United Kingdom, are doing what we

29

S/PV.6847

can to address that. The United Kingdom is the second
largest bilateral donor to the international humanitarian
response, to date providing $60 million for food,
medical care, shelter and other essential support to the
tens of thousands of people affected by the fighting in
Syria and the refugees in Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey and
Iraq. I echo Under-Secretary-General Feltman’s appeal
to Member States to contribute to the humanitarian
assistance.

In the meantime, it is notable that, in August, the
General Assembly overwhelmingly voted in favour
of a resolution that deplored the Security Council’s
failure to agree on measures to ensure the compliance
of the Syrian authorities with its decisions. Resolution
66/253 B called on all Syrian parties to rapidly
implement the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and encouraged Member States to support that
implementation.

However, the overwhelming priority remains an
end to the violence and full and unhindered access for
humanitarian agencies so that civilians can escape the
fighting and aid can get through to save lives in the
worst affected areas. United Kingdom aid is making a
difference and is helping to save lives, but we should
be under no illusion about the difficulties involved in
delivering such assistance. Civilians have been targeted
and killed. Medical workers have been attacked and
blocked from helping those in need.

As our Foreign Secretary, William Hague, has said
in a statement today, it is utterly unacceptable that the
regime continues to attack its own people with brutality
and without remorse. No country should shut its eyes
to the horrors that we are witnessing. History and the
Syrian people will judge it harshly if it does.

There is evidence of atrocities committed by both
the Government and the opposition in violation of
international law but, as the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
makes clear in its report (A/HRC/19/69), the greater
responsibility clearly lies with the regime. We urge all
parties to comply with their obligations and to protect
civilians from the scourge of conflict.
We should of course continue to work to assist
those affected by the conflict. However, the Council
has a moral imperative to work to address the causes of
the conflict. We are all fully committed to supporting
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, in his work towards a political settlement and
a political transition.
As the Council, we have achieved a great deal over
the past year on issues concerning Somalia, Yemen
and the Sudan and South Sudan but, in each case, the
Council was united in making clear that there would
be serious consequences if one or other of the parties
failed to meet its commitments. We need to apply that
lesson to Syria. The brutal regime has been impervious
to the repeated efforts of international actors, including
some around this table, to persuade it to follow the
route of dialogue. It has ignored its obligations to cease
violence under the six-point plan pursuant to resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). Instead, the violence has
escalated. The Council needs to apply the firm and
consistent pressure that has so far been lacking.
30

Grave as the situation in Syria is, we must not lose
our focus on the unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
whose resolution remains central to the stability of the
region. The frequency with which that issue was raised
during the general debate of the General Assembly last
month underlined its continued importance. Our shared
goal remains a negotiated two-State solution based on
the 1967 lines, a fair solution for refugees and security
arrangements that respect Palestinian sovereignty and
protect Israeli security and Jerusalem as a joint capital.
A negotiated end to the occupation remains the
best way to allow Palestinian aspirations to be met in
reality and on the ground. A demonstration of political
will and leadership is needed from both sides to break
the current impasse. We have urged both sides to focus
on dialogue, to avoid steps that could undermine the
prospects for peace and to work towards the resumption
of direct negotiations.
Israeli settlement activity remains the most serious
threat to the two-State solution. Settlements are illegal
under international law and undermine the very viability
of a two-State solution. Any step that entrenches the
presence of settlements in the West Bank risks sending
the message that Israel is not serious in its support for
a two-State solution. Like others, we also remain very
concerned about the increasing number of incidents of
settler violence and the fact that many such incidents
appear to go unpunished.
As Under-Secretary-General Feltman reported, last
month the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee on Assistance to
the Palestinians highlighted the Palestinian Authority’s
continued State-building efforts. However, it also
focused on the severe fiscal crisis that the Palestinian

12-54722

S/PV.6847

Authority is now facing. The Palestinian Authority
will continue to face regular and increasingly profound
crises unless its finances are put on a more sustainable
footing in the medium term. External factors severely
constrain the Palestinian Authority’s ability to help
the private sector to develop, to promote Palestinian
livelihoods and to address the fiscal gap.
The United Kingdom will continue to be one of
the principle supporters of Palestinian State-building
efforts, assisting it to tackle poverty, build institutions
and boost its economy. However, a shift in the freedom
of movement of goods and of people and in the
framework for doing business across the Palestinian
territories is also urgently needed.
With our European partners, we call upon Israel
to halt the demolition of Palestinian housing and
infrastructure in Area C of the West Bank and the
subsequent forced transfer of the population, as well
as to address humanitarian needs. We encourage Israel
to accelerate the approval of Palestinian master plans
and to simplify administrative procedures to obtain
building permits for Area C. Without Palestinian
control over that land, including planning, building and
security, the viability of a future Palestinian State, and
thus the two-State solution, is reduced.
We also remain concerned about the situation in
Gaza and continue to press the Israeli Government
to ease restrictions on movement and access. We will
never underestimate Israel’s security needs but, for any
sustainable peace deal, there must be an economically
viable Gaza.
Rocket attacks from Gaza must also stop. We
continue to urge all parties to exercise restraint and
to prevent civilian casualties and loss of life. The
escalation of violence earlier this month only served to
entrench the status quo.
The developments in the wider region underscore
the importance of achieving a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict that gives the Israeli people
peace and security and the Palestinian people the State
that they need and deserve. We will continue to urge
both sides to show the political leadership and courage
required to make progress towards that shared goal of a
two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity. I will limit my
remarks to two things. First, I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing. Secondly, I would like to announce that
12-54722

I have requested the Secretariat to distribute the text
of my statement in order to save some time. It is past
1 p.m. That is my small contribution to gaining a little
bit of time.
I shall now give the floor to four delegations under
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed variation when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me, at the outset,
to reiterate to the Council that my Government
remains committed to the letter of resolution 1701
(2006) and looks forward to its implementation in its
entirety. In that context, I would also like to say that
all Lebanese parties, whether in the Government or
the opposition, would like the Council to exercise its
leadership in urging Israel to abide by its obligations
under that resolution, that is, to bring a complete halt
to its violations of Lebanese sovereignty, whether on
land, sea or air, and to withdraw forthwith from any
Lebanese territory that it continues to occupy.
For almost two years now, hundreds of thousands
of young men and women across the entire Arab world
have been taking to the streets, seeking freedom,
dignity and good governance. That has laid waste to
the idea of Arab exceptionalism, a pseudo theory
advanced by some pundits to explain the so-called
Arab resistance to democratization, whether based on
the racist cliché that democracy is incompatible with
Islam or inimical to Arab culture, or on the erroneous
prejudice that Arabs are not yet ready for democracy
or hold democratic values in lower esteem than other
people. That pseudo theory of Arab exceptionalism has
been swept away by the winds of change that have been
blowing in our region.
Unfortunately, some other forms of exceptionalism
continue to survive in our part of the world. While
the day after tomorrow the Security Council will
be holding an open debate on strengthening the rule
of law in the maintenance of peace and security, it is
important to keep in mind that one country in our region
continues to challenge, with unquestioned impunity,
the principles and norms of international law, and to

31

S/PV.6847

ignore all resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
and the Council on the situation in the Middle East and
the question of Palestine.
As it happens, that exceptionalism is best illustrated
by the fact that Israel has failed to withdraw from the
Palestinian territories it occupied in 1967, as per its
legal obligations under resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). It also continues to build settlements in the
occupied territories, in violation of international law,
international humanitarian law, General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice (see A/ES-10/273).
Indeed, Israel’s annexation of Jerusalem, its extension
of the wall close to the Golan Heights and the erection
of the wall itself also constitute similar violations.
Similarly, the punitive blockade to which Gaza has been
subjected represents collective punishment in a form
that violates articles 33 and 55 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which govern the conduct of an occupying
Power in relation to a civilian population living under
occupation.
Moreover, since 1967, Israel, as an occupying
Power, has constantly and systematically violated its
basic duties under international humanitarian law. Such
violations have included the transfer of populations, the
annexation of land, collective punishment, the punitive
demolition of houses, the use of torture and political
assassinations. In addition, Israel has been charged with
grave violations of human rights and with a number
of war crimes in its conduct of military operations in
the occupied territories. Nonetheless, it continues to
behave as if it were above the law.
Has the time not come to put an end to such
exceptionalism and to hold Israel accountable for
its international obligations? That is not a rhetorical
question. Let me then repeat, has the time not come
to put an end to such exceptionalism and to hold Israel
accountable for its international obligations?
On 29 October, the Council will hold another open
debate on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. The Security Council is to be commended
for having adopted a landmark resolution — resolution
1265 (1999) — by which it expresses its willingness to
respond to situations of armed conflict where civilians
are being targeted or humanitarian assistance to
civilians is being deliberately obstructed. Since that
time, the Council has begun to mainstream an approach
based on the protection of civilians into its work, and
has enhanced the role of its peacekeeping operations
32

to that effect in various country-specific situations.
They include the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, Côte d’Ivoire, Chad, Haiti, Libya, Liberia and
the Sudan.
But when it comes to the Arab-Israeli conflict,
exceptionalism is king. The Security Council has
dramatically failed to respond in any tangible manner
to the offences it has voted to address, namely, the
targeting of civilians in armed conflict, particularly
Palestinian women and children, and the deliberate
obstruction of humanitarian assistance, let alone even
considering sanctions against the perpetrator — Israel,
the occupying Power. Need I recall here that resolution
1325 (2000) called on all parties to armed conflict
to fully respect international law applicable to the
rights and protection of women and girls, especially
as civilians? And yet, when it comes to Palestinian
women, the Council exhibits paralysis, and is unable to
take any concrete action to redress their dire situation.
Palestinian women are particularly vulnerable to
the immediate effects of the Israeli occupation. The
fact is that roadblocks, patrols, curfews, checkpoints
and the construction of the wall all have a negative
impact on the health, education and economic security
of Palestinians in general, and women in particular.
The restriction of movement created by such repressive
measures has seriously impeded their access to health
care, for example. People living in villages around East
Jerusalem need so-called permits to enable them to
reach hospitals. The Israeli human rights organization
B’Tselem documents how such requirements are
particularly problematic for pregnant women, who
need to get to hospital in time to give birth, and how
women have had to give birth at checkpoints because
of the Israeli permit regime, leading to numerous infant
deaths in the process.
Furthermore, according to a UN-Women publication
entitled Suspended Lives: Palestinian Female Prisoners
in Israeli Prisons, an estimated 10,000 Palestinian
women have been arrested and/or detained under Israeli
military orders since 1967. According to the Public
Committee against Torture in Israel, the interrogation
methods used by Israeli agents include
“beating; slapping; kicking; stepping on shackles;
bending the interrogee and placing her in other
painful positions; intentional tightening of shackles;
violent shaking; sleep deprivation; prolonged
shackling behind the back; cursing, humiliating
and threatening the detainee; depriving the detainee
12-54722

S/PV.6847

of essential needs; exposing her to extreme heat
or cold; isolation and secrecy; and imprisonment
under inhumane conditions”.
The Security Council is clearly failing to live up to
its responsibility to sustain the relevant legal provisions
applicable to the situation of Palestinian women; hence
the survival of yet another form of Israeli exceptionalism.
Unfortunately, the same can be said about the protection
of children’s rights. Need I further remind members that
this Council has recognized the paramount importance
of the protection of children in armed conflict, namely
through its adoption of resolution 1261 (1999), followed
by resolution 1612 (2005), in which the Security Council
established a monitoring and reporting mechanism for
grave violations committed against innocent girls and
boys? But Palestinian children have been deprived of
that elaborate protection system.
According to a recent UNICEF bulletin, of the total
amount of killings and injuries perpetrated against
Palestinian children, 84 per cent have been at the hands
of the Israeli security forces. That bulletin addresses the
illegal detention of children who are subjected to acts
“tantamount to torture by the Israeli army and police”
and who experienced being “hand-tied, blindfolded,
strip searched, verbally abused, subjected to physical
violence”. In that regard as well, the Council is failing
to live up to its responsibility to sustain the relevant
provisions applicable to the situation of Palestinian
children; hence the survival of yet another form of
Israeli exceptionalism. In that context, advocating that
international and humanitarian law has not applied to
Palestine since it is not a State only adds insult to injury.
The time for ending all forms of Israeli
exceptionalism is long overdue. The time for recognizing
the State of Palestine and granting it full membership
of our Organization is long overdue as well. An interim
step in that direction would be to secure non-member
State observer status for Palestine during this General
Assembly session.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes. I now give the floor to the representative
of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Arab Group, I would like to thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing today. The delegation of Egypt,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, would like to

12-54722

add its voice to the statements to be delivered by the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by
the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Since the two statements will reflect the
fundamentals of the Arab position with regard to the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, I shall briefly underline six points to be raised
by the Group of Arab States.
First, the Group of Arab States deplores the ongoing
Israeli violations against the Palestinian population
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the
blockade and recurrent aerial bombardments of
Gaza, the most recent of which took place yesterday.
We also deplore the extrajudicial killings and note
with concern the Israeli settlers’ violence, which has
reached unprecedented levels, and the desecration
with impunity of Christian and Muslim shrines in
the occupied territories, including written phrases
inciting hatred of Jesus and opposing churches in the
occupied lands, in addition to the storming of Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem this month by settlers and Israeli
security forces. All of that deserves special attention.
Undoubtedly, the recent Israeli threats to launch a full
military land operation against Gaza are additional
reminders of the intentions of the occupying Power.
The Arab Group calls for the Security Council to
take urgent measures before the situation deteriorates
irremediably.
Secondly, peace efforts in the region are passing
through one of the most difficult stages in years. That
is due to the absence of any clear political horizon for
the two-State solution. It is also due to the deliberate
manipulative procrastination of the Israeli Government,
which always uses insubstantial pretexts, such as
the forthcoming elections and the expected change
in Government, to avoid compliance with United
Nations resolutions, despite the fact that Security
Council resolutions and peace treaties are international
obligations. This is despite the fact that Security
Council resolutions, as well as the provisions of the
peace treaties, are internationally binding, irrespective
of Government changes or the holding of elections. The
Middle East peace process has become a rote process
dragging on for more than two decades without any real
achievement towards its main goal, which is peace.

33

S/PV.6847

Thirdly, the failure of the Quartet to meet at the
ministerial level during the high-level segment of
the General Assembly or even to issue a statement
expressing its position requires a re-evaluation by the
international community of the role of the Quartet and
whether it should remain the key international player
in the Middle East peace process or the question of
Palestine.
Fourthly, Israel continues to claim that it is
willing to consider incremental solutions that would
block any final solution during the various phases of
implementation. The international community has to
set the parameters of the peace process on the basis
of Security Council resolutions. The Group of Arab
States calls upon the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities to address the question of Palestine
in earnest. That question has always been the main
source of instability in the Middle East, threatening
international peace and security. The Arab Group
therefore calls upon the Security Council to adopt a
clear-cut resolution that indicates the parameters of the
final solution.
Fifthly, the Group of Arab States expresses its
full support for all the steps taken by the Palestinian
leadership to achieve the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. We call upon all Member States to
recognize the State of Palestine within the borders of
4 June 1967 and to support the Palestinian quest for
full membership of the United Nations. We expect the
General Assembly at least to adopt a resolution during
its current session to upgrade the status of Palestine
to that of a non-member observer State, as a first step
towards achieving full membership. Such a resolution
would confirm in practice that the United Nations
organs are applying the principles of justice without
politicization or double standards.
Sixthly, the Group of Arab States reiterates the
decisions taken by the Ministerial Council of the Arab
League with regard to the Syrian crisis, including its
recent decision of 5 September in Cairo. The Group
condemns the ongoing killings of brotherly civilians in
Syria over the past 18 months. Those responsible for the
atrocities have to be brought to international justice and
should be held accountable for their crimes.
On the other hand, the Group of Arab States stresses
the importance of focusing on the main topic of the
monthly briefings on the Middle East in the Security
Council which is the continued Israeli occupation of
Arab lands.
34

The current situation in Syria should not be used
as a pretext to turn a blind eye to the continued Israeli
occupation of the the Syrian Golan.
The Arab Group requests that all monthly briefings
to the Security Council by the Secretariat on the
situation in the Middle East include a clear reference to
the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan condemning
Israel’s continuous violation of resolution 497 (1981) and
confirming the applicability of The Hague Convention
of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 to
the occupation of the Syrian Golan since 1967. A similar
reference should also reaffirm the illegality of Israel’s
annexation and settlement activities and the application
of Israeli legislation in the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as reaffirm that Israel must fully withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of June 1967.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to reiterate Brazil’s satisfaction at seeing
Guatemala presiding over the work of the Security
Council.
(spoke in English)
In the interest of time, and heeding your appeal, Sir,
I am going to read out a short version of my statement.
The full text will be available in the Chamber.
Unfortunately, the situation in the region continues
to deteriorate since the Council last discussed the
Middle East in this open format, three months ago
(see S/PV.6816).
We are witnesses, on a daily basis, to the unfolding
crisis of the most serious consequences for the Syrian
people. The losses and injuries of Turkish nationals
added to the horrifying statistics of civilian casualties.
Brazil associates itself with the press statement by
the Security Council and condemns in the strongest
terms the shelling of the town of Akçakale. We also
express our heartfelt condolences to the families of
the victims and the Government of Turkey. As the
dangers of a regional spillover have become manifest,
Brazil calls for restraint. The escalation of the conflict
serves the interests of no one, in particular not those of
innocent civilians on both sides of the border.
Our sympathy and solidarity now also go to
those who have been victimized by heinous terrorist
attacks in Aleppo. As stated by the Council, such

12-54722

S/PV.6847

acts are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomever
committed.
Although the situation in Syria continues to defy
the best efforts of engaged actors, there is no alternative
but to deepen and strengthen diplomatic efforts towards
a political solution. We all know there is no military
solution to the conflict.
As stated by President Dilma Rousseff in the
general debate (see A/67/PV.6), diplomacy and dialogue
are not just our best option, they are the only option.
We reiterate our condemnation of all violence and our
firm call on the parties to lay down their weapons and
engage in the mediation efforts being undertaken by the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, who must be supported not
only in words but also — especially — in deeds.
We reaffirm our support for the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and reiterate that the
largest share of the responsibility for the violence we
have seen so far lies with the Syrian Government.
As we call for an immediate ceasefire and a
cessation of all violence, we recall the primary
responsibility of the Syrian authorities in committing
to the process. Armed opposition groups, especially
those that increasingly rely on foreign military and
logistical support, have only added to the scope of the
Syrian tragedy.
Our serious concerns regarding Syria do not allow
us to overlook the increasingly worrisome situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The peace process
remains at a dangerous stalemate.
Despite overwhelming international condemnation,
unabated Israeli settlement of the territories, including
East Jerusalem, is turning the prospect of a two-State
solution into an ever more elusive goal, in contravention
of consensus decisions by the Council.
The serious financial constraints now facing the
Palestinian Authority not only pose further threats
to stability but also reveal the clear limits of social,
economic and institutional development under Israeli
occupation.
Violence from elements in the Palestinian side must
also be rejected. Peace and a future of stability and
prosperity will not be served by shelling and other acts
of that kind. Negotiations are the way forward and the

12-54722

only way to ensure that the conflict, which has lasted
for much too long, will be overcome.
This body must not abdicate its primary
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. We reiterate our call on the Quartet, which,
unfortunately, has become inoperative, to establish
regular reporting procedures to the Council on its
activities. Peace in the Middle East concerns the whole
of the United Nations and cannot be outsourced.
Brazil is convinced that only a free and sovereign
Palestine will be able to meet Israel’s legitimate
security needs and fulfil our collective goals of peace
and political stability in the region. In that context, we
reiterate our support for the admission of Palestine as a
full Member of the United Nations. As an interim step,
we will be certain to extend our support to upgrading
the Palestinian status to that of an observer State.
As I address the Council, the Brazilian Minister
of Foreign Relations is paying a visit to the region. He
was in Israel on Saturday and Sunday and is currently
in Palestine. The message he conveys, as the leading
diplomat of a country where Jews and Arabs, Syrians
and Lebanese live together in harmony, is a message of
peace, based on respect for international law, through
dialogue and diplomacy.
Allow me some brief words on Lebanon. Brazil
commends the Lebanese Government and the political
leadership for their efforts to maintain stability in the
country despite regional turmoil.
Lebanon deserves our active support and
encouragement. In that regard, Brazil reaffirms its
intention to continue to participate in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon Maritime Task Force.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to welcome to the
Council the representative of Pakistan, who has just
been appointed as an Ambassador to the United Nations.
I would also like to associate myself with the statement
to be made by the Ambassador of the Islamic Repblic
of Iran, who will speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
More than 60 years have passed since Israel
occupied the Palestinian territories. That occupation
has caused more than 5 million Palestinian refugees,

35

S/PV.6847

who were chased from their land and had their houses
and property stolen from them. There are those who
want to control their present and their future. As I said,
there have been more than six decades of systematic
settlement activities and grave violations committed by
Israel on a huge scale, including violations of the human
rights of those who are living and those who have
passed away. Violations of our land, of international
humanitarian law and of every existing international
legal standard and code of ethical conduct have been
carried out in the occupied Arab territories.
For more than six decades, the Palestinian people
have awaited the opportunity to exercise their most basic
right, namely, the establishment of a free, independent
sovereign State on the land of their ancestors.
For more than six decades, Israel has defied
international legitimacy, arrogantly carrying out its
aggressive policies in order to impede any opportunity
for achieving peace in the region. That situation has
continued due to the direct assistance provided to it by
a number of powerful countries that can be found here
in the Council, as well as others, of course, outside of
the Council.
Despite all of that, some are still in an inquiring
mode, posing naive questions to the international
community in an attempt to determine the parameters
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the Palestinian
issue. Their naivety is quite similar to the attempts
during the Middle Ages to determine the gender of
angels.
My questions for the Council, therefore, are the
following. How many more decades will Arab lands
have to spend under Israeli occupation until some
States finally admit that there is a need for serious
action to end that reprehensible occupation? How
many more innocent Palestinian, Syrian, Lebanese
and other victims will have to die before those States
finally become convinced that this genuine tragedy
must come an end? How many more settlements in
occupied Arab lands will have to be built? How many
separation apartheid walls will have to be erected in our
occupied lands? And how many Islamic and Christian
holy sites will have to be desecrated before those
same States finally wake up and put an end to Israel’s
crimes? Were all the reports submitted after dozens
of investigative committees, fact-finding missions
and panels of wise men to the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations during the
36

decades-long Israeli occupation not enough to make the
world aware of the scale of the aggression and terror
wrought by Israel upon the States and peoples of the
region? More than 1,000 resolutions have been adopted
by the Organization and its specialized agencies calling
for an end to Israel’s occupation and condemning its
serious and systematic violations of human rights. Was
all that not sufficient to make those States feel some
unease about their provision of unlimited military,
economic and political support or to make them put an
end to their illegal assistance to Israel, enabling it to
continue its crimes against the occupied Arab lands?
All of those questions are levelled at those States that
back Israel and claim night and day that they wish to
see international law implemented and that they wish
to fight against terrorism and maintain the credibility
of the United Nations and the inviolability of human
rights.
During the meeting this morning, we have heard
a number of representatives of States backing Israel,
explaining to us their countries’ position concerning
human rights laws, international law and peace in our
region. Some of them did so to such an extent that they
simply seemed to forget the agenda item that we are
discussing here today.
The very bitter truth is that part of our land in the
Syrian Golan, which we hold dear to our hearts, has
been under occupation for 45 years now, despite the
fact that the Security Council adopted by majority vote
resolution 497 (1981), declaring Israel’s annexation of
the Syrian Golan, occupied in 1967, to be null and void
and without legal basis. The Security Council must live
up to its responsibility, embrace reality in a serious way
and implement resolution 497 (1981) and other relevant
resolutions it has adopted. We say that because not to
do so and to have failed to do so for decades simply
confirms the existence of selective and exceptional
interpretations among some members of the Council
when it comes to the implementation of resolutions
concerning Israel.
The representatives of the Secretariat are first
and foremost tasked with discharging their mandates
by informing the Council in a regular, updated,
transparent and fair way of violations committed by the
occupying Power, Israel, in the occupied Syrian Arab
Golan. We systematically provide information on such
violations to the Secretary-General, most recently when
we presented information to him on the kidnapping of
Syrian citizens from the Syrian side of the ceasefire

12-54722

S/PV.6847

line. In addition to that, Israel has conducted large-scale
aggressive and offensive military manoeuvres in the
Syrian Golan, similar to those that have taken place
against Syria before.
The Council has just heard a clear threat by the
representative of Israel that his country was preparing
actively for war in the region. Those who claim
hypocritically that they are concerned about the rights
of the Syrian people during these difficult times cannot
simply ignore that the Syrian people have a right to
recover their occupied lands. They cannot pass over in
silence the tragedy or the suffering of Syrians under the
Israeli occupation of the Golan. Those who claim that
they want to protect the Syrian people cannot pass over
in silence the ongoing construction of settlements in the
Syrian Golan or the erection of an apartheid wall to the
east of the occupied city of Majdal Shams.
Israel’s refusal to make maps of minefields available
to international organizations is inexcusable because
cluster munitions and mines that were laid by Israel
in the Golan have claimed 726 Syrian lives, including
those of 227 children. The last such death took place on
4 October, when two Syrian children, both under the
age of 10, died as a result of injuries resulting from the
explosion of a disused Israeli land mine in the Syrian
Golan.
It is quite astonishing to see those who seek security
and stability in the region simply disregard Israel’s
threat to regional and international peace and security
by fanning the flames of war against countries of the
region and its unbridled attempts to involve its allies
in that war. How can some States simply remain silent
in the light of Israel’s acquisition of nuclear weapons
and its decision to remain outside the framework of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons?
Aware that Israel continues to refuse to participate
in the international conference to be held next month
to rid the Middle East of all types of weapons of mass
destruction, we remind the Council that Syria continues
to back the creation of such a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
That support is a reflection of my country’s initiative
in 2003 — when we were members of the Security
Council — to free the region of all types of weapons of
mass destruction, first and foremost nuclear weapons.
As the Council knows, those who prevented that
initiative from succeeding are the very same countries
that today refer with such hypocrisy to the dangers of
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.

12-54722

Finally, I am forced again to warn against the
frenzied attempts of some delegations that back the
continuation of Israeli occupation of Arab lands to
weaken the well-known historic references of the
agenda item on the Middle East by introducing other
topics into the debate in order to move Security
Coucil deliberations away from the main objective for
which the item was created, namely, to put an end to
Israeli occupation of Arab land, pursuant to Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981). Based
on that, I am not going to respond to the false claims and
allegations levelled at my country by some delegations
during this meeting. I am not going to respond to the
undiplomatic language used, which is not appropriate
to use in this forum.
We must put an end to the implementation of
agendas that we have warned Arabs and non-Arabs
against and ensure that the Council does not get bogged
down in manoeuvres that will reduce to nought the
very essence of the the item under discussion. All of
this would only serve the designs of Israel and those
who protect it. We are aware that we have a great deal
that we could say to refute those allegations, levelled
by the same countries that have spared no effort to
intensify the Syrian crisis and to thwart any peaceful
resolution of it. In brazen violation of international law
and of the Charter of the United Nations, and through
the interference in Syrian domestic affairs, they have
attempted to kidnap the rights of the Syrian people, to
deprive them of their right to freely choose their future
and their political system, and to put an end to all
attempts at comprehensive national dialogue.
Flagrant foreign intervention in Syria’s internal
affairs prevents us from achieving national dialogue
and reconciliation, which would enable us to build a
Syria by all Syrians for all Syrians. Furthermore, the
same countries undermine my country’s sovereignty by
encouraging terrorism and by supplying and providing
all types of logistical, financial and political support
to armed groups in Syria by providing them with arms
and by recruiting terrorists, foreign terrorists, and
facilitating their transit to Syria.
The greatest paradox here is that the Security
Council has faced the situation in Mali in an appropriate
way — and we thank the Security Council for that. All
Council members agreed to confront the terrorism and
extremism that rage in northern Mali today. However,
some members of the Council have decided to deal with
the same kind of terrorism — I am referring to that in

37

S/PV.6847

Mali — in a very different way from that in my country,
Syria, which is introduced through neighbouring
countries. That is a policy of double standards. I urge
the members of the Council to ponder that.

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still a
number of speakers on my list for this meeting. I intend,
with the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m..
The meeting was suspended at 1.55 p.m.

38

12-54722
