116

General Assembly-Thirty-seeond Session

favour of developing island countries 161 and welcomes
the initiation of the measures specified therein;
2. W elcomes, in particular, the activities undertaken by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, including the establishment of a unit in
its secretariat devoted to the problems of the least developed, land-locked and island developing countries;
3. Also welcomes the progress achieved by the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization in
its implementation of the special technical assistance
programme for developing island countries;
4. Urges ali organizations in the United Nations
system to continue to identify and implement, within
their respective spheres of competence, appropriate
specific action in favour of developing island countries,
in accordance with the recommendations in resolution
98 (IV) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, in particular those concerning the
fields of transport and communications, trade and commercial policies, industrialization, tourism, the transfer
of technology, marine and submarine resources development, the flow of externa! resources, environment
protection and response to natural disasters;
5. Further urges the United Nations organizations
concemed, in particular the United Nations Development Programme and the regional commissions, to give
attention to programmes of regional and subregional
co-operation in respect of developing island countries;
6. Calls upon Governments, in particular those of
the developed countries, to take fully into account, in
their bilateral and regional development efforts and in
relevant negotiations towards the attainment of the objectives of the new intemational economic order, the
special problems of developing island countries;
7. Decides to keep under review all progress in the
implementation of the present resolution and requests
the Secretary-General to submit for the consideration
of the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
sectoral analysis of action undertaken in favour of developing island countries and proposals for further consideration, taking into account the consideration of this
question by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its fifth session.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/186.

Assistance to Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 32/ 413 of 28 November 1977
by which it deferred until its thirty-third session con~
sideration of the question of Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent,102
Aware of the special problems faced by Antigua,
Dominica, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent with regard to territorial size, geographical
location and limited economic resources as well as
the serious adverse effects on their econ01~ies of recent
world-wide economic and financia! problcms,
Mindful that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of their dcvelopment
objectives,
161 A/32/126 and Add.l.
162 See sect. X.B.6.

Recalling also its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and ali other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to these Territories and peoples,
N oting the action taken by the specialized agencies
and the organizations within the United Nations system, as well as the regional bodies, particularly the
Caribbean Community and Common Market, to provide
eeonomic, financia} and technical assistance to these
countries, as set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on progress in the implementation of specific
action in favour of developing island countries, 163
Recalling that the question of Antigua, Dominica,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent is
currently under consideration in the relevant and competent organs of the United Nations,
l. Stresses the urgency of rendering all necessary
assistance to the peoples of Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent in their
efforts to strengthen their national economies and calls
upan the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, in consultation with the
freely elected representatives of the peoples of those
Territories, to take adequate steps to establish and
finance an appropriate programme of development of
the Territories;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including in particular the United Nations Development Programme, international financia! institutions and aid
donors to intensify their assistanee within their respective spheres of competence to the peoples of those
Territories.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/187.

Deht prohlems of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Recalling its resolution 31/158 of 21 December
1976 on debt problems of developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 94 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 164
Noting that no substantive action has been taken in
pursuance of the resolutions noted above and that the
?rowing externa! debt of developing countries amountmg to nearly $200 billion, resulting from a decline in
their export earnings, increased import costs and inadequate concessional assistance, places a heavy burden
on their limitcd forcign cxchangc resourccs,
C:onc:erned that ~any developing countries are expenencmg extreme d1fficulties in scrvicing their externa]
dcbts ancl are unable to pursue or initiate important
16 :J

164

A/32/ l 26 and Add.1.

See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and D~velopm~nt, Fourth Session, vol. J, Report and
Annexes _(Umted Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.TI.D.10

and corngendum), part one, sect. A.
