United Nations

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4852

nd meeting
Wednesday, 29 October 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Negroponte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .

Mr. Cordeiro
Ms. Zaharieva
Mrs. Mahouve
Mr. Maquieira
Ms. Liu Jia
Mrs. D’Achon
Ms. Priess
Mr. Zoumanigui
Mrs. Arce de Jeannet
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Nikiforov
Ms. Jiménez
Mr. Atieh
Ms. Sagar

Agenda
Women and peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-58594 (E)

*0358594*

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: In order to optimize the use of
our time, I will not invite speakers individually to take
seats at the Council table. When a speaker is taking the
floor, the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker
on the list at the table.
I call on the representative of Italy.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour of
taking the floor on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The acceding countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland,
Slovakia and Slovenia and the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey declare that they align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes the opportunity to
highlight the importance of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). In discussions in the Council last year, the
European Union put forward a number of proposals to
make the resolution more operational: to revise
guidelines and operational procedures; to look into
organization and training; to provide gender officers to
field missions; and to mainstream gender into all peace
mandates, mission planning and staffing.
The deliberations of last October confirmed the
Council’s commitment to gender. I am pleased to
inform the Council that the European Union has
recently discussed a new initiative that builds on
resolution 1325 (2000) and that can serve as a basis for
setting up a road map for strengthening a gender
perspective in European Union conflict management.
Resolution 1325 (2000) represents one of the
most important milestones of gender mainstreaming at
the United Nations. Since October 2000, that important
tool has allowed all United Nations bodies and
agencies, through the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security, to work together on issues
related to women and peace and security. It has
provided the mandate for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and the Department of Political
Affairs to actively include gender issues on their
agendas. It has also encouraged Member States to do
the same in their work in the Security Council. Along
these lines the European Union, during the Athens
Forum on “Gender, Peace and Foreign Policy: the
European Union Perspective”, held in May 2003,
called on Member States to ensure, in a systematic

2

manner, that women in conflict and post-conflict
situations were fully empowered.
Peace is inextricably linked to equality between
women and men. The growing targeting of civilians,
particularly women and girls, exacerbates violations of
the human rights of women. As shown by the 2002
study on women, peace and security overseen by the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, women are not only victims
of armed conflict, they are also active agents and often
direct participants in conflict. Women also play an
active role in informal peace processes before, during,
and after conflicts, although they are frequently
excluded from formal peace processes, including
negotiations and the drafting of peace accords and
reconstruction plans.
Last year, on the second anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), the Secretary-General
presented a 21-point programme based on the findings
of the aforementioned study (see S/2002/1154), with a
view to ensuring the Security Council’s action towards
the full implementation of the resolution. On that
occasion, the European Union welcomed the systemwide implementation action plan developed by the
Inter-Agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security. The plan covered all areas pertaining to the
mandates of United Nations entities identified in the
resolution, including gender mainstreaming, training,
humanitarian assistance, post-conflict cooperation and
development, disarmament, gender-sensitive training,
protection of women and girls in armed conflict,
constitutional and political issues and reproductive
health.
The European Union believes that the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) can be
achieved only through an increased recognition of the
crucial role of women in all the cited areas. One of the
most important issues still remaining to be addressed
with regard to women and armed conflict is women’s
participation in conflict resolution and in the
negotiation of peace agreements at national and
international levels.
The European Union welcomes the creation last
spring of a gender focal point position in DPKO, which
it considers to be an important factor for
mainstreaming gender in peacekeeping operations. In
that respect, we would like to express our greatest

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

appreciation to Mr. Guéhenno, whom we heard this
morning, for his readiness to implement the relevant
Security Council recommendations. Our full support is
with him.

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
rehabilitation, reconstruction, repatriation, resettlement
and development programmes and the active and equal
participation of women in those processes.

The European Union also encourages the
Secretary-General to intensify efforts to appoint more
women as special representatives and envoys,
especially in matters related to peacekeeping, peacebuilding and preventive diplomacy. The strengthening
of the full participation of women in constitutional and
electoral processes in post-conflict countries is also of
utmost importance. The European Union believes that
the increased involvement of women in all those areas
would contribute to the achievement of the overall goal
of gender equality in relation to peace and security.
That goal is still, three years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), far from achieved. As the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly (General Assembly resolution
S-23/3) recognized, the lack of gender-awareness in
those areas presents serious obstacles for the countries
currently in a conflict or post-conflict situation.

The President: I call on the representative of
Australia.

In today’s conflicts, women and girls are more
and more often directly targeted, and rape and sexual
violence continue to be used as weapons of war.
Clearly, this differential impact on women and girls
calls for more effective responses from the
international community. Much more needs to be done
to make those involved in conflicts aware of relevant
international laws and to prosecute and punish those
who violate those laws. In that respect, the European
Union calls upon all States to ratify and implement the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
actively to cooperate with the Court, which has a vital
role in ensuring justice for all and in fighting impunity.
The European Union is also strongly committed
to the adoption of all international measures and
instruments, including the Palermo Protocol, aimed at
supporting the fight against trafficking of human
beings, in particular women and children, and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). The
European Union calls upon other States to do the same.
The European Union strongly believes that the
international community must continue to focus its
attention and advocacy on the situation of women in
conflicts throughout the world, to ensure the
incorporation of a gender perspective during

Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak today. It would be remiss
of me not to begin, Sir, without acknowledging your
personal commitment and energy in carrying this
debate forward. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno and Amy Smythe for their very
helpful presentations this morning. At the risk of
annoying the interpreters, I shall summarize my
prepared remarks to make them even briefer than they
were, in the interest of moving things along this
afternoon. But I cannot leave out the first paragraph,
which notes that this is the third anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and that we,
Australia, are proud to reaffirm our commitment to that
resolution.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was the first resolution
addressing gender issues to be passed by the Security
Council. A great deal has been accomplished since
then, but a great deal more needs to be done. Not least,
of course, because women and girls remain
overwhelmingly the main victims of armed conflict,
often victims in the most horrific of ways.
Women continue to be significantly underrepresented in peace-building, peacekeeping and postconflict reconciliation and reconstruction, despite the
acknowledgement by resolution 1325 (2000) of their
importance in those areas. So much still needs to be
done.
We have some very relevant experience in the
Pacific region which bears attention at the United
Nations and by Member States more generally. In
particular, we have built issues of the impact of conflict
on women and children into our peace, conflict and
development policy, which is now an integral part of
our aid policy.
We have had experience, in both the Solomon
Islands and Bougainville, of drawing particularly on
the contribution which women in both of those conflict
areas have been able to make. In particular it is the
case in the Solomon Islands and Bougainville that

3

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

women have made a more than equal contribution
toward the achievement of peace.

The President: I call on the representative of
South Africa.

I am pleased to note that we have a senior
Australian policewoman as the current United Nations
Police Commissioner in East Timor. Police
Commissioner Sandra Peisly is the only woman
holding such a position in an operation of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). We
make a concerted effort to include women
peacekeepers in our peacekeeping contributions around
the world.

Ms. Grobbelaar (South Africa): It is an honour
for my delegation to participate in today’s open debate
on resolution 1325 (2000). We express our appreciation
to you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. My
delegation also supports the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General in his reports to the Council
during the past years, as well as the important
contributions made earlier today by Mr. Guéhenno and
Ms. Smythe and initiatives undertaken by United
Nations specialized agencies and Member States in
pursuing this topic.

We remain committed to the sustainable
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
commend the first steps that have been taken towards
that objective, including through the appointment of a
Gender Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, as others have noted, and the development
of gender action plans in the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We note also
that DPKO is developing a field guide to gender
mainstreaming and has issued a gender and
peacekeeping training manual. In all of this,
Jean-Marie Guéhenno deserves commendation for his
leadership.
But, as I have already said, much more needs to
be done. Without further concrete action, resolution
1325 (2000) will only remain a set of aspirational
standards. In that context there are some questions
which many others have asked but which, I think,
DPKO and the Secretariat more generally need
constantly to address. What are the hurdles in
achieving the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in current peacekeeping operations? Has the
Secretariat put into place any institutional mechanisms
to monitor progress made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000)? What efforts are being made to
ensure that the recommendations in resolution 1325
(2000) are mainstreamed into the work programmes of
all United Nations agencies?
The responsibility for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) rests not only with the Secretariat.
Member States — and, in particular, Council
members — also have important responsibilities, not
least in ensuring that mandates take full account of
gender perspectives. We all now need to focus on
practical steps to give effect to resolution 1325 (2000).
Australia stands ready to do its part.

4

As we confront the challenges of peace and
security in global terms and in particular in Africa, we
acknowledge the need to remain vigilant concerning
the impact of armed conflict on women and girls.
However, the leadership role women could have in
situations of conflict prevention, resolution and postconflict peace-building efforts remains underutilized,
despite commitments made at Beijing and Beijing +5
and in the outcomes of major conferences and summits.
The Millennium Declaration agreed on the third
Millennium Development Goal on the importance of
achieving gender equality and empowerment of women
and that women should engage on an equal basis with
men in the political, economic, social and civic
development of their respective countries and
continents. Women’s participation is therefore critical,
especially during periods of transition, in ensuring that
gender mainstreaming takes place in the areas of
democracy, good governance and human rights.
Concerning the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), South Africa has undertaken certain
initiatives at the national level. We have also enhanced
our partnership with United Nations agencies through
the recent visit of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
when, on 16 May, the South African Parliament hosted
the African launch of the UNIFEM report on the
independent experts’ assessment of women, war and
peace and the impact of armed conflict on women and
their role in peace-building.
The event generated huge interest and was of
importance to South Africa and our partners in Africa.
As a result, the report will be tabled in a number of
Parliamentary committees to ensure that the gender
dimensions of peace and security, including the

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

implementation of such human rights treaties as the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and the
draft protocol on the rights of women in Africa, are
incorporated into national structures.
At the regional level, the African Union decided
to include women as contributors to peace processes
and to enhance their active participation in this regard.
The African Union also acknowledges that failure to
ensure gender equality and the empowerment of
women seriously undermines a peaceful and violencefree environment.
The Union’s first initiative in this regard was in
1998, when the African Women’s Committee for Peace
and Development was established to ensure the
participation of women as decision makers. This
structure was successful in raising the awareness of
women on the issues before us today. The Committee
initiated, for example, the solidarity mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in December 2001
to support Congolese women in their preparations for
effective participation in the inter-Congolese dialogue
hosted in South Africa early in 2002.
Networks of women working for peace in the
Great Lakes region have also been established and
Committee members have been on teams to observe
elections in African countries, in line with the African
Union’s commitment to implementing gender equality.
Furthermore, the Windhoek Declaration and the
Namibia Plan of Action on Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations strengthened these initiatives.
As a country, we have remained principled on the
issue of gender mainstreaming and, as a co-sponsor of
United Nations resolutions on the advancement of
women at all levels, our leadership is keenly aware of
the centrality of women as peacemakers and facilitators
in political processes and peace-building initiatives.
My delegation has consistently stressed the
importance of gender mainstreaming in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and we are encouraged to
learn that the presence of gender expertise in these
missions has contributed to some progress in gender
mainstreaming in the field. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the appointment of an interim
Gender Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and expresses the hope that the permanent
position of Senior Gender Adviser will be filled as a
matter of priority.

The valuable gender mainstreaming work of the
Secretary-General’s Office of the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women in the
recent peace process in Liberia is testimony to the
urgent need for that unit at United Nations
Headquarters. We trust that the human resources
capacity of the Adviser’s Office will be expanded, in
accordance with the objectives of resolution 1325
(2000).
My delegation would also recommend that the
international community consider establishing centres
of excellence to train women for leadership positions in
peacekeeping operations. This could assist the United
Nations system in accelerating progress in the rate of
representation of women at the professional and higher
levels.
The effectiveness of the United Nations capacity
in maintaining peace and security could be
strengthened by improving the number of women in
senior positions and in peacekeeping missions, and we
hope that appropriate and measurable targets to achieve
that objective can be adopted. The most obvious reason
is that it is a fact that, through women’s presence and
their effective participation in peacekeeping operations,
the benefits gained by local women and girls, including
other vulnerable groups caught up in armed conflict,
improve drastically.
In conclusion, the women of our continent know
that our destiny is inseparable — that our citizens are
bound together by geography, history, heritage and,
often, conflict. In roles of leadership or as caregivers,
women wish to be partners in the peace process and in
building secure futures for generations to come. They
cannot do it alone, however, without the realization of
the principles contained in the operational paragraphs
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I call on the representative of
Colombia.
Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
taken the initiative of convening this open debate of the
Security Council on women, peace and security
so that we may assess progress made in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), in which member States
expressed their concern over the situation of civil
populations, particularly women and children, in armed
conflict.

5

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

My country is a member of an informal group of
delegations working to formulate initiatives allowing
the United Nations and its membership effectively to
formulate and implement gender equality policies;
focus on women and child victims of armed conflict
throughout the world; take into account the specific
needs of women; and help in reconciliation and the
restoration of the social fabric. Colombia is committed
to the ideals expressed in resolution 1325 (2000). As a
member of the group of friends, we have supported the
resolution’s implementation and follow-up.
In Colombia, violence perpetrated against
civilians by illegal armed actors has led to the forced
internal displacement of thousands of people, mostly
women and children, with grave social and economic
consequences for the entire nation. We also have the
tragedy of women combatants in these illegal armed
bands, where, in addition to becoming machines of
death, they are also the subjects of sexual and
psychological discrimination and abuse. In such bands,
women lose their very natures and vocation as the
bedrock of family, community and social stability. The
existence of women combatants makes it impossible to
build the peaceful and sustainable society that every
country requires.
Given the particular vulnerability of women and
children in armed conflict, the Government of
Colombia has focused special attention on the
participation of women in issues related to peace and
security. We have devised a national policy of women
as builders of peace and development, a policy geared
towards peace, equity and equal opportunity. Building
equity starts with identifying populations in which
there are clear differences in opportunity and needs.
All those issues have been included in our national
development plan, “Towards a Communal State”, a
document reflecting the current Administration’s
priorities.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has particular meaning in
Colombia, being closely linked to our harsh reality.
Just like men, and even children, women are both
participants in and victims of armed conflict. Our
efforts are aimed towards ensuring that all members of
illegal armed bands disarm, demobilize and reintegrate
themselves into civil society. Our commitment is to the
thousands of internally displaced persons, to whom we
want to give the necessary assistance so that they can
soon return to their homes. In both tasks we attach
particular importance to women and children, who

6

make up at least half of the membership of illegal
armed bands and of internally displaced persons in our
country.
The repatriation, reintegration and rehabilitation
of combatant and non-combatant populations are basic
priorities during the post-conflict stage in order to
build foundations for reconciliation and structures for
peace. In those circumstances, the achievements in
programmes for women and children have a direct and
immediate impact on communities and entire countries.
On 14 October, while subscribing to the national
agreement on equality between men and women — an
event in which Government officials, members of the
executive and legislative branches and representatives
of civil society participated — President Alvaro Uribe
made a special appeal to women in the ranks of illegal
armed bands to lay down their weapons. He also gave a
firm commitment by the State to support them in that
process.
Colombia, like the United Nations and Member
States, has the goal of taking all children out of armed
conflict. We must also aim to take every woman out of
the ranks of illegal armed bands. Colombia appeals to
the United Nations and Member States to give
particular attention to the reality of women soldiers in
illegal armed bands. Programmes and campaigns must
be implemented to encourage those women to abandon
the path of violence and become true builders of peace
and development.
Women’s organizations in Colombia make a
considerable contribution to the restoration of peace
and to reconciliation. There is therefore an urgent need
for women combatants in illegal armed bands to end
their involvement and join all those who are daily
working to extricate the country from decades of
violence and armed conflict. A woman without a rifle
is an active member of society whose example
influences families and communities. A woman
without a rifle has a direct impact in the task of taking
children out of conflict. A woman without a rifle is a
guarantee that society is ready to become more deeply
involved in building peace.
I conclude by reiterating the commitment of the
Government of Colombia to respect for international
humanitarian law and the human rights of all
Colombia’s citizens, both women and men. It is high
time for the illegal armed bands themselves to decide
to respect the lives, integrity, property, freedom and

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

other rights of the civilian population. We must
urgently begin to strengthen peace and security while
taking women and children out of armed conflict. By
doing so, we will be making a considerable
contribution to peace.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Bangladesh.
Ms. Tasneem (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
complimenting you, Mr. President, on the manner in
which you have stewarded the Council’s deliberations
during the current month, as well as on your initiative
in organizing this open debate on a subject so close to
every Bangladeshi heart.
Mr. Guéhenno’s comprehensive briefing also
deserves high praise. We feel privileged by the
presence of Ms. Angela King and Ms. Amy Smythe.
Gender
mainstreaming
and
women’s
empowerment are key components of Bangladesh’s
foreign policy thrusts. They have indeed gone a long
way towards aiding our own positive societal
transformation, as well as towards marginalizing
extremist and irrational thought and action. They have
helped render moderation and tolerance the twin
characteristics of Bangladeshi society, and enabled us
to play the constructive role that we play in the global
arena.
It is therefore no accident that in the Council
Bangladesh was so closely associated with the
evolution and adoption of landmark resolution 1325
(2000). It was the Bangladeshi presidency that issued
the statement on women and peace for the first time in
the Council on International Women’s Day in March
2000. The thesis of that statement was that equal access
to, and full participation of, women in power structures
and their full involvement in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts were essential ingredients for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.
On the third anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), we need to reflect further on how best to
advance its implementation. We need to analyse what
poses the main challenges and how they can be
overcome. Certain practical steps immediately come to
mind. One is adequate representation of women at all
levels of decision-making, both at the pre-conflict stage
and during hostilities. The same applies at all points in
peacekeeping, peace-building, reconciliation and
reconstruction. The other is the need to continue to

maintain sustained commitment at all times to gender
justice and women’s empowerment. Ensuring
protection from, and zero-tolerance for, impunity for
war crimes committed against women are of paramount
importance. Greater representation of women in
peacekeeping operations and the appointment of a
special representative to the Secretary-General should
make profound impacts in enhancing gender sensitivity
at all stages of peace missions.
While numbers are important, it is equally
significant that issues pertaining to gender be
mainstreamed and integrated so that outcomes benefit
women. That empowerment must be effected both
politically and economically. Your delegation, Mr.
President, has initiated in the Third Committee this
year a draft resolution on women and political
participation. We commend you on that. Bangladesh
has co-sponsored that draft resolution, because we
deeply believe in its contents.
Once a peace process is set into motion, women’s
groups and networks can be energized to work together
with the United Nations system to educate and raise
awareness with regard to human rights and the rule of
law in areas of conflict. Their adequate participation in
peace negotiations will help them focus on the special
difficulties that women confront at such times. It is
during the stages of peace-building and reconstruction
that women can make an even greater contribution.
Recently, the Second Committee, which the
Ambassador of Bangladesh has the privilege to chair
this year, organized a panel discussion on women’s
empowerment, microcredit and poverty eradication.
Simple innovative ideas like microcredit and nonformal education for women in post-conflict societies
can render an immense service to positive societal
transformations. A politically and economically
empowered woman who is also educated can form the
backbone of any post-conflict society — indeed, all
post-conflict societies. In many places devastated by
conflict — Kosovo, Timor-Leste, Afghanistan and
others — microcredit has proved to have a stabilizing
effect on local economies. Immediate access to
financial resources for the most disadvantaged, such as
war widows and other female heads of household,
provided employment, generated income, improved
food security for the family unit and jump-started the
economic development process.

7

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

Bangladesh’s experience in empowering rural
women through micro-credits and education is well
known. Our investments in women have contributed to
the values of pluralism, democracy and human rights.
We believe that those ideals provide the matrix for
sustainable peace. We are prepared to share this with
the world, particularly with societies of a comparable
milieu. Bangladesh’s vibrant civil society organizations
work to spread those values in Africa, Afghanistan and
Timor-Leste. Our peacekeepers, one of the largest
contingents in United Nations peacekeeping, carry
those ideals with them, aiming to impart them to
people in distant parts. The United Nations system,
particularly the Security Council, can collate those
experiences and practices, examine and study them and
transmit them in an institutionalized fashion. This may
contribute to move us forward from advocacy to
implementation, from thought to action and from hope
to fruition.
The President: I
representative of Japan.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Ozawa (Japan): At the outset, I should like
to pay tribute to you, Sir, Ambassador John D.
Negroponte, for convening this meeting on the third
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. I should also like to extend my appreciation to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Amy Smythe for
sharing with the Council their insightful observations
regarding the implementation of the resolution.
The ultimate goal of the international community,
and therefore of the United Nations, is to build a world
free of conflict. By adopting that resolution three years
ago, the Security Council showed its wisdom by fully
recognizing the important role played by women and
girls in the process of building and maintaining peace
and security. As a country striving to do its utmost in
the areas of conflict prevention and post-conflict
peace-building, Japan fully supports this resolution and
will intensify its efforts to implement it. Empowering
women is one of the key elements of enhancing peace
and security.
Allow me to share with the Council some modest
but practical steps that Japan has taken in this regard.
In Afghanistan, we remember that under the Taliban
regime, women were denied access to education and
work outside their homes. For a country in a

8

reconstruction process, such as Afghanistan, Japan is
convinced that the participation of women is absolutely
essential, and thus a gender perspective is taken into
account in all aspects of Japan’s reconstruction and
humanitarian assistance programmes for Afghanistan.
For example, the Japan International Cooperation
Agency sent experts on gender issues to the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs, to the sector responsible for the
rehabilitation of women’s schools and colleges and to
the mother and child healthcare hospital. Japan
provides the United Nations Development Fund for
Women with assistance through the Trust Fund for
Human Security. That assistance finances vocational
training, seminars, and income-generating programmes
for female Afghan refugees and displaced persons. We
believe that such programmes help to empower women
and girls and encourage them to assume more active
roles in Afghanistan.
Allow me to share with the Council another
example of the efforts Japan is making. In February
last year, the Government of Japan dispatched a
Ground Self-Defence Forces engineer group of 680
members, together with 10 headquarters personnel, to
the United Nations peacekeeping operation in TimorLeste. For the first time in our history, Japan included
female personnel in that large peacekeeping unit. Seven
women were members of the group, a relatively small
number but significant nonetheless, we believe. Japan
recognizes the need for expanding the roles and
contributions of women in United Nations field-based
operations and indeed for increasing the participation
of women at all levels. We are starting by doing what
we can but have every intention of broadening and
increasing our efforts.
On this third anniversary, I reaffirm the
commitment of my delegation to the implementation of
the provisions of the Council’s resolution on women
and peace and security; my delegation condemns the
violations of the human rights of women and girls in
conflict situations, wherever they occur.
We are all aware that women experience conflict
in different ways than men. In a conflict situation,
women are often widows grieving the loss of their
husbands, mothers who mourn their lost children and
victims of violence that targets their gender. Today,
however, women’s roles are changing in every aspect,
and more women have a say in how they will
participate in conflict resolution. More women can
participate not only by providing non-military support

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

but also by assuming important roles in peace-building
if they so wish.
In order to provide an effective response to the
challenging needs and priorities of women and girls
who take on this range of tasks, gender perspectives
have to be more systematically integrated into all
activities related to peace and security. There is still
much to be done in this regard. Japan hopes that the
Security Council, Member States, the United Nations
system — including the offices within the Secretariat
responsible for these issues — non-governmental
organizations and civil society as a whole will all do
everything in their power to fully and systematically
implement the recommendations of this resolution.
To conclude, may this discussion be a
demonstration of the firm commitment of the entire
international community to achieving the goal of
creating a world of peace and security.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Ambassador Negroponte, for organizing this open
debate on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). Allow me to begin by
commending you, Sir, on the most appropriate manner
in which you have chosen to steer the debate to mark
the third anniversary of that historic resolution. The
focus on implementation, I believe, is both timely and
necessary. Since the adoption of the resolution, the
Security Council has held a number of open debates to
reaffirm its commitment to charting a definitive place
for gender perspectives on its ongoing agenda. Thanks
to that commitment, it is now widely accepted that the
concerns of women and girls must be actively
addressed in matters of conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Marking the second anniversary of the resolution
last year, the Secretary-General’s report (S/2002/1154)
offered a comprehensive set of recommendations for
doing so, and the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2002/32) incorporating many of the
recommendations into a call for action on the part of
the Council, the Secretary-General and Member States.
The task now is to ensure their full and continuing
implementation.
In this regard, I am grateful for the presentation
made by Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno on the

work undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to implement Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) and that of Ms. Amy Smythe on her
experiences in the field as Senior Gender Adviser to
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They have clearly
outlined the progress made thus far as well as the
challenges that remain in implementation.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the progress
made by the Secretariat at Headquarters and in the
field. We are encouraged that gender specialists are
now assigned to 10 United Nations peacekeeping
missions and are backed up and coordinated by a
Gender Adviser at the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO). We also commend the progress
made to provide gender perspectives training to staff in
peacekeeping operations. We know and appreciate that
much of the push for the progress was provided by the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, led by Ms. Angela King.
We encourage the Secretariat to keep up the
efforts towards the full completion of these measures.
We also see that references to gender issues are
included in DPKO reports to the Council. We would
have liked to see great detail and elaboration in those
references. We hope the substance will be provided in
future reports of missions as well as when the
Secretary-General presents his next report on the issue
to the Council in 2004.
In the meantime, we strongly encourage the
collection of data related to peace operations,
desegregated by gender and age. For policies to be
effective, they must accurately reflect the situation on
the ground, where the experience of conflict and peacebuilding remains very different for men than for
women and for different ages.
We also note the lack of progress in other areas.
There has been no meaningful increase in the number
of women appointed as special representatives and
envoys of the Secretary-General. In any case, the
appointment of women to high-profile tasks and gender
specialists to peace missions would be just the
beginning. Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
calls for the full integration of gender perspectives and
the increased participation of women in peace
processes, peacekeeping, humanitarian operations and
rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes, and,

9

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

further,
in
reintegration.

disarmament,

demobilization

and

The Republic of Korea hopes that the investment
of personnel, expertise and training by the United
Nations will serve as a catalyst in getting all actors on
board, including parties to armed conflicts, for
materializing the full vision of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2005). In the process, the continuing
willingness of the Council to incorporate a gender
perspective into peacekeeping operations will be
instrumental as it compliments and reinforces the work
of other bodies of the United Nations in strengthening
the role of women as active agents of change in times
of both peace and conflict.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this meeting today on the agenda item
before us, which reflects the renewed determination of
the Council to protect women in armed conflicts and
promote their role in addressing issues of peace and
security. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Marie Guéhenno and Ms. Amy Smythe
for their important briefings.
On the occasion of the anniversary of Council
resolution 1325 (2000), concerning women and peace
and security, my delegation wishes to affirm its support
for the resolution. Since its adoption on 31 October
2000, we note encouraging progress resulting from the
implementation of the resolution by Governments,
United
Nations
bodies,
non-governmental
organizations and other relevant sectors of civil society.
Gender mainstreaming activities by United
Nations bodies continues in the fields of peacekeeping
operations, peace-building, and disarmament. We
welcome the initiatives by the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to incorporate
gender focal points and gender affairs offices in field
operations and by the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the
United Nations Department of Political Affairs to
promote programme activities in enhancing women’s
role in peace-building. We also welcome the
development of the Gender Mainstreaming Action Plan
by the United Nations Department for Disarmament
Affairs, which incorporates gender perspectives in the
fields of disarmament and security, and the

10

establishment of the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security, which serves as a focal
point for implementing all aspects of resolution 1325
(2000).
My delegation also notes with interest the actions
taken by the relevant non-governmental organizations
to disseminate the resolution and to promote women’s
role in peace and security. Their contribution should
fortify the work of Governments and the United
Nations system in that field.
Despite the aforementioned progress, much
remains to be done in the future. In our view, as long as
conflicts occur in various parts of the world, we will
continue to deal with women and other vulnerable
populations in such situations.
During armed conflict, women often become
targets of groups who use terror as a tactic of war, and
suffer from gender-based violence. They have often
been forced to become sex workers. Women have also
been abducted and trafficked for sexual exploitation.
When women are forced to leave their countries
and become refugees or internally displaced persons,
they often have to deal with violence at camps. A
report by UNIFEM, entitled “Women, War and Peace”,
indicates that sexual exploitation of women and girls
occurred at refugee camps in some conflict zones and
its impact was devastating. The teenage pregnancy rate
reached 50 per cent at the camps. Women often
suffered from attacks by members of different ethnic
groups. They also often risked abuse from their own
relatives.
Armed conflicts have also brought about severe
impacts on women’s health. This has been more serious
for women who were pregnant or breastfeeding their
children. Women often suffered from infectious
diseases, injuries and wounds, mental fatigue and
stress-related diseases. Access to health services
became scarce because war had ruined the health
systems and access to providers of health services.
In some conflict areas, women have also been at
risk for HIV/AIDS. According to the UNIFEM report,
women’s exposure to HIV in war zones was due to
sexual violence and exploitation, lack of adequate
health care facilities and medical treatment,
contaminated instruments and the mixing of civilians
and combatants. Underlying factors but not direct

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

causes of the epidemic were economic destitution,
psychological trauma and poor nutrition.
My delegation has in the past supported concerted
international efforts to alleviate the suffering of women
dragged into conflicts. We believe that the rights of
women in armed conflicts should be acknowledged as
an explicit priority and firmly entrenched in peacemaking, peace-building and conflict resolution
processes, as well as in demobilization and
reintegration plans.
We give particular emphasis to the efforts to
make women central to peace-building by promoting
the understanding of the impact of conflicts on women,
improving protection and assistance for women,
placing women and gender perspectives at the core of
peace processes and fostering gender justice. We also
value initiatives to develop networking among women
stakeholders, such as the Mano River Women’s Peace
Network.
My delegation stresses the need to address the
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse of women and
girls in humanitarian crises and conflict situations,
including those cases involving humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers. We welcome in this regard the
Secretary-General’s bulletin on special measures
against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse and other
measures developed by the United Nations system to
prevent and address such incidents.
We also see the need for contributing countries to
incorporate the six core principles of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee on emergencies, the relevant
provisions in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, the outcome of the United Nations General
Assembly’s special session on women and relevant
provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women into pertinent
codes of conduct for peacekeeping personnel.
Contributing countries are also encouraged to develop
appropriate disciplinary measures and accountability
mechanisms and to improve awareness of the
responsibilities of United Nations peacekeepers,
especially in the protection of vulnerable populations.
Among the Secretary-General’s recommendations
in his last report was the expression of his intention,
which we supported, to establish a database of gender
specialists and women’s groups and networks in
countries and regions in conflict. We look forward to
obtaining some elucidation on how work is progressing

on this database, which will be of tremendous help
when conflict breaks out in a particular region. In this
regard, we recommend the support of this idea by
Member States of the Organization, donors and civil
society towards providing financial, political and
technical support for women’s peace-building
initiatives and networks.
Indonesia looks forward to the forty-eighth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women in
2004, which, in accordance with its multi-year
programme of work for the period 2002 to 2006, will
review the thematic issue of women’s equal
participation in conflict prevention, management and
conflict resolution and in post-conflict peace-building.
We also welcome the initiative of the Division for
the Advancement of Women, in collaboration with the
Office of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women and the
Department of Political Affairs, to organize an expert
group meeting on “Peace agreements as a means for
promoting gender equality and ensuring participation
of women — a framework of model provisions”, to be
held in Ottawa, Canada, from 10 to 13 November 2003.
Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and to
constructively contributing to the deliberations on that
issue at the forthcoming session of the Commission on
the Status of Women.
The President: I call on the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation is pleased to participate in this open meeting
on the third anniversary of the adoption of the historic
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. I should like to express my
delegation’s appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his opening remarks, which
we found to be useful and very helpful in this debate.
Similarly, we greatly appreciate the presence of Ms.
Amy Smythe, Senior Gender Adviser of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The first-hand information that
she has provided about her experiences and about the
challenges in the field merits our careful and serious
consideration. The demonstrated catalytic role of the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, under the leadership of Ms.

11

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

Angela King, is also highly appreciated, and we
encourage Ms. King to persevere on that path.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was an
acknowledgement of the importance of the role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
peace-building. It was a further acknowledgement of
the fact that women not only are disproportionate
victims in conflicts but also assume a variety of roles
during and after conflict, including those of civilian
combatants, peace activists and participants in
reconstruction efforts. It was also an acknowledgement
of the need to involve women fully in the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security and to make that
role concrete and visible.
Resolution 1325 (2000) prescribes a role for all
players. Three years after its adoption, it is evident that
there is a gap between resolve and reality. It is obvious
that, for resolution 1325 (2000) to become a reality,
Member States must take action commensurate with
operationalizing the provisions of the resolution.
That leads me to pose a few questions. Have we
been able to give meaning to the resolution by
incorporating gender perspectives into all peacekeeping
operations? Have we been able to allocate adequate
resources — including human resources — to permit
gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations?
Have we made any provisions for the required training
of staff, consistent with the resolution?
At this juncture, it is important for me to
acknowledge the appointment of an interim Gender
Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. That is certainly a welcome development,
which, my delegation believes, signifies the relevance
and importance of resolution 1325 (2000). While we
express the hope that the Gender Adviser will
champion the incorporation of gender perspectives into
peacekeeping operations, it is important to ensure that
her Office has the requisite support and cooperation
from the United Nations system as well as from
Member States. We appreciate the fact that the position
of a Senior Gender Adviser is being earmarked for the
peacekeeping mission in Liberia. We hope that that will
be standard practice in future.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to share
with the Council efforts that have been made in the
regions of East Africa and Southern Africa to give
meaning to resolution 1325 (2000). Conflict situations
have amply demonstrated women’s abilities to take

12

active and leading roles in resolving conflicts. Women
in the region are progressively taking a keen interest in
issues related to peace and security. Political and
military establishments and armed groups are
increasingly becoming aware of the role and potential
of women in those areas. Women, on their own, are
also increasingly becoming a powerful constituency in
advancing their role in peace and security issues and
have proved to be essential in that area. The
involvement of women in the Burundi peace process is
a case in point.
In the broader context of gender mainstreaming,
we within the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), have set for ourselves the goal of
reaching a minimum target of 30 per cent
representation by women in politics and in decisionmaking structures by 2005. The overall regional
situation indicates that SADC member States are
making progress in that regard. At least two member
States have provided for representation by women in
their respective constitutional amendments. Women’s
combat experiences and their civilian roles in the
liberation movements of many of these countries have
proved valuable and have paved the way for the logical
involvement of women in post-conflict governance,
reconciliation and nation-building.
There is a deliberate, gradual increase in the
proportion of representation by women in various
structures in most member States. As most member
States in the region are expected to hold general
elections in 2004 and 2005, it is expected that they will
use the opportunities of those forthcoming elections
and other measures to advance and achieve the
immediate minimum target of 30 per cent. The process
of women’s empowerment will continue thereafter. The
imperative is not to give token attention to women’s
participation, but to acknowledge the fact that the
foundation for durable peace, development, good
governance, human rights and justice lies in women
playing a full part as equal partners in all peace
processes and in the maintenance of peace.
My country, Tanzania, is working closely with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to ensure the security of refugees, including
women and girls, as well as to ensure the humanitarian
and civilian nature of refugee camps and settlements.
As we in the Great Lakes region prepare for an
international conference on peace, security, democracy

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

and development in the Great Lakes region to be held
in June 2004, we are gratified to note that women have
carved out a niche for themselves as important
participants in the preparatory process leading to the
conference.
While we take note of the few positive steps
towards the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), it should be a matter of
concern to all of us that women still make up only a
small part of those who participate in peace and
security negotiations. They continue to be marginalized
in most post-conflict planning. My delegation believes
that resolution 1325 (2000) is a powerful instrument in
our hands. Our challenge is to put that instrument to
work to achieve the results it is intended to accomplish.
That can happen only if we harness the political will to
allocate the necessary funding, to identify the requisite
staffing and to provide the training that is required to
make resolution 1325 (2000) a way of our political life.
Today’s debate is a valuable contribution in sustaining
the momentum for change in that direction. The trend
towards empowering women has generated its own
dynamic, which cannot be ignored or reversed.
The President: I
representative of Ukraine.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important open meeting marking the third anniversary
of the historic resolution on women, peace and
security, adopted during the Namibian presidency of
the Council, with the participation of Ukraine, which
was then a Council member. As has been mentioned,
that document strengthened specifically the political
legitimacy of women’s struggle for a seat at the
negotiating table, and provided a framework within
which women’s protection and their role in peacebuilding can be addressed.
I would like to express our appreciation to the
Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms.
Angela King, and all members of the Inter-Agency
Task Force on Women, Peace and Security, as well as
to the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, for their activities in promoting the
coordination of efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000).
Despite the progress made, however, issues of
gender representation and gender perspectives have

still not been systematically incorporated into all
United Nations activities on peace and security.
During the past three years, the Security Council
has increasingly focused its attention on the situation
of women and girls in armed conflict. However, these
issues have often been discussed as a separate item,
rather than integrated into wider deliberations by the
Council. In order to effectively respond to the needs
and priorities of women and girls during armed
conflict, in our view gender perspectives must be
systematically integrated into all peace-building,
peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts, as well as
humanitarian operations and reconstruction processes.
Unfortunately, in today’s conflicts, women and
girls are increasingly targeted directly, and are
threatened by rape, domestic violence, sexual
exploitation, trafficking, sexual humiliation and
mutilation. They are at heightened risk in all settings,
whether at home, in flight or in camps for displaced
persons. That is why we think that all humanitarian
responses in conflict situations must include systematic
reporting on sexual violence, emphasize the special
reproductive health needs of women and girls and
reflect a strengthened policy guidance on responses to
gender-based violence and sexual exploitation.
It is important that the Rome Statute reflect
ground-breaking developments in the criminalization
of sexual and gender violence and the establishment of
structures to ensure the effective investigation and
prosecution of such crimes by the International
Criminal Court. As such, the Rome Statute is the first
treaty to recognize certain acts of sexual and gender
violence as being among the most serious crimes under
international law.
With regard to sexual violence, we should not
forget one of its worst possible consequences — the
risk of the transmission of HIV/AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases. In our opinion, measures
regarding an HIV/AIDS response should be better
reflected in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Ukraine has already incorporated HIV/AIDS awareness
training into the national training programmes for
military personnel in preparation for deployment.
Although they are often victims of armed
conflict, women cannot be considered merely as
passive recipients who are incapable of taking charge
of their own destiny. The international community
should use the potential of women as agents of

13

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

preventive
building.

diplomacy,

peacekeeping

and

peace-

Recent years have witnessed the flowering and
growth of a vibrant women’s peace movement. From
grass-roots activism to international networks and
campaigns, women’s organizations have brought new
energy and focus to peace-building. Despite the
obstacles and difficulties they face, many have had a
positive impact on local and national peace processes.
This can be noted in Liberia, Burundi and South
Africa, as well as in the Middle East, the Balkans and
South-East Asia, where, in their struggle for peace,
women’s networks bridge the dividing lanes of
conflict, despite threats and abuse. The contributions
made by the informal peace initiatives of local
women’s groups and networks should be recognized
and supported by the world community.
Regional organizations also play an important
role in protecting women and supporting their role in
peace-building. In this context, I would like to draw
attention to the initiatives of the Cooperation Forum of
the Women of the GUAAM countries — Azerbaijan,
Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. The
resolution adopted at the second meeting of that body,
which took place in Kiev last year, contained a
provision aimed at the creation of an international
peace movement, entitled “Women against violence,
conflicts and wars”. The Forum also called upon the
Secretary-General to use all of his power and authority
to intensify efforts aimed at resolving existing armed
conflicts and preventing the emergence of new ones.
In spite of the increasing information and
knowledge surrounding women’s experience of
conflict, relatively little systematic documentation on
their peace-building efforts is available. The work they
do is still largely invisible to the eyes of the world’s
media and policy makers. Scepticism about women’s
contributions continue to hamper policy and
programmatic developments aimed at supporting and
enhancing women’s participation. Perhaps as a result of
this scepticism, today only one woman leads a United
Nations peace mission. Our delegation supports the
appeals of the Secretary-General and the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues to Member States to act in
proactive manner by identifying women to serve in
senior decision-making positions and to increase their
recruitment to military observer teams, peacekeeping
contingents and civilian police units. A broad database
of experienced women in peacekeeping and other

14

relevant disciplines should be created. Eight female
officers from my country already number among
civilian police and military personnel, and we want that
figure to increase.
We believe the Security Council has a special
responsibility to support women’s participation in
peace processes by ensuring respective gender balance
in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Finally, let me remind members of one of the
greatest time-honoured customs of the peoples of the
Caucasus. A woman could stop bloodshed just by
throwing her scarf between the combatants. It is a
centuries-old practice, but should we not sometimes
heed the wisdom of our ancestors?
The President: I give
representative of the Philippines.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Mercado (Philippines): I should like to
express my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for having provided us with this opportunity
to participate in an open debate on the issue of women,
peace and security. In our view, this open debate
sustains the momentum of resolution 1325 (2000) as
we assess the work that has been done to improve the
plight of women in conflict situations, including their
role in conflict resolution, conflict prevention and
peace-building.
We wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for his report on the efforts that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is making in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in all
peacekeeping missions. We support his efforts to
mainstream gender in peacekeeping operations.
We likewise wish to extend our appreciation to
Ms. Amy Smythe, the Senior Gender Adviser of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), for
sharing her experiences, as well as setting out the
challenges one faces in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) while working on the ground in
the Democratic Republic of Congo. We support her
proposal to increase the number of police women in
peacekeeping operations, since they can better relate to
the plight of women and girls.
Conflict resolution and peace processes must
essentially have a gender dimension. The increase in
weapons collection in communities during periods of
post conflict has been attributed to the role of women.

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) “Weapons in Exchange for
Development” programme in Albania has proved to
what extent women have played a vital role in the
disarming of civilians after an armed conflict, thereby
contributing to the reduction of threats to public order.
For a lasting peace to be built, negotiation
processes at all levels must necessarily include all
significant actors, including women. The inclusion of
women in the negotiating process ensures their
participation and involvement in post-conflict political,
social, civil, economic and judicial structures. Shortand long-term actions aimed at creating democratic
institutions following an armed conflict require inputs
and commitments from both men and women in regard
to peace, security and development. Furthermore, both
formal and informal processes must be pursued through
collaboration with civil society and non-governmental
organizations that have advocated the role of women in
peace-building.
We in the Philippines continue to exert efforts to
achieve peace, democracy and development. We
recognize that women have suffered the most from
armed conflict and that they have contributed
significant efforts to put an end to it. Filipino women
are at the forefront in the resolution of conflict and
have taken lead roles in the Philippine peace process.
More than 10 years ago, the groundwork for the peace
process was laid through the National Unification
Commission, which is headed by a woman. That
Commission was strengthened by the creation of the
Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process, also headed by a woman, one who has had
extensive experience working with non-governmental
organizations in conflict resolution.
The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the
Peace Process manages and supervises the peace
process through several programmes: first, by pursuing
socio-economic and political reforms that address the
root causes of internal armed conflict; secondly, by
building consensus and empowerment for peace,
including through the institutionalization of the
interfaith dialogue to build and sustain intercultural
understanding among Christians and Muslims in
Mindanao; thirdly, by sustaining and enhancing peace
zones through the conduct of peace negotiations with
different rebel groups; fourthly, by implementing
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for former

rebels, their families and communities; and fifthly, by
building and nurturing a climate conducive to peace
through peace advocacy programmes.
My Government, in partnership with women
leaders from the private sector and civil society,
remains steadfast in its pursuit of an agenda for longlasting peace and development. We have placed special
emphasis on the training of young women leaders in
peace-building and in the provision of livelihood
training and assistance to combatants and their families
and in their reintegration into the mainstream of
civilian, economic and social life.
We look forward to the forty-eighth session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, to be held in
2004, when we will be reviewing the thematic issue of
women’s equal participation in conflict prevention,
management and conflict resolution and in postconflict peace-building. We view it as another
opportunity to discuss the issue of gender
mainstreaming in peace and security-related issues in
the ongoing activities of the United Nations system. It
is our hope that the international community will
further strengthen its commitment to ensuring the
increased participation of women in the process of
conflict prevention at all levels of decision-making.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Croatia, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to start by
commending the United States presidency for having
convened this open debate of the Security Council on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is
important to proceed along the road paved by that
resolution and to prove in practice that it remains an
action-oriented, results-producing document.
The issue before us is as important as it is
complex. One could approach it from various angles
yet still leave many of its important aspects untouched.
As a country that not so long ago was exposed to
armed aggression and went through the horrors of war,
Croatia has gained valuable knowledge about some
aspects of the field we are debating today. Let me
briefly share with the Council some of Croatia’s
experiences and achievements in that regard.
The Government’s Commission for Gender
Equality —
an
intergovernmental
Commission
entrusted with the creation of policies and the
coordination of all activities for the promotion of

15

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

gender equality at the local, national and regional
levels — incorporated a chapter on women and armed
conflict in the National Policy for the Promotion of
Gender Equality for the period 2001-2005 and its
implementation programme. Both documents were
adopted by the Croatian Parliament.
The following activities have been envisaged for
implementation by 2005. The Commission for Gender
Equality, in cooperation with other relevant institutions
and organizations, especially non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), will inform women, on an
ongoing basis, about the work of the International
Criminal Court and the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. It will educate women and
children about landmines and other types of explosive
devices; secure appropriate assistance for displaced
persons, refugees and victims of the Homeland War;
and participate in the implementation of measures
aimed at simplifying their return and reintegration into
society.
The Commission is also entrusted with the task of
promoting the participation of women in activities
associated with the maintenance of peace at all levels;
enhancing knowledge of humanitarian law and human
rights; and enabling greater representation of women in
bodies dealing with security issues and the defence
policy of the Republic of Croatia.
Some tangible results have already been achieved
in pursuit of the goals set in the National Policy. I am
pleased to inform the Council of the following facts.
Through the Defence Act, adopted in 2002, the
Committee for Gender Equality was established within
the Ministry of Defence. Today, in the Croatian
Ministry of Defence and in the Croatian armed forces,
women constitute about 15 per cent of the workforce.
That includes the Minister of Defence herself, as well
as one of the Assistant Ministers and the Secretary of
the Ministry.
As an integral part of the modernization of
military education and training for the armed forces,
the subjects of international humanitarian law and
human rights are now included in the school
curriculums of the Croatian Military Academy. In the
teaching of those subjects, special emphasis will be
placed on the promotion and protection of women’s
human rights and on the introduction of measures
aimed at combating violence against women in war, in
armed conflict and during post-conflict transitions.

16

In July 2003 the Parliament of Croatia adopted
the Law on Gender Equality, which, inter alia,
stipulates that all State administration bodies and
corporate entities with public competences have an
obligation to apply special temporary measures and
adopt action plans for the promotion of gender equality,
thus introducing the principle of gender mainstreaming
into Croatian legislation.
With respect to Croatia’s participation in
peacekeeping missions, not only do we support the
incorporation of a gender perspective into
peacekeeping field operations, but we also implement
that rule ourselves. Croatia contributed four female
officers to the German contingent of the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. In addition, I
should like to draw the Council’s attention to the fact
that a Croatian army captain is the first female army
officer to take part in the Military Observer Group in
India and Pakistan.
Non-governmental organizations in Croatia are
playing an active role in the promotion of the role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in peace- building. They are carrying out various
projects, ranging from awareness-raising and capacitybuilding activities aimed at increasing the
representation of women at all decision-making levels,
to specific activities in which NGOs assist women in
multi-ethnic areas and areas heavily damaged by armed
activities. For the post-war confidence-building process
to be successful, it is essential to include women as
active participants in post-conflict reintegration and
reconstruction. Croatia has gained a great deal of
experience in this area, and we stand ready to share it
with others.
The issue of the protection of women in armed
conflict and their fundamental role in conflict
prevention and peace-building cannot be considered
without taking into account the fact that they are
among those most affected by the violence and
economic instability brought upon society by armed
conflict. Yet when it comes to negotiating peace, postwar reconstruction and reconciliation, women are still
grossly under-represented. Therefore, we need to
enhance the role of the main bodies of the United
Nations so that they can streamline their efforts
towards the empowerment of women.
Strengthening the participation of women in the
work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Fund for Women could make a
real difference on the ground. Post-conflict transition,
recovery and reconstruction cannot be achieved if
gender equality and the promotion of women’s rights
are absent. Croatia welcomes the increased
involvement of women in peacekeeping operations,
especially among human rights and humanitarian
personnel, military observers and civilian police.
Along those lines, we strongly encourage the
practice of mainstreaming a gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations. At the same time, we must
strengthen our efforts to improve protection for women
in armed conflict, in parallel with the enhancement of
their contribution to peace processes and rebuilding
their communities. As the Secretary-General has stated
“Sustainable peace will not be achieved without the
full and equal participation of women and men”.
(S/2002/1154, para. 68)
Let me conclude by saying that, although much
has been done, we still witness continuous violence
against women during conflict, women who are forced
to flee their homes for that reason, lack of health care
and the accelerated spread of infections such as
HIV/AIDS in conflict and post-conflict settings. It goes
without saying that we need to do more at the
international, regional and national levels. Our
deliberations here today and constructive ideas are our
joint efforts in that direction. It is encouraging to see
the Security Council engaged in this debate. I take this
opportunity to commend once again the effort to
convene and successfully organize this meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.

the resolution into its day-to-day operations. While we
join other speakers in recognizing the progress that has
been made, we cannot forget that there is a vast amount
of work left to be done.
We welcome the United Nations coordinating
efforts undertaken through the Inter-Agency Taskforce
on Women, Peace and Security. We are particularly
heartened by efforts of the Department for
Disarmament Affairs (DDA) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), in
partnership with the Office of Human Resources
Management (OHRM), to develop detailed gender
action plans, which we believe will lead to more
effective and representative programming and policy
by these bodies.
We welcome the recent establishment of a gender
adviser position in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and look forward to the assessment
announced by Mr. Guéhenno this morning. We would
be interested in Mr. Guéhenno’s views on the prospect
of the Department’s undertaking an initiative similar to
that of DDA and OCHA to facilitate a better
integration of gender considerations in the activities of
the Department.
We strongly support initiatives related to training
peacekeepers on the importance of integrating a gender
perspective in their work. In that respect, we would be
interested in further information from Mr. Guéhenno on
efforts to ensure that gender perspectives are
mainstreamed in all training modules and are not
confined to gender-specific training modules. We
believe this will contribute significantly to tackling this
issue.

Mr. Laurin (Canada): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. We thank
Mr. Guéhenno for addressing this open debate today,
and welcome the commitments he personally made this
morning. We also thank the United States presidency
for creating an opportunity to hear directly from a
senior gender adviser about her work in the field.
Ms. Smythe’s experience in this area is critical to
bridging the gap between policy and implementation.
We commend her for her work.

Canada warmly welcomes the issuance by the
Secretary-General last week of the bulletin on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse. This document has been much anticipated and
provides an important accountability framework for the
United Nations system, as well as for Member States,
complementing the important work undertaken by the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee Task Force on this
issue. Putting in place mechanisms for monitoring and
follow-up are essential next steps for preventing such
incidents and effectively addressing them, should they
occur.

Canada strongly and actively supports full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
welcome the efforts of the United Nations to integrate

We were pleased that, in response to last year’s
Office of Internal Oversight Services report on sexual
exploitation, the Special Representative of the

17

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

Secretary-General instituted a Personal Conduct
Committee to look into cases of misconduct, including
sexual exploitation, involving civilian and military
personnel of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. We welcome Mr. Guéhenno’s commitment to
setting up similar mechanisms in all missions.
We would be interested in being informed by
Mr. Guéhenno on the follow-up action taken by the
Secretariat to convene the meeting requested by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to
discuss ways and means of meeting challenges in the
areas of conduct and discipline.
(spoke in French)
We again call for explicit reference to gender
considerations in all Security Council mandates. The
lack of information in the reports to the Security
Council, noted this morning, should not be an excuse
for inaction. Council members can seek information
from the Secretariat and take advantage of the presence
of Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in
the Council to hold them accountable and ask them for
information on the situation of women and girls and on
ways of enhancing the protection of civilians. We
would like to know what difficulties Ms. Smythe
encountered in ensuring that information finds its way
to the Council.
With regard to the Council’s recent missions to
West Africa and the Great Lakes region, we, like other
speakers, are disheartened that their reports are silent
on gender equality issues and give no indication of
whether meetings were held with women or with
ministries and organizations dealing with gender. Such
missions should systematically include this item in
their mandates. They should address it explicitly in
their reports and make specific recommendations on
the situation of women and girls. We welcome
Germany’s commitment in this connection with regard
to the Council’s mission in Afghanistan.
We must again call attention to the absolute need
for the system and us, the Member States, to achieve
gender balance in the system. In 1995, in Beijing, we
set the goal of 50/50 gender distribution in the United
Nations system by 2000. In the context of today’s
meeting, resolution 1325 (2000) urges the SecretaryGeneral and Member States to improve gender balance.
Yet, at the level of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, there is still only one woman
leading peacekeeping operations, out of approximately

18

50 such positions. We must recommit ourselves to
achieving this 50/50 gender balance goal. Moreover, as
Mr. Guéhenno noted, we must remember that it is our
role, as Member States, to put forward candidates.
Canada continues to actively implement its
commitments made at the time of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). We are pleased to be working
with the Division for the Advancement of Women in
organizing the upcoming Expert Group Meeting on
“Peace agreements as a means for promoting gender
equality and ensuring participation of women”, to be
held in Ottawa next month. We call on all States to
fulfil their commitments and to work to make this
resolution a reality for women in order to ensure their
protection and to give them the opportunity to
participate in rebuilding their communities.
I thank you again, Mr President, for providing a
forum for this important debate.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to echo
previous speakers in welcoming the initiative of the
United States presidency to hold an open debate in the
Security Council on the agenda item “Women and
peace and security”. Our thanks go to Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno and Ms. Smythe for their valuable
observations.
The item under consideration is of key
importance for our country. At the same time, it is in
the limelight for all members of society. In that regard,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and all
those who contributed to the preparation of the report
on women, peace and security, document S/2002/1154.
The report presents valuable recommendations for the
consideration of Member States. Azerbaijan agrees
with them and supports their operationalization.
The twenty-first century has witnessed both a
dynamic movement towards worldwide implementation
of the principle of gender equality and the proliferation
of various kinds of conflicts where women have to an
alarming degree become victims and targets of
atrocities and aggression. Analyses of both trends have
proven that notions of peace and the advancement of
women are inextricably linked in a number of
dimensions. This interconnection is strikingly evident
in situations of armed conflict, the consequences of
which most severely affect women and children both
physically and psychologically.

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

Nevertheless, while trying to mainstream the
gender perspective into each stage of the conflict
resolution process, one cannot ignore the striking fact
that women suffering as a result of various forms of
violence are more hesitant than men to avail
themselves of rehabilitation programmes.
Moreover, the report of by the Secretary-General
on the impact of armed conflict on women and girls,
prepared in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000),
indicated that women and girls are disproportionally
targeted in contemporary armed conflicts and constitute
the majority of all victims.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation on the necessity that we must
recognize the extent of the violations of the human
rights of women and girls during armed conflict and
ensure that this is duly taken into account in the
planning and implementation of peace support
operations. In that regard, local and international nongovernmental organizations acting to protect and assist
those affected by armed conflict could serve as reliable
sources of information. To that end, cooperation
between international organizations, including those of
the United Nations system, and the Government
concerned is an indispensable element in ensuring the
dynamic of a positive change in the attitudes and mindsets of affected women and girls upon whom peace and
security depends.
In our view, one of the most outrageous impacts
of armed conflict takes place when civilian women and
girls are taken hostage by parties to the conflict. In
such a situation, women and children hostages are
exposed to various forms of violence ranging from
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment to rape, slavery and trafficking in
women and children for the purpose of their sexual
exploitation, forced labour or other services. Here, I
would like to mention that the Commission on the
Status of Women of the Economic and Social Council
already condemned these illegal acts committed against
women and girls in its resolution 46/1 entitled “Release
of women and children taken hostage, including those
subsequently imprisoned, in armed conflict”. That
organ condemned such violent acts — which are in
contravention of international humanitarian law —
against the civilian population in areas of armed
conflict, and called for an effective response to such
acts, in particular the immediate release of women and

children taken hostage, including those subsequently
imprisoned in armed conflict.
We are pleased to note that during the past decade
international legal frameworks that provide protection
for women and girls affected by armed conflict have
been developed. It is encouraging that the statutes of
the two international tribunals created by the Security
Council to address crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and the statute of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone have been expanded to
include gender-based violence, such as rape, enforced
prostitution and trafficking during armed conflict,
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,
and enslavement.
At the same time, we believe that other forms of
violence affecting women and girls in situations of
armed conflict, including hostage-taking, must also be
recognized and adequately acknowledged by an
appropriate legal body, specifically the International
Criminal Court. That would allow women and girls
who are victims of violence in situations of armed
conflict, to have the opportunity to pursue claims for
compensation for injuries and other physical and moral
damages.
Another dimension of the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls is the situation of women
and girl refugees and internally displaced persons.
Coping with problems of women refugees requires the
integration of specific gender-sensitive concerns into
the full spectrum of emergency assistance, in particular
the transition from relief assistance to development.
Women refugees can be effectively involved in the
process of identifying the needs of affected populations
and distributing humanitarian assistance in the field.
Their active participation in tailoring gender-sensitive
rehabilitation programmes relevant to their own
livelihood, food security and health would provide
better relief and employment opportunities for women
refugees.
All the aforementioned points bring me to the
conclusion
that,
despite
women’s
increased
vulnerability and exposure to violence during armed
conflict, their role in giving and sustaining life has
gradually developed their unique skills and instincts for
contributing to peace and development. Therefore, I
believe that it must be our common goal to ensure that

19

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

the concerns of women are fully incorporated into our
efforts to maintain peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At a time when the month of your
presidency is drawing to a close, please allow me, Sir,
to commend you for the skill and competence with
which you have accomplished your difficult task. My
delegation would also like to commend you for your
praiseworthy initiative in organizing this important
debate on women and peace and security, marking the
third anniversary of the unanimous adoption by the
Security Council of resolution 1325 (2000). That
resolution was the result of many years of work among
Governments, non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies.
My delegation is pleased to participate in the
current meeting. It is pleased that the Council wished
to retain this item on its agenda and to follow up on the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000), thereby showing its determination to remain
involved in the work to ensure gender equality in the
area of peace and security.
I would like to take this opportunity not only to
thank Mr. Guéhenno and Ms. Smythe for their
invaluable introductory presentations on the item under
consideration, but also to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Ms. King and her entire team in the Division for the
Advancement of Women for the work they are doing in
promoting the status of women, and for their efforts to
increase the participation of women in the sphere of
conflict prevention and settlement. I would also like to
take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of an
interim Gender Adviser in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).
When the Namibian presidency convened a
meeting of the Council to discuss the status of women
and peace, a large number of delegations, including my
own, welcomed the initiative. The adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the Council was thus a
historic turning point that allowed us to draw the
world’s attention to and heighten its awareness of the
effects of conflict and the important role played by
women in settling disputes and maintaining peace. It
was the first Council resolution dealing exclusively
with women in armed conflict. Among other things, it

20

drew up a complete programme on women, peace and
security, designed, inter alia, to ensure their full
participation on an equal footing in peace processes
and peace-building activities and provided for training
on the role of women for the personnel of
peacekeeping operations.
The commemoration of the third anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) is a timely
reminder that the Council had asked Member States to
involve women in all peace efforts. The Council had
called on the Secretary-General to implement a
strategic plan of action to that end and to draw
international attention to women’s priorities. It also
highlighted the contribution of women to peace
processes.
Lasting peace and security cannot be achieved
without the emancipation and full participation of
women, since their contribution at the local level to
maintaining cohesive communities in conflict, along
with their experience in peace processes and social
reconstruction, are undeniable. States must therefore
make the necessary effort to ensure women’s
participation at all phases and levels of the peace
process so as to ensure political stability to the benefit
of all. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Transitional Constitutional provides for the State’s
obligation to take measures in all areas, especially in
the economic, social and cultural spheres, to ensure the
full participation of women in the nation’s
development.
My delegation welcomes the opportunity afforded
by this debate to stress once again the basic importance
of peace and security to achieving parity between the
sexes and allowing women to participate in the
decision-making process.
At its twenty-third special session, the General
Assembly reaffirmed the international community’s
dedication to the creation of a conducive atmosphere
for and to the implementation of policies to promote,
protect and guarantee women’s enjoyment of their
civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights,
including the right to development, with a view to
achieving equality, development and peace. The
promotion of sustainable development, which involves
fighting poverty, hunger and disease, needs long-term
action to promote equality between men and women.
Similarly, the report of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security remains timely. Indeed, it

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

offers an assessment of the challenges facing women
and girls in armed conflict and a series of useful
recommendations on how the international community
can contribute to meeting them.
Congolese women certainly belong to this group.
They have taken up the challenge by playing their role
and resolving to uphold the values and ideals of peace,
stability and democracy. Congolese women are deeply
involved in the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement process
by striving to fulfil the specific needs of widows,
female combatants, soldiers’ wives and their own
families. They also take care of women, girls and
children affected or infected by HIV/AIDS, the
exponential growth of which has been especially
exacerbated by recurrent rapes used as a weapon of war
in the ongoing conflict. Finally, Congolese women are
to be found in fields as varied as health care,
particularly for children, peace campaigns and
education to cope with the violence of armed
aggression.
For its part, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is resolved to address the needs
of women in conflict zones and to support the role of
women in the peace process. Mr. Joseph Kabila,
President of the Republic, is sparing no effort to ensure
that gender issues are taken into account and
appropriately addressed at every phase of the ongoing
transition process, along with scheduled reforms,
particularly in the electoral, judicial, and legislative
fields, and, above all, the essential reconstruction and
national reconciliation.
The Government has planned a sweeping
programme in this regard that requires the significant
involvement of the international community. We take
this opportunity to thank Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), for her support during the
issuance in Kinshasa of the report on women, war and
peace. Her recent visit to my country was seen as an
expression of support for Congolese women, who have
paid a heavy price during the armed aggression that has
lasted some five years now.
My delegation particularly welcomes the
announcement on the opening of a UNIFEM office in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This happy
initiative will allow Congolese women, the principal
victims of the war, fully to play their role in the

reconstruction of the country and the improvement of
their tenuous status. Moreover, my delegation supports
the efforts of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ease
tensions and to urge the establishment of peacebuilding mechanisms, as well as the role played by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We hope that
everything will be done to ensure that attacks on the
physical integrity and dignity of women are prosecuted
and punished under international law as war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
We support the recommendations to establish
mechanisms to investigate cases of exploitation of
women, whether their perpetrators be parties linked to
the conflict or messengers of peace. In this connection,
my delegation welcomes the presence of women in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
improves access to and support for local women. This
presence, while allowing better protection for women
caught in the trap of armed conflict, also increases the
capacities of such operations and encourages their
personnel to be more thoughtful and responsible. We
believe that it would be useful to draft a code of
conduct for peacekeeping personnel and a system of
notification of sexual violence in the context of
peacekeeping.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo attaches the highest
importance to the implementation of positive measures
to draw attention to the needs of women in conflict
zones. The Government recently dispatched a team to
the eastern part of the country to analyse the violence
being committed against women and girls, especially in
Ituri, where the humanitarian situation is most
alarming. The women and children of Ituri continue to
be subject to terrible violence and tensions. My
delegation takes this opportunity to express its deep
concern over the persistence of this violence against
women and children in the eastern part of our national
territory, particularly in Ituri.
Following the example of Ms. Pétronille Vaweka,
a member of the Ituri Pacification Commission —
whose courage in working to restore normalcy in Ituri
we hail — Congolese women are involving themselves
directly in the promotion of peace in their country. The
Congolese women’s search for liberating peace must
now be supported, because the return of peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can help Congolese
women in their fight against poverty and all forms of

21

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

violence and discrimination against them. They have a
right to that peace, without which all hope for human
dignity, well-being and development is vain and
compromised.
The President: I call on the representative of
Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The debate you
have convened, Sir, on the issue of women, peace and
security is a timely one and we thank you very much
for your initiative.
We believe that there are two main areas of this
broad topic, which warrant equal attention, and they
are the issues of protection and participation, as set out
in resolution 1325 (2000).
On the protection side, women and girls continue
to be prime targets due to their perceived role as
bearers of cultural identity and their special
vulnerability. The recent past has certainly brought
about some landmark developments in the area of
protection, most prominent among them the
recognition of rape and other forms of sexual violence
as a crime under international law. The ad hoc tribunals
established by the Security Council have done
groundbreaking work in that area, and the relevant
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court were drafted in a manner that allows
the Court to bring to justice perpetrators of genderspecific crimes in times of armed conflict.
Protection under the law, and in particular under
international law, is of paramount importance and can
have a preventive effect, but it must of course be
complemented by practical and operational measures,
in particular those undertaken by United Nations
operations and presences in the field. In that context,
we welcome in particular the appointment of an interim
gender adviser in the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations. We hope that the permanent position for a
senior gender adviser can be filled in the near future.
We very much welcome the presence of the Senior
Gender Adviser to the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo at
today’s meeting. We would like to thank her for her
contribution to this debate.
Still on the issue of protection, the study on
women, peace and security submitted last year also
makes it clear that the effects of armed conflict on
women are particularly grave where a culture of

22

violence and discrimination against women and girls
exists even prior to an armed conflict. There is
therefore a continued need for close cooperation
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, which is active in the elimination of
discrimination and domestic violence against women.
The attention given to the participation of women
must be at least as strong as that given to the need for
their protection. There seems to be a continued lack of
awareness of the fact that women can, and often do,
play an active role in connection with armed conflicts,
as participants in hostilities but also as crucial players
in peace processes, in particular when they are
informal, and in post-conflict peace-building situations.
The United Nations and its operations on the
ground are perfectly placed to utilize that largely
untapped resource. We continue to believe very
strongly that the appointment of women as special
representatives and envoys can play a catalytic role in
increasing the involvement of women in peace
processes, especially when those processes reach more
formal stages. Such appointments might also have a
positive impact on the level of reporting on genderrelated issues to the Security Council, which is still
unsatisfactory. Again, since the Council last met on this
topic, progress on women’s representation in such
leadership positions has been disappointing.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a groundbreaking
text that was followed up by an excellent study and
report to the Council last year. The 21 points identified
for action by the Secretary-General constitute a very
concrete basis for action. Their implementation will go
a very long way to address and, in fact, alter the current
situation of women in armed conflict. We very much
commend the work done by the Inter-Agency Task
Force on Women, Peace and Security. We would also
like to make particular mention of the implementation
work carried out by the Department for Disarmament
Affairs and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
Nevertheless, there is obviously a long way to go,
and we wonder if all the tools are actually in place to
ensure full implementation. The action plan for
implementation developed by the Task Force requires a
significant coordination effort, and it is not clear to us
whether the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women is sufficiently
equipped to fully play that crucial role. It also seems to

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

us that the Council itself has not been consistent
enough in incorporating resolution 1325 (2000), or
aspects thereof, in its relevant resolutions. Enhanced
coordination along the lines of the proposal made
earlier in this meeting by Chile would be an excellent
measure to improve the Council’s efficiency in that
respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Ambassador of Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): In the interest of time, I
will give a brief version of the statement that is being
circulated.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) has
undoubtedly increased our awareness and recognition
of women’s contributions to peace and security around
the world. Today a growing number of State leaders,
policy makers, non-governmental organizations and
international organizations are advocates of gender
mainstreaming in conflict management and conflict
prevention. The United Nations has played an
important role in mobilizing for such new norms and
standards.
As important as it may be, the time is ripe to
move beyond the mobilizing phase and look at where
we stand in terms of implementation. In that regard, I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno and
Senior Gender Adviser Smythe for their reports this
morning.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) requires
that the Secretary-General’s reports to the Security
Council address the gender aspects of the conflict
situations in question. The analysis recently completed
by the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and Advancement of Women reveals that two thirds of
reports make no, or only one, mention of women or
gender issues. That is not good enough. There is a need
to place greater emphasis on gender issues in all
reports to the Council. Furthermore, we call on the
Security Council to mainstream elements of resolution
1325 (2000) into all future resolutions on peace and
security.
Mr. Guéhenno informed us this morning of the
status of the work by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with regard to its efforts to mainstream
gender issues into the training and planning for
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, Norway hopes
that the recruitment process for the gender focal point

position within the Department will be completed as
soon as possible. A single position can be only a first
step. Further strengthening and, not least, upgrading is
necessary.
Gender issues form an integral part of Norway’s
United Nations training courses and programmes. We
will work actively to make sure that a gender
perspective is included in all relevant training
activities. We also welcome and strongly support the
Secretary-General’s policy of zero tolerance with
regard to United Nations personnel engaging in acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) urges
Member States and actors involved in negotiating and
implementing peace agreements to adopt a gender
perspective on their work and to invite women to the
peace table. In Afghanistan women have been invited
to be members of the Constitutional Commission,
which is crucial in order to ensure the rights of women
in the new Afghan constitution. It was interesting to
note during the public consultation process that
respondents put the rights of women high on the
agenda of the new constitution. However, there are
many challenges ahead.
In Sri Lanka the parties to the peace process
agreed to establish a mechanism to ensure a central
role for women and to have women’s issues properly
incorporated into the peace process. To support that
important initiative of the parties to the peace process
in Sri Lanka, Norway has appointed a senior adviser on
gender issues to the Sri Lankan peace process.
What more can Member States do to speed up the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)? A good
basis for that is found in the recommendations included
in the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up
to the resolution (S/2002/1154) and in the proposals
put forth in the report commissioned by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women entitled
“Women, war and peace”. Those reports paint a painful
picture of the situation of women in conflict zones, but,
just as important, they also paint a promising picture of
the potential of women as peace-mongers and peacebuilders.
Gender issues have a bearing on both peace and
development, and women’s active involvement is an
asset in the promotion of both.

23

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now call on the Ambassador of
Iceland.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) lays down the ground rules for
women to play a central role in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building. The key issue now is
implementation. Like those who preceded us, we
welcome the decision by the presidency to hold this
open debate to mark the resolution’s third anniversary.
Such debates remain necessary, considering how far we
are from full implementation.
By adopting the resolution, the Security Council
acknowledged that women have a role to play, whether
it concerns conflict prevention, peace negotiations,
peacekeeping or reconstruction.
The United Nations involvement in such
processes and its promotion of gender equality is a key
element to establish peace and security in conflict
regions. The Security Council should put the same
effort into ensuring the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) as it puts into all its other resolutions. The
effectiveness of the United Nations and its
international authority ultimately rest on the extent to
which it is seen to implement its own decisions.
Iceland has consistently supported gender
equality and the advancement of women. Resolution
1325 (2000) is an important element of the United
Nations agenda in that field.
The Icelandic Government has, for the past three
years, been financing the post of a gender expert at the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) office in Kosovo, where UNIFEM has been
playing an important role in advancing gender equality.
The Icelandic Government stresses the importance of
hiring both men and women for the Icelandic
peacekeeping unit.
We welcome the appointment of an interim
Gender Adviser to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. We hope that the permanent position of
Senior Gender Adviser will be filled shortly. Staff
working directly on gender issues must be included in
all peacekeeping operations and afforded effective
authority to ensure compliance at all levels. We also
encourage the Secretary-General, as a matter of
priority, to appoint more women as special
representatives and envoys, as called for in resolution
1325 (2000).

24

Iceland was the tenth State to ratify the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). The
entry-into-force of the Statute and the establishment of
the Court represent a major breakthrough for the
protection of human rights, including those of women.
It recognizes, inter alia, the specific impact of armed
conflict on women by criminalizing sexual and gender
violence and puts an end to impunity through ensuring
effective investigation and prosecution of those crimes
by the Court. It also addresses another very important
subject that is reflected in resolution 1325 (2000): by
being the most gender-balanced bench of all
international judicial institutions, the ICC provides an
excellent example of how to ensure the increased
representation of women at all decision-making levels.
The President: I give
representative of Timor-Leste.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Allow me from the
outset to express my delegation’s appreciation to you,
Sir, for convening this meeting on the anniversary of
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). This commendable initiative highlights the
commitment that the Council attaches to the role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in peace-building processes. Resolution 1325
(2000) recognizes that women and children are the
most vulnerable group both during and after conflict
and establishes a framework within which to ensure
their full participation in all aspects of the peace
process.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my delegation’s appreciation to UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno and Ms. Smythe for their
detailed presentation this morning because it is
particularly useful to have insight from the field.
We recognize the significance of this resolution in
the area of peacekeeping and endorse the
recommendations of the Secretary-General contained
in his report on women, peace and security of 2002
(S/2002/1154). We also welcome the appointment of a
Gender Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations; it will further contribute to ensuring a
gender perspective in all areas of peacekeeping
operations. However, more needs to be done to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2002) at all levels. TimorLeste welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) as reflected
in Secretary-General’s note (A/58/168), which reviews

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

and updates the activities conducted by UNIFEM in
2002. In particular, we commend the Independent
Experts’ Assessment of the Impact of Armed Conflict
on Women and Women’s Role in Peace-building,
issued in 2002.

the Child. My country will do its utmost to meet
international human rights standards in its laws,
policies and practices. To that end, Timor-Leste would
like to extend its appreciation to the donor community
for its commitment and support.

In Timor-Leste, UNIFEM has played a key role in
addressing gender equality and women’s empowerment
by strengthening their economic security and rights,
promoting human rights and supporting women in
governance and peace-building. In reference to the
latter, UNIFEM provided training to various groups of
women in political processes and participation. The
close collaboration among Timorese women, UNIFEM,
non-governmental organizations and other relevant
United Nations agencies resulted in a high percentage
of women being elected to the Constituent Assembly in
August 2001. In fact, 27 per cent of Timor-Leste’s
National Parliament is comprised of women, almost
achieving the 30 per cent quota set out in the Beijing
Platform for Action.

In that context, the Office for the Promotion of
Equality in the Cabinet of the Prime Minister, in
cooperation with UNIFEM, will draft Timor-Leste’s
first national report to the Committee on the CEDAW,
due in March 2004.

In May 2003, UNIFEM re-established its office in
Timor-Leste with the objective of training women
candidates for local elections and to continue its
dynamic partnership with the Government of TimorLeste in achieving the objectives of gender
mainstreaming
and
economic
and
political
empowerment in all facets of governance and civil
society.
In addition, with the technical and advisory
support provided by the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) to the National
Police Service, the number of women on active duty in
that law enforcement body now makes up more than 20
per cent of the total number of police officers.
Timor-Leste is committed to a nation-building
process which promotes a culture of peace, with full
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms, the
equality of all citizens and non-discrimination. Based
on that, the National Parliament ratified a package of
international human rights conventions on 10
December 2002, notably the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) and its Optional Protocol, the
International Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Rights of

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, a landmark treaty, recognizes that specific acts
of sexual and gender violence constitute serious crimes
under international law. In addition, the Statute
guarantees the fair representation of women on the
bench and requires the inclusion of judges with legal
expertise on violence against women and children.
Finally,
let
me
reaffirm
Timor-Leste’s
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which is essential to the achievement of the
Millennium Declaration Goals. We share the view
previously expressed here that sustainable peace and
lasting security cannot be achieved without the full and
equal participation of women in conflict resolution and
peace-building. For those reasons, we would like to see
this issue remain a regular item on the Security
Council’s agenda.
The President: I
representative of India.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Nambiar (India): I thank you, Sir, for
holding this open debate of the Security Council on
gender and peacekeeping to mark the third anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. I also wish to thank the senior
United Nations personnel who have provided us with
valuable introductions to the topic at hand.
The critical importance of this issue stems from
the fact that civilians are increasingly the victims,
sometimes unintended and sometimes intended, of the
violent conflicts that occur in different parts of the
world today. It has been estimated that close to 90 per
cent of current war casualties are civilians, the majority
of whom are women and children, compared to a
century ago, when 90 per cent of those who lost their
lives were military personnel. Although entire
communities suffer the consequences of armed

25

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

conflict, women and children are particularly affected
because of their status in society and their gender.
Despite this, women should not be viewed solely
as victims of war. They assume the key role of ensuring
family livelihoods in the midst of chaos and
destruction, and are particularly active in peace
movements at the grassroots level and in cultivating
peace within their communities. However, the absence
of women at the peace-negotiating table is
unconscionable.
My delegation supported many of the
recommendations made in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2002/1154) pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). We welcome, in that context, the decision to
appoint a gender adviser in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
Armed and other types of conflicts, terrorism and
hostage-taking still persist in many parts of the world.
My country has been the victim of a vicious campaign
of cross-border terrorism for two decades, resulting in
the deaths of at least 63,000 persons, mainly civilians,
women and children included. On 27 October, two days
ago, the first day of Ramadan, one person was killed
and 34 were injured in the Indian state of Jammu and
Kashmir when a grenade was indiscriminately lobbed
into a public telecommunications centre where people
were lined up to pay their bills. The campaign of
terrorism and intimidation seeking to force itself on an
unwilling citizenry in the state of Jammu and Kashmir
has been compounded by the misguided zealotry of the
fundamentalists who have launched a terror campaign
specifically targeting women for their so-called nonobservance of strict moral codes. In an area where
society has traditionally placed no such restrictions on
women and in which women have played such an
important role, the externally-foisted and forced
imposition of such social codes can only impact
adversely on society in general and on women in
particular.
It is our experience that terrorists exploit the
vulnerabilities of women in situations where violence
prevails and where normal life and livelihoods are
disrupted on account of terrorist activities. Perhaps
those that direct and sponsor terrorist activities are
aware that women, having the most vested interests in
ensuring a stable and peaceful society, foster values
that go against violence and terrorism.

26

Moreover, when provided the opportunity to
mobilize themselves through democratic processes,
women have been at the forefront of initiatives for the
consolidation of peace and security. One consistent
factor in democratic elections in different parts of India
has been the preponderance of women among voters.
The success of elections in Jammu and Kashmir last
year can be partly attributed to the high turnout of
Kashmiri women desirous of utilizing this democratic
exercise to empower themselves with the means for
producing a more secure and stable environment. It is
implicit that their participation would also foster and
strengthen activities that combat terrorism.
In Afghanistan, women are finding their rightful
place in society. The violence of the gun has largely
given way to a more peaceful and settled existence for
a large part of the population. An entire generation of
women who were denied their right to education and
work by those represented by the Taliban are now
pursuing educational and professional opportunities.
Unfortunately, the same religious fundamentalists have
now diverted their attention to other parts of the world,
including the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
India recently undertook the largest democratic
decentralization exercise when it provided grassroots
level panchayats — locally elected self-governing
bodies — across the country, with decision-making
powers. Since at least one-third of all panchayat
members in India are women by statutory law, that
decision has opened up the opportunity to Indian
women to lead on peace and security issues from the
grassroots level. Undoubtedly, women having a voice
in inculcating systems that foster peace and security in
a country of a billion people will have an impact far
and wide.
Women and children constitute some 80 per cent
of the world’s millions of refugees and other displaced
persons. They are threatened by the deprivation of
property, goods, services and their right to return to
their homes of origin, and by violence and insecurity.
We therefore support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the reintegration of women
through disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes be an integral part of all future
peacekeeping missions.
The debate today has provided a valuable
opportunity for the Council and the larger membership
to be updated on and further sensitized to the important

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

role that women can and should play in securing peace
and international security. It is incumbent upon the
United Nations to play its role in supporting and
furthering efforts in that direction. We support the
implementation
of
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations, although, as with all broad
recommendations, this must be conditional upon
circumstances and situations.
The representative of Pakistan has, in his
wisdom, chosen to make unwarranted and
unsubstantiated comments on the treatment of women
in India. I have earlier drawn the attention of the
Council to the invaluable role the political
empowerment of women can play in inculcating values
that serve as a deterrent to violence and terrorism. The
stark contrast between Indian and Pakistani politics,
seen in their historical and current contexts, can offer
no better evidence of the differing political, legal and
social frameworks within which each country views its
women as a resource in addressing the issue of peace
and security.
Early this month, in an open letter, dated 10
October 2003 addressed to the President of Pakistan,
the Executive Director of the Asia Division of Human
Rights Watch devoted one entire section to legal
discrimination against and mistreatment of women and
religious minorities in that country. The letter also
addresses, inter alia, the issues of the torture and
mistreatment of political opponents and journalists,
return to civilian rule and the legal framework order
and sectarian violence. The letter specifically records
that inaction on the Hudood laws persists despite the
Government-run National Commission for Status of
Women calling for a repeal of the Hudood Ordinance
on the grounds that it “makes a mockery of Islamic
justice” and is “not based on Islamic injunctions.”
This, despite the outcry over cases such as the tribal
jirga-ordered gang-rape of Mukhtaran Bibi in Punjab
and the sentencing to death by stoning of Zafran Bibi
on grounds of adultery. Human Rights Watch has
monitored those and other cases involving abuse under
the Hudood laws. Informed estimates suggest that over
210,000 cases under the Hudood laws are under
process in Pakistan’s legal system.
The aforementioned is just an illustration of the
problems that women in that country face. A State that
is unable and unwilling to provide basic rights to its
women is incapable of any sensitivity towards the
plight of women in other countries brought about by

terrorist actions. Conversely, it reveals the ethos —
under which the sponsors of the regressive Taliban in
Afghanistan have decided to use similar means to
subdue a civilian population, particularly women and
children, of another nation into succumbing to the
threat of terror.
The President: I would now like to offer a
statement in my national capacity.
The United States vigorously supported the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and we continue to pursue its goals, particularly
through the Group of Friends of resolution 1325
(2000), so ably energized by the Canadian delegation.
We therefore scheduled today’s meeting to take stock
of progress made to see what can be done to continue
to advance implementation and to provide an
operational perspective on implementation. The two
presentations that started off today’s discussion
provided us with valuable information, followed by a
useful and thought-provoking debate. I thank
Mr. Guéhenno and Ms. Smythe for joining us today.
We heartily commend the efforts of the
Secretariat, the Gender Advisers, Member States, civil
society
and
others
on
their
insight
and
accomplishments. But we clearly have work to do
before we can say that Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) has been fully implemented. I address this
point to everyone — the members of the Security
Council, other Member States, parties to conflict and,
of course, every department and office in the
Secretariat.
Although we called upon the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to provide today’s report, we
have not forgotten about the responsibilities and
contributions of other United Nations departments,
including the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, the Office of the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, and the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM),
among others. For our part, we in the Security Council,
where appropriate, include references to gender and
resolution 1325 (2000) in our resolutions, mission
mandates and reports — although there have been
comments throughout the day that perhaps we do not
do that sufficiently.
My Government’s support for resolution 1325
(2000) and the principles it embodies are part of a

27

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

larger United States commitment to advancing the
rights of women more broadly at home and around the
world. We envision a world in which participation in
all aspects of civic life by both men and women is free
and whole.
With respect to the focus of resolution 1325
(2000), it is literally impossible to understand conflicts
and then frame and implement policy responses to
those conflicts without overcoming the inertia that too
often sidelines, sidetracks and silences half of the
world’s population. No approach to peace can succeed
if it does not view men and women as equally
important components of the solution.
The United States, therefore, is placing great
emphasis on the role of women in resolving conflicts
and building peace in countries that desperately need
their vision and full participation. That is why we are
investing heavily in bringing women into the equation
in post-conflict areas where their voices have been
muted. For example, the Office of the Senior
Coordinator for International Women’s Issues in the
United States Department of State lists nearly 175
projects dedicated to women’s political, economic and
social development in Afghanistan. These include a
$2.5 million grant to build women’s resource centres in
14 provinces, as well as an additional $1 million for
educational and training programmes on topics ranging
from employment to human rights education and
political participation skills; grants to support women’s
political participation and potential female candidates
in various Afghan provinces, and an advocacy training
programme held in the United States for Afghan
women political activists in preparation for the Loya
Jirga. We look forward to the Council’s upcoming trip
to Afghanistan as an opportunity to see first-hand what
kind of progress women in Afghanistan have made and
to continue to urge their involvement in the postconflict reconstruction of their country. I am pleased to
have heard Minister of State Müller confirm
Germany’s commitment to that aspect of the Council’s
visit.
In Iraq, we are promoting women’s inclusion in
the building of civil society. The Coalition Provisional
Authority governance team has in fact held dozens of
meetings with Iraqi women on a range of issues,
including constitutional and legal reform, security,
human rights and education and health, among others.
In May, the Authority Administrator, Ambassador
Bremer, personally met with Iraqi women representing

28

a range of backgrounds to discuss the future of Iraq. He
encouraged them to form a steering committee, and as
a result, on 9 July more than 70 women — experts in
law, education, health, human rights and economics —
participated in a day of workshops entitled “The voice
of women in Iraq”. United States Undersecretary of
State for Global Affairs Paula Dobriansky gave the
keynote address and delivered a personal message from
President Bush, who commended the women attending
the conference for “their strong commitment to
creating an Iraq where the benefits of freedom are
available to all citizens”. Representatives from the
United Nations and United Nations agencies —
including the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children’s Fund and UNIFEM,
which do such important work on these issues — also
participated and contributed.
There is remarkable work being done at the
United-States-supported Fatima al-Zahra Centre for
Women’s Rights in Hillah, where another important
meeting, entitled “The heartland of Iraq’s women’s
conference”, took place just this month. More than 150
women attended from the five south-central provinces,
including women involved in the establishment of
women’s centres and organizations in their
communities.
In addition, we are working to strengthen
community-based groups in Iraq to foster citizen
participation in the local policy-making process. In that
regard, our funding for women’s organizations has
helped them build their capacity to promote women’s
issues at interim advisory councils across Iraq and to
organize workshops for Iraqi women to discuss reforms
in such areas as matrimonial law, the prevention of
violence, abuse against women and equal opportunities
in education and employment. Reinforcing those
efforts, the Coalition Provisional Authority and the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) are cooperating with the Baghdad District
Advisory Council women’s committee, the Baghdad
Women’s
Non-Governmental
Organization
Coordinating Council and Women for Women
International to conduct on-site assessments for the
establishment of nine women’s training and education
centres across the city.
As Ms. Smythe noted, women are among the
most disadvantaged members of the population of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, another strife-torn
nation. To help women in the Democratic Republic of

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

the Congo, we have funded programmes through the
International Human Rights Law Group to support
local organizations attempting to end sexual violence
against women. USAID has also granted $500,000 to
the International Rescue Committee for a programme
to counsel women and help them deal with the
consequences of rape in North and South Kivu.
Those are but a few examples of our
programmatic emphasis on implementing resolution
1325 (2000) in letter and spirit. As a further
manifestation of our resolve, shared by many of the
countries present here today, the United States has
sponsored a draft resolution on women and political
participation during the current session of the General
Assembly. Our draft resolution outlines a series of
practical steps that States and other actors can and
should take to increase women’s participation in
politics and decision-making. It also specifically
mentions resolution 1325 (2000) and urges States and
the United Nations to increase women’s participation in
conflict resolution and peace processes.
I would also like to draw attention to another
issue that has a significant impact on women,
particularly in conflict situations. We know that each
year hundreds of thousands of women and children fall
victim to the sex trade. As President Bush said to the
General Assembly last month,
“Nearly two centuries after the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade and more than a century
after slavery was officially ended in its last
strongholds, the trade in human beings for any
purpose must not be allowed to thrive in our
time.” (A/58/PV.7, p. 12)
The United States Government has therefore
committed $50 million to support organizations that are
rescuing women and children from exploitation and
giving them the hope of a new life. In this regard, I
would especially like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno for his update on the current
response of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to trafficking in women as it affects
peacekeeping operations, and note that we look
forward to the lessons-learned study that he has under
way. We join others in expressing our pleasure at
hearing that the Department intends soon to fill the
Gender Adviser position at Headquarters.
I conclude by saying that, while we have made
progress, there is indeed much more work to be done. I

echo many of the questions that my colleagues have
raised. My Government and my Mission will continue
to support and push for the implementation of the
landmark resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Because of the press of other business, UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno was unable to be with us
this afternoon. I therefore propose that the presidency
of the Council undertake to comb through some of the
questions that were addressed to him during the course
of this afternoon’s discussion, ensure that they reach
his Office and ask for those replies that he can provide
at this particular time. In any event, I am sure that such
questions will serve as a guide to his Office and to
others with regard to the concerns expressed here this
afternoon by Member States.
Since Ms. Smythe has been with us this
afternoon, listening patiently throughout the debate, I
would now like to ask her if she has any additional
comments to make or if she would like to undertake to
reply to any of the questions that have been asked this
afternoon.
Ms. Smythe: I do not feel able to step into
Mr. Guéhenno’s shoes and answer the questions
directed at him.
I would like, however, to say that I recognize that
sensitivity on gender issues has taken hold. We in the
field would like to see verbal commitments translated
into real action. The support that we have received so
far has enabled us to come as far as we have.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular, the question of elections is preoccupying
many women’s groups, as well as civil society in
general. So we are very pleased to know that some
work has been done by your Government,
Mr. President, on women and political participation.
That is one of the issues that we will follow up very
quickly — as soon as I get back — so as to get more
information for my colleagues in the system, as well as
for people in the United States Embassy.
Perhaps we omitted to mention this morning that
one source of support that enabled us to do the amount
of work that we were able to do was the Office of
Ms. Angela King. From the outset, when there was no
Gender Adviser, her Office supplied much useful
advice to the gender office in the Democratic Republic

29

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

of the Congo. We are particularly grateful to Ms. King
and her team for that. We apologize for the omission in
our statement this morning.

I would also like briefly to draw the attention of
the Council to a report in The New York Times on
2 February 2003 on the Gujarat killing. It states:

Having made those comments, I would like to
add that we shall work very closely with
Mr. Guéhenno’s Office to supply any answers that may
be needed as a follow-up to this meeting.

“The scale of the violence was matched only by
its brutality. Women were gang-raped before
being killed. Children were burned alive.
Gravediggers at mass burial sites told
investigators that ‘most bodies that had
arrived ... were burned and butchered beyond
recognition. Many were missing body parts —
arms, legs and even heads.’”

I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to speak here today.
The President: I would like once again to thank
Ms. Smythe for her statement and for bringing us the
perspective of somebody who is working very hard on
these issues in the field.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to respond to the
remarks by the representative of India.
One of the dimensions of today’s debate is the
plight of women as victims of conflict. It was from that
perspective that my delegation highlighted the travails
and tribulations of Kashmiri women facing brutal
repression by the Indian security forces.
The tales of torture and rape of Kashmiri women
have not been concocted by Pakistan; they have been
systematically catalogued by Indian and international
human rights organizations over the past 13 years. The
horrific gang rape of over 20 women in the Kashmiri
village of Konan Poshpura by Indian soldiers remains a
scar on the conscience of humanity. In that so-called
largest democracy there is still no accountability for
the perpetrators.
I would like to quote just one report. Asia Watch
states:
“Rape is used as a means of targeting women. In
raping them, the security forces are trying to
punish and humiliate the entire community.”
The international media has reported similar
tactics employed by the Hindu mobs during the recent
killing of over 2,000 Muslims in Gujarat. Just recently,
a key witness of the killing of many innocent Muslims
in what is known as the Best Bakery case, a woman of
young age, was harassed to the point where she had to
go back on her earlier accounts in order to save her life
and the lives of the remainder of her family. That
incident has been extensively reported by the Indian
media.

30

That report was contributed by Mr. Pankaj Mishra, an
Indian who is the author of a novel entitled The
Romantics.
Despite these reports, impunity continues for the
perpetrators, while the victims live in fear, shame and
ignominy.
The Indian representative referred to the case of a
Pakistani woman, Mukhtaran Bibi. In that unfortunate
incident, the law took its course, and all the
perpetrators have been brought to justice. Such isolated
incidents are indeed not comparable to State-sponsored
terrorism unleashed on innocent people.
Our discussion today will not be complete if we
fail to speak for those and other such victims around
the world. It would be morally wrong to pretend that
everything is fine just because India says so. We
believe that the international community has a
responsibility to stand up for the helpless Kashmiris as
well, who cannot match India’s military might but
legitimately hope for justice and fairness.
It is high time for India to give up its policy of
deceit and chicanery and instead engage in a serious
and purposeful dialogue with Pakistan to resolve the
Kashmir dispute, which has brought untold suffering to
12 million Kashmiri people.
The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
indicated that the presidency would undertake the task
of preparing a summary of the main points expressed
during our discussion. Accordingly, the presidency will
do so as soon as possible and issue it as a press release.

S/PV.4852 (Resumption 1)

I wish to thank all the participants in today’s very
interesting discussion on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). A total of 37 Member States,
including Council members, took the floor, which is

evidence of the strong interest in the United Nations in
the implementation of this very, very important
resolution.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

31
