S/PV.9276

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9276th meeting

Tuesday, 7 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dlhovo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Ms. Escorel de Moraes
Ms. Lin Yi
Mrs. Flores
Ms. Schiappa
Ms. Ndembet Damas
Ms. Abudu
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Buttigieg
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Berset
Ms. Al Kaabi
Lord Ahmad
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Towards the 25th anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
Letter dated 24 February 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/146)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-06823 (E)
*2306823*

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Towards the 25th anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000)
Letter dated 24 February 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/146)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the President, Ministers and other high-level
representatives. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Pakistan, Panama, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
Uruguay and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite Her Excellency
Ms. Amal Hamad, Minister of Women’s Affairs of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.
It is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Sima
Sami Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women;
Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric Egger, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross; Ms. Bineta
2/31

07/03/2023

Diop, Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission; and
Ms. Leymah Gbowee, 2011 Nobel Peace Laureate.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Stella Ronner-Grubačić, European Union
Ambassador for Gender and Diversity, to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/146, which contains the text of
a letter dated 24 February 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
Ms. Bahous: In the 20 years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, we have witnessed some historic
firsts for gender equality. While we should pause to
appreciate those firsts, we should also remember that
we have significantly changed neither the composition
of the people who sit at peace negotiation tables nor
the impunity enjoyed by those who commit atrocities
against women and girls. In fact, that twentieth
anniversary was not a celebration but a wake-up
call. We warned that the effects of ignoring our own
commitments to women and peace and security would
be long-lasting and intergenerational for women, and
immediate and drastic for world peace.
We were right to worry. At the Security Council
meeting two and a half years ago marking the twentieth
anniversary (see S/2020/1076), the Security Council
heard from an Afghan woman representing civil
society, Zarqa Yaftali. She was proud to be the tenth
Afghan woman to be invited to speak to the Security
Council. Like most of those who preceded her, she
asked that women’s rights not be bargained away to
reach a deal with the Taliban. And she expressed regret
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276

that women had been excluded from 80 per cent of
peace negotiations from 2005 to 2020, including the
talks between the United States and the Taliban. A few
months later, Zarqa’s worst fears materialized, and the
Taliban took control of her country once again. I visited
Afghanistan with the Deputy Secretary-General only a
few weeks ago. Since then, the Taliban have announced
more restrictions and detained more activists, including
the women’s rights defenders Narges Sadat and Ismail
Mashal, a university professor who bravely showed
his solidarity with Afghan women and their right
to education. Since the Council will be holding yet
another meeting on Afghanistan tomorrow, I want
to ask Council members to speak and act forcefully
against that gender apartheid and find ways to support
Afghan women and girls in their darkest moment.

social media, have roles in sharing vital information
and rallying support and also in causing further harm
through spreading disinformation and fostering violent
misogyny. It is critical that Governments and private
companies work together to foster technology as an
enabler and accelerator of progress.

Afghanistan is one of the most extreme examples
of regression in women’s rights, but it is far from the
only one. Just five days after the Security Council met
to mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), fighting broke out in Ethiopia’s northern region
of Tigray. When a peace deal was signed two years
later, some estimated the death toll to be in the hundreds
of thousands. We may never know the number of
women and girls who were raped, but the International
Commission of Human Rights Experts on Ethiopia
said that sexual violence had been committed on a
staggering scale. Child marriage increased by 51 per
cent in one year of conflict, and local health centres,
aid organizations and human rights groups continue to
report cases of sexual violence.

Back in 2020, in a world wracked by a new
pandemic that showed the enormous value of caregivers
and the importance of investing in health, education,
food security and social protection, we had hoped
that countries would heed the lessons from decades of
activism by women peacebuilders and rethink military
spending. Instead, that spending has continued to grow,
passing the $2 trillion mark, even without the significant
military expenditure of the past months. Neither the
pandemic nor supply-chain issues prevented another
year of rising global arms sales. As we meet today at
the mid-point between the twentieth and twenty-fifth
anniversaries, on the eve of International Women’s
Day, it is obvious that we need a radical change of
direction. The concept note (S/2023/146, annex) for
today’s meeting asks members for their plans between
now and 2025, and I will close with two suggestions
about what that change of direction could look like.

Since the twentieth anniversary, there have been
several military coups in conflict-affected countries,
from the Sahel and the Sudan to Myanmar, dramatically
shrinking the civic space for women’s organizations
and activists if not closing it altogether. According to a
recent study, for example, politically motivated online
abuse about women from and in Myanmar increased at
least fivefold in the aftermath of the military coup in
February 2021. It mainly takes the form of sexualized
threats and the release of home addresses, contact
details and personal photos or videos of women who
commented positively on groups opposing military rule
in Myanmar.
Yesterday the Commission on the Status of
Women began its annual session with a priority theme
dedicated to innovation and technological change.
As my examples so far have demonstrated, women’s
status is under siege. Aspects of technology, such as

We also just passed the one-year mark since the
start of the invasion of Ukraine and of the largest
refugee crisis in Europe since the Second World War.
Women and their children make up 90 per cent of the
nearly 8 million Ukrainians who have been forced to
move to other countries. Similarly, women and girls are
68 per cent of the millions displaced within Ukraine.
Peace is the only answer, with women’s engagement in
the process.

First, we cannot expect 2025 to be any different if
the bulk of our interventions continue to be training,
sensitization, guidance, capacity-building, setting up
networks and holding one event after another to talk
about women’s participation, rather than mandating
it in every meeting and decision-making process in
which we have authority. I ask that Member States’
plans be remarkable for their special measures and
accountability with regard to their application. I ask
that that they be characterized by mandates, conditions,
quotas, funding earmarks, incentives and consequences
for non-compliance. To transform the way that we do
peace and security will take more than exhortations
and consultations in the margins.

23-068233/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

Secondly, we need to broaden our reach to get
resources to those who most need them but do not
have them. The best tool that we have in the United
Nations to channel funds to women’s organizations in
conflict-affected countries is the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, which has already funded more
than 900 organizations since it was created in 2015 — a
third of them in the past year alone. I am especially
proud that almost half of those organizations received
funding from the United Nations for the first time, and
90 per cent of them operate at the subnational level.
We urgently need better ways to support civil society
and social movements in those countries. That means
being much more intentional about funding or engaging
with new groups, especially with young women. Let me
assure members that UN-Women is ready to work with
them in finding that change of direction and forging a
new path forward.
I am grateful to the Government of Mozambique for
convening us now to set new goals and make purposeful
and effective plans before it is too late.
The President: I thank Ms. Bahous for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Spoljaric Egger.
Ms. Spoljaric Egger: I thank the Republic of
Mozambique for convening today’s important debate.
As we speak, more than 100 armed conflicts are
raging around the world. At the same time, hardwon generational gains on gender equality are being
reversed. That is no coincidence. As respect for gender
equality declines, violence rises. When armed violence
intersects with pre-existing patterns of discrimination,
the impacts are disastrous for communities. Gender
inequality harms us all and holds back women and girls
the most. From front lines to camps and prisons, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) sees
on a daily basis the brutal impacts of armed conflict on
women and girls. They are exposed to sexual violence at
the hands of arms-bearers at shocking levels. They die
giving birth, unable to access the medical care that could
have saved them. Women and girls are displaced, at risk
of further abuses, while in search of water, firewood
and food in their daily struggle for survival. Some are
former soldiers, who are dehumanized and often denied
the same treatment as their male counterparts. Some
are detained in prisons designed for men and therefore
unsuited to their needs. Others go missing and are at
greater risk of either not being reported missing or of
their missing status not being adequately recorded by
4/31

07/03/2023

the authorities. And in the digital space, women’s safety
and dignity are threatened by gender disinformation
and abuse.
Civilians, fighters, caregivers, prisoners, mothers,
daughters — the realities of women in conflict are
all too often invisible and disregarded. Every day,
the International Committee of the Red Cross bears
witness to the vital role that women play in protecting
and leading their families and societies, such as in their
mobilization and their search for their missing relatives.
The ICRC is also acutely aware that the humanitarian
responses that fail to take gender inequality into account
are likely to reinforce gender-based discrimination and
other harms.
The ICRC’s principles are there to guide
us — humanity, impartiality and neutrality. Taking
those three principles together means that we take the
side only of the victims of armed conflict and violence,
whether they are men, women or children. Neutrality,
in particular, is a practical tool that allows the ICRC
to negotiate access to populations affected by conflict
in the places that are the hardest to reach. As a neutral
organization, we do not take a stand on political,
military or ideological matters. But that has never
prevented us from seeking to reach people and alleviate
their suffering and the harms they face that are shaped
by social or political power dynamics.
First, international humanitarian law lies at the
heart of protecting all victims of conflict. That means
that diverse women, men, boys and girls are protected
equally. Respect for international humanitarian law
will prevent the enormous harm resulting from the
violations of its rules. It will also help to rebuild stability
and reconcile societies. Importantly, international
humanitarian law prohibits discrimination and requires
the parties to armed conflict to assess and take steps
to reduce expected civilian harm. The effective
implementation of those obligations requires the
political will of States to assess their own conduct and
to seriously examine whether or not their fighting forces
have the resources and expertise to take the protection
of the entirety of the civilian population into account. It
is urgent that States be committed to applying a gender
perspective to the application and interpretation of
international humanitarian law. Those commitments
can be made in women and peace and security national
action plans and related policies.
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

Secondly, States must ensure that the clear
prohibition of sexual violence under international
humanitarian law is integrated into national law, military
doctrine and training. While acts of sexual violence
are prohibited, both explicitly and implicitly, under
international humanitarian law and in international and
non-international armed conflicts alike, it is too often
a known and normalized reality. Currently, national
frameworks feature inadequate definitions of sexual
violence and multiple barriers that prevent survivors
from coming forward. Survivors of sexual violence
often suffer from a double violation, in that they face
community rejection or stigmatization if they attempt
to access support or legal services. Changes to domestic
law and policy are required. They should be robust,
resourced and implemented. Engaging more boldly and
directly with weapons-bearers on the issue of sexual
violence, with the ultimate goal of preventing it from
occurring in the first place, should become a de facto
preventive approach that is supported and facilitated in
times of peace in order to prevent the worst in times
of war.
Thirdly, States can empower women before, during
and after the onset of armed conflict to support a
greater likelihood of achieving a sustainable peace. If
women are absent in former labour markets, if they are
not benefiting equally from digital transformation and
technological advancement, if they have no access to
health care and if they have to live with the physical
and mental scars of sexual violence, how will they take
their seat at the table?
In peacetime, women must be empowered not only
politically and legally but also economically if they
are to play a role in political settlements. At the end
of the day, only those who control assets will have
an influence when important decisions are taken. It
is vital that women not just be at the table to make
up the numbers, but also be empowered to represent
their communities.
Closing the gender gap in innovation and
technology is the focus of the Commission on the Status
of Women at its sixty-seventh session, which opened
yesterday. Nowhere is the digital gender divide more
acute than in conflict settings. We must urgently ensure
that the promises of technological advancement also
support the efforts for its gender equality and women’s
empowerment in those contexts.

S/PV.9276

The protection of those faced with the greatest
discrimination and dehumanization — very often,
women and girls — lies at the heart of respect for the law
as a pathway to peace. Peace draws closer when people
of all genders are equally respected and protected, free
from physical and mental harm, and when they have the
opportunities to shape their future.
The President: I thank Ms. Spoljaric Egger for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Diop.
Ms. Diop: Let me recognize you, Madam President,
and congratulate you and the delegation of Mozambique
on your presidency of the Security Council for the
month of March and on convening this open debate
on women and peace and security, towards the 25th
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). I wish you a
happy women’s month.
Allow me to thank Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and her team for the various
forms of support that we have received in Africa on
the implementation of women and peace and security
policies and programmes. I recognize the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and my
sister Leymah Gbowee, the Nobel Peace Laureate.
Let me just say that the open debate that we are
having today is very important to us in order to look
back and reflect on what we have achieved and learned
since 2020. It will help us to recalibrate the agenda as
we move towards the silver jubilee in 2025. It is also an
opportunity to assess how we are emerging from the
past two dark years of the coronavirus disease, which
reversed many of the gains made over the past two
decades of hard work and sacrifice by women.
The current impact of armed conflict on women and
girls is precarious. The kidnappings in the Sahel, the
rape, killing and maiming of young girls and boys in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the destruction of
homes, abductions and displacement in Cabo Delgado,
Mozambique, and all the ongoing atrocities in the
chronic conflict areas in the Lake Chad basin in East
Africa, combined with climate change and a decline
in financial flows, have exacerbated the suffering
of women and girls, stripping them of their dignity
through the unprecedented rates of sexual violence and
the deprivation of necessary commodities and services.
Many girls have seen their futures robbed, as they
miss the opportunity to attend school and develop their

23-068235/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

human capital. To resolve that, we must restructure and
enhance our protection measures.
Unfortunately, while many women are engaged
in community and peacebuilding initiatives, their
voices are yet to be heard in the peace negotiations
and mediation processes during which road maps to
return to peace are drawn up. We are changing that
situation within the African Union by calling for the
deployment of FemWise-Africa in various tracks, not
only in track three but also in track one and track two
mediation processes.
Let me provide one example. An hour ago, I attended
a retreat of Ethiopian women from all areas — not just
one part, but different regions. We met at a retreat in
Pretoria, facilitated by our sister Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, who is part of the Panel of the Wise. I listened
to the women of Ethiopia and their requests regarding,
of course, an issue that we have mentioned, namely,
violence against women, and how to bring it into
negotiation and peacebuilding, which was a priority.
The request for 50-50 per cent participation of women
in peacebuilding efforts was also highlighted. I think
that those are some of the examples in which we see
that, when women are not invited to the table, they can
create their own table and make sure that they invite
other women to come and join them, because they
said that they had been waiting, and they could not
wait anymore.
If I may be allowed, let me again just highlight the
fact that, as I said, as we look forward to the twentyfifth anniversary in two years’ time, my Office, the
African Union Office of the Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security, in line with our mandate to raise
the voices of women in peace and security processes,
has led a two-pronged strategy to accelerate the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda on the continent.
The first strand of the strategy is strengthening
the women and peace and security policy environment
by advocating for the adoption and implementation
of national action plans by all States, including the
remaining States, because, to date, 61 per cent of our
member States have adopted a national action plan.
Such national action plans are very important. We hope
to attain a 75 per cent rate of adoption of national action
plans by 2025. It is a commitment that our member
States made. We are doing that while strengthening
accountability, which is another approach that we need to
6/31

07/03/2023

put in place, using the Continental Results Framework,
which is quite unique in the world, as well as annual
reporting on women and peace and security. Eightythree per cent of our member States reported using the
Continental Results Framework. Recommendations as
a result of such reporting were presented to the Peace
and Security Council for follow-up action. That is what
my Office continues to do in our continent.
The second strand is building an African
women’s movement — the African Women’s Leaders
Network — in order to complement FemWise-Africa
in focusing on women and peace and security. The
Network has been established in 32 nations. Through
the Network, we are ensuring that women’s leadership
is mainstreamed in governance and in the peace and
development process so as to create a critical mass
of women leaders at all levels. We need to make sure
that they are in all sectors of life, not just in peace
processes. That way, we would no longer need to
ask for an invitation to women to participate at the
decision-making table, because they would already
be there.
The data from the Continental Results Framework
show that we are making some — although
inadequate — progress in the implementation of
existing protection mechanisms, as confirmed by
all the previous speakers. Eighty-five per cent of our
countries reported, in 2022, that they had established
mechanisms to protect from, and respond to, sexual and
gender-based violence, such as special courts, gender
desks and call centres in security, medical and social
institutions as a way of boosting their holistic survivorcentred support in big cities.
At the continental level and in addition to the
existing framework, we at the African Union are in the
process of developing a convention on violence against
women and girls, which was strongly recommended by
the two positive masculinity conferences held at the
presidential level, in Kinshasa and Dakar, in 2021 and
2022, consecutively We hope that all Member States
will join that process in order to make sure that we
address the scourge that UN-Women has called the
“shadow pandemic”.
However, we need to do more, especially by
preventing violations and supporting victims to rebuild
better through socioeconomic and psychological
programmes. We urgently need measures to end
impunity and hold perpetrators to account.
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276

Allow me to conclude by commending the work
of the Council in realizing the women and peace and
security agenda, including by convening more regular
and frequent women and peace and security open
debates, inviting women civil society briefers and
mainstreaming women and peace and security language
in other Security Council resolutions. I believe we can
scale up those efforts. We need to make sure there is
accountability and that resources are available, so that
it is not just words, open debates and resolutions, but
also action.

Almost 23 years ago, in this very Chamber, a
resolution was adopted (resolution 1325 (2000)).
Everyone believed it was the key to unlocking the full
potential of women in the global quest for peace and
security. At the time, the conversation around wars
and peace processes was primarily limited to men with
political power and men with guns. The common slogan
we at the grass-roots level heard was “Men make wars;
they should make peace.” It has been proven time and
again that men do make war, but are unable to make
peace themselves.

In order to enhance the Council’s work on the
women and peace and security agenda, I recommend
that the Council consider the following.

Sadly, the conversation is the same in 2023. The
question we must then ask ourselves as stakeholders
is: how do we discuss the issue of peace and security
and leave out 50 per cent of the population? How do
we change the dynamic of a particular situation without
engaging and utilizing all of the resources at our
disposal? Twenty-three years after the resolution on
women and peace and security, what have I learned?

First, the Council should work more closely with
other regional entities, such as the African Union Peace
and Security Council, on matters of common concern.
We know that the Continental Results Framework we
have developed is unique. How do we make sure that the
Council is inspired by that tool put in place to measure
progress and ensure accountability?
Secondly, we must ensure that women’s
organizations have access to predictable and flexible
funding. Flexible funding, in particular, is important
to enable the organizations to effectively carry
out peacebuilding efforts in the current difficult
circumstances they are operating in, especially in
conflict zones.
Finally, we must rethink the structure of our
mediation table. We must devise ways to ensure
wide inclusion, especially of women and youth, at
decision-making tables.
I reiterate our commitment to working with all
Member States in efforts to prevent and eliminate
conflicts while protecting the dignity of women and
girls. We look forward to increased support to the
women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I thank Ms. Diop for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gbowee.
Ms. Gbowee: I would like to take this moment to
express solidarity with the women across the world who
are suffering injustices and abuse, specifically in places
where their right to life, education and bodily autonomy
is a daily struggle. I would also like to recognize the
efforts of women at the community level who continue
to keep hope alive through their advocacy.

First, I learned that resolution 1325 (2000) is still
seen by many actors as a tool for nations in a state of
war, where investment in its implementation is either
stalled or slowed.
Secondly, I learned that the national action plans on
the resolution are now a tool for politicians and political
actors to window dress women and peace and security
issues, as a cover-up for their failure to incorporate
women’s rights issues into their national action plans
or national agendas. That is done to impress donors and
development partners.
Thirdly, I learned that local activists working on
women and peace and security issues continue to do
their work, proving time and again that despite the lack
of funds, it is not a day job, but an insurance policy for
their children and their communities.
There is a need for us to redefine peace as we look
towards the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). Peace, in my opinion, is not just the absence
of war, but the presence of conditions that dignify all.
The greatest threats to women and peace and security
in nations across the world are no longer the barrel of
a gun. Economic hardship, health and food insecurity
and climate crisis are all part of it. When social budgets
for our nations surpass our military budgets, we will
begin to see more peaceful communities.
The women and peace and security agenda is not a
dormant agenda. It is an actionable agenda. It is not an

23-068237/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

agenda for meetings and conversation. If we collectively
put some measures in place, we can definitely attain
global peace. Here are a few ways we must amplify the
women and peace and security agenda.
First, engage local women as peace activists at the
very beginning of peace missions. Partner with them
and seek their counsel, as they are the custodians of their
communities, hence the keepers of vital information.
Secondly, as we have said over the years, we should
bring women to the peace table both as negotiators
and mediators. It is amazing to see how it is only the
men with guns who are consistently invited to the table
to find solutions, while women, who bear the greater
brunt, are often invited merely as observers. The impact
of conflict on the lives on women qualifies us for more
than observer status at peace talks.
Thirdly, we must move beyond political rhetoric.
It is not okay to have national action plans but not the
budgets to match them. Without funding and political
will, we cannot move the peace and security agenda
forward. Without funding and political will, resolution
1325 (2000) will remain a toothless bulldog.
Every stakeholder globally should see women and
peace and security as a holistic part of the global peace
and security agenda in all its shapes and forms. Our
search for peace in our world will continue to be in vain
if we do not bring women to the table. I firmly believe
that trying to work for global peace and security without
women’s participation is like trying to see the whole
picture with one eye covered. As Michelle Bachelet
has said,
“We simply can no longer afford to deny the full
potential of one half of the population. The world
needs to tap into the talent and wisdom of women.
Whether the issue is food security, [climate
change], economic recovery, health or peace and
security, the participation of women is needed now
more than ever”.
As we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
women and peace and security agenda, it is my hope
that more will be done and that actionable agendas will
be undertaken to move us towards a more peaceful and
just world.
The President: I thank Ms. Gbowee for her briefing.
8/31

07/03/2023

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Mozambique.
(spoke in Portuguese; English interpretation provided
by the delegation)
On behalf of the Government of Mozambique, I
am personally pleased to welcome all the briefers and
members of the Security Council honouring us with
their presence at this high-level open debate on the
theme of “Women and peace and security: towards
the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000)”, a topic that is undeniably timely and relevant
throughout the world, particularly in Mozambique.
Let me express our appreciation to His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres for his visionary
leadership of our important Organization, and above
all for his commitment to keeping gender issues at the
centre of the global agenda while emphasizing conflict
prevention, management and resolution, as well as the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
debate, which is taking place during Women’s History
Month, provides us with an opportunity to assess the
results of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The women and peace and security agenda
constitutes one of the greatest priorities and challenges
for the international community, Africa, the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and
Mozambique in particular. The Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in October 2000
represented a significant step forward by clearly
highlighting the transformative role that women
play in political and socioeconomic processes and in
peacebuilding. The resolution calls on national and
international actors to include women fully in postconflict prevention, resolution and recovery and to
ensure that all peacebuilding efforts are consistent with
the principles of gender equality.
To this day, women constitute one of society’s
groups that are most affected by armed conflict
throughout the world and in Africa in particular. We
continue to see serious violations of women’s rights,
and the majority of refugees and internally displaced
people whose situation is caused by armed conflict is
made up of women, children, people with disabilities
and the elderly. Unfortunately, that sad reality continues
to prevail despite the fact that the Security Council
has adopted many resolutions aimed at preventing
such situations.
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

Women’s
participation
in
decision-making
processes concerning issues of peace, security, conflict
prevention and resolution, along with their effective
participation in peacekeeping missions, is a major
challenge. The Government of Mozambique promotes,
supports and values women’s advancement in all aspects
of political, economic, social and cultural life through
constitutional rule and its implementation. That is why
we have established and implemented a number of
instruments that prioritize our country’s gender policy
and the strategy for its implementation, including a
national action plan for the advancement of women, a
domestic violence law, a multisectoral mechanism for
integrated care for women victims of violence and a
law aimed at preventing and combating early marriage,
because we believe that such instruments can be of great
help to women in overcoming the challenges they face.
At the international level, among other things
Mozambique is a signatory to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, the Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa
and the SADC Protocol on Gender and Development.
But while we have many instruments, the challenge is
to implement them fully.
In order to operationalize resolution 1325 (2000),
Mozambique implemented its national action plan on
women, peace and security, and we have achieved
notable results by emphasizing strengthening women’s
safety and providing comprehensive services to
survivors of various types of violence; encouraging
the socioeconomic promotion of women in the
context of post-conflict recovery; strengthening the
capacity of women and women’s organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, particularly at the
community level; guaranteeing equal rights to access
to land, education and health, with a positive impact on
illiteracy rates, which fell from 88 per cent in 1980 to
46 per cent in 2021, and on maternal and child mortality;
and increasing women’s political representation in
governance bodies at the central, provincial, municipal
and district levels, most notably illustrated by the fact
that the percentage of women in the Assembly of the
Republic increased from 25 per cent in 1997 to 43 per
cent in its present session, which is presided over by
a woman, as was the previous session. Mozambique
enjoys gender parity in the Council of Ministers, where
women lead important ministries, in addition to women

S/PV.9276

Deputy Ministers, Secretaries of State and provincial
Governors. In judicial bodies, women’s participation
is substantial at all levels. It should also be noted that
there are women Presidents of the Administrative
Court and the Constitutional Council, and that the
Attorney General of the Republic is a woman. The
representation of women in judicial bodies allows for
greater attention to the legal protection of women’s
rights in conflict situations.
Within the scope of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), the coordination, monitoring
and accountability of global commitments in terms of
women and peace and security has been strengthened.
We reaffirm the commitment of the Government of the
Republic of Mozambique to continue its internal efforts
with a view to ensuring the increased involvement of
women in the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts, as well as in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
As the United Nations, we must work harder to
incorporate the gender perspective into peacekeeping
operations; ensure that parties to armed conflict
take special measures to protect women, girls and
children from gender-based violence, in particular
the different forms of sexual violence; guarantee the
socioeconomic empowerment of women and girls
in the post-conflict period as a fundamental tool for
their reintegration; strengthen society’s awareness
of gender equality and women’s rights in all spheres;
and ensure that Security Council missions take into
account gender mainstreaming and women’s rights,
including in consultation with local and international
women’s groups.
We hope that at the end of today’s open debate,
we will be able to positively assess the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by Member
States and envisage their full compliance therewith.
We also hope to forge synergies among Member States
and other relevant actors with a view to strengthening
strategies and ongoing actions in the field of gender
equality and the effective involvement of women in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, as well as to ensuring
that all peacebuilding efforts are consistent with the
principle of gender equality.
There is no doubt that by involving more women
in the peacebuilding and peacekeeping agenda in our
countries, we will achieve success. Women — who give
life — do not wish under any circumstances for the lives

23-068239/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

of the people they bring into the world to be taken away.
We must protect and leverage women’s sensitivity and
capacity to resolve conflicts and maintain peace on
our planet.
(spoke in English)
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the President of the Swiss Confederation.
President Berset (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank Mozambique for convening today’s
open debate on this very important topic.
The statements already made indeed reminded us
once again that sustainable peace must be built by and
with women, or it will simply not exist. In that context,
the term “women and peace and security agenda” is not
just confined to the United Nations — it is a reality.
And I can share with the Security Council that I had
the opportunity to see that reality again last month
during my visit to your country, Mozambique, Madam
President, in Maputo, of course, but also in Cabo Delgado
and Mueda, and in Pemba, where I met with President
Nyusi. And the discussions I had in that context showed
me that women are committed to peace, both in their
communities and at the national level, and that in doing
so they are contributing to building a just and equal
political and economic future for their country.
Twenty-three years have now passed since the
member States of the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. That resolution truly made history, marking
the first time that the Council recognized the key role
played by women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. It also marked a real paradigm shift, because
security would no longer be understood exclusively in
military terms but instead would focus primarily on
the individual. We also recall that the adoption of that
pioneering resolution was made possible thanks to the
tireless work of civil society, including peace activists
and the feminist movement.
The women and peace and security agenda is
universal, and its implementation is a daily priority. The
current crises and conflicts in Ukraine, Afghanistan,
Syria and Yemen are grim reminders of that. The
Security Council must continue to play its leading role
in promoting the agenda. However, it is very important
for each State to have a direct role to play in that context
at the national level — that is probably one of the most
10/31

07/03/2023

significant elements of resolution 1325 (2000). In that
context, it is very encouraging to see that more than
100 countries have adopted national action plans for its
implementation — you mentioned, Madam President,
the plan adopted by Mozambique. Switzerland, of
course, also adopted a national action plan — we were
among the first countries to do so, in 2007.
In two years, we will celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
That will undoubtedly be a special moment for us to take
stock. But at the same time, we already know today the
challenges that need to be addressed urgently — above
all, the fact that women are often the primary targets
of violence, hate speech, threats and reprisals. Those
types of violence — including of course sexual
violence — are unfortunately well known. But they
also take new forms, including the violence perpetrated
in the digital space, especially hate speech.
Those types of violence are structural, which means
that no society or country is immune to them. And
within each country or all together, including within
the Council, we can take concrete measures to address
that scourge by undertaking national strategies and
commitments in our countries. Switzerland, for example,
has made combating gender-based violence a main
focus of its Gender Equality Strategy 2030. To address
the emerging challenges I have just mentioned, we also
support research on the links between cybersecurity
and women, in addition to actively promoting the
integration of the agenda of resolution 1325 (2000)
into our national cybersecurity strategies. That is
why Switzerland created the Swiss Women in Peace
Processes Network, a network that not only brings
together the expertise and experiences of Swiss
women in peace processes but also collaborates with
other regional networks — African, Commonwealth,
Mediterranean and Nordic networks — in order to
share best practices.
Therefore, I would also like to recall that ensuring
women’s participation requires clear political support
and adequate resources. That condition must be met in
order to enable women to speak out and contribute to
sustainable peace, and for them to do so safely, freely
and without fear of reprisals.
The topic of resources brings me to one of my last
points. As we are all aware, the mandates of the Council
increasingly refer to the women and peace and security
agenda, which is encouraging. But words must now
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

be matched with concrete actions in terms of budget,
personnel and policy. In that regard, Switzerland is
committed to ensuring that the Council implements
the women and peace and security agenda in all the
contexts and topics on its agenda. Our co-chairing with
the United Arab Emirates of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security and our support for
the Shared Commitments initiative are part and parcel
of the goal of making that approach a natural reflex in
the work of the Council.
The women and peace and security agenda is a
pioneering agenda. It is an innovative agenda, and I
have just reminded the Council why — because it exists
simultaneously at the global and local levels. And its
implementation must be further accelerated. It must
be a pillar of the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for
Peace and enable us to move forward together on the
path to sustainable peace. Our response to the current
and emerging challenges to peace must absolutely take
the central element of gender dimensions into account.
I hope that we can celebrate the next anniversary of
the resolution in two years’ time with a real sense of
common achievement, and above all a sense that this
sentiment is shared by all who are working for peace all
over the world.
The President: I now call on the Minister of Justice
in charge of Human Rights of Gabon.
Ms. Ndembet Damas (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I congratulate Mozambique for its initiative in holding
today’s high-level debate, which addresses one of the
priorities on Gabon’s international agenda. It is a great
opportunity, two years before the 25th anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), to assess the progress that
has been made and to draw up realistic perspectives
in our collective march towards the recognition of
the central role of women in peace processes, from
conflict prevention to post-conflict recovery, through
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
I would like to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women, Ms. Sima Bahous; the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Mirjana
Spoljaric Egger; and the Special Envoy of the African
Union Commission for Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Bineta Diop, who have brilliantly defined the
contours of our debate. I also thank Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
the Nobel Peace laureate, for her inspiring presentation.
The international context today is marked by
multiple crises. Many parts of the world are now caught

S/PV.9276

in the grip of armed groups and terrorist gangs. Women
and children are exposed to inhuman tragedies. The
situation is unacceptable. The international community
must provide concerted, supportive and inclusive
responses. Women should no longer pay the heavy
price of armed conflicts but should rather play an
increasing role in the response to them by participating
fully in all peace and decision-making processes. Their
participation in all stages of conflict prevention and
resolution is one of the surest ways to achieve a more
sustainable peace.
While it is undeniable that the Council’s advocacy
for the recognition of women as key actors in peace
processes has gradually achieved significant resonance,
my country remains concerned about the worrisome
regression in the promotion of women’s rights in several
regions of the world, which is undermining the positive
results we have achieved in the past few decades.
We cannot underscore enough that recognizing the
centrality of women in peace processes is a catalyst for
their empowerment and for the alleviation of tensions
in our socioeconomic and political landscapes. It also
helps to create an enabling environment for conflict
prevention and the peaceful resolution of disputes that
may arise.
That is why Gabon, under the impetus of President
Ali Bongo Ondimba, has made reducing gender
inequalities a key parameter of its policies, which
are based on the promotion of women’s participation
in all decision-making processes. That strategic
course is clearly reflected in the presence of women
in leading positions such as Vice-President of the
Republic, President of the Senate and President of the
Constitutional Court, as well as at the helm of sovereign
ministerial departments, including the Ministries of
National Defence and of Justice. All of those positions
of high responsibility in Gabon are held by women of
stature. This is not a fad. We are more intent than ever
on ensuring that women are permanently represented
in the sphere of governance. To that end, we will be
implementing a political mentoring programme for
women aimed at encouraging them to become involved
in political action in order to significantly increase
their representation on all decision-making bodies.
Gabon has remained firm and consistent in its
advocacy for women’s inclusion, participation and
resilience-building. During our recent presidency of
the Security Council, in October 2022, we initiated
an important public debate on the importance of

23-0682311/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

strengthening women’s resilience and leadership as
a way to achieve peace in regions plagued by armed
groups (see S/PV.9158). Our continuing aim is to
transcend words and give real visibility to the ability of
women to stand up, reclaim their destiny and participate
in the development of their own narrative.
We want to affirm once again that women have
a fundamental role to play in the drive to silence the
guns. They contribute significantly to the fight against
the illicit transfer and circulation of small arms and
light weapons and their uncontrolled proliferation in
many regions, particularly on the African continent.
Women have a central role to play in responding to
the humanitarian consequences of conflict and in
combating sexual and gender-based violence and the
recruitment of child soldiers. We must restore women’s
place at the local, national and global levels. Promoting
gender equality and women’s meaningful participation
is a choice in favour of the prevention of armed
conflict and violence. Promoting the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda includes
strengthening our response against violence and war.
We therefore call for the strengthening of national,
regional and global efforts to achieve an inclusive and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
other relevant resolutions, as well as for reinforcing the
gender dimension at all stages of peace processes and in
all prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
We should make no mistake. The viability of our
societies and the resilience of our communities will
be measured by the place we give to the other half of
humankind. As for the Council, it must go far beyond
principles and good intentions to truly translate the spirit
of resolution 1325 (2000) into action as a guarantee of
the effectiveness and sustainability of our collective
actions in line with the legitimate expectations and
aspirations of the peoples of the world.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Women and Human Rights of Ecuador.
Ms. Flores (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate
on the women and peace and security agenda. We
have taken note of the valuable information presented
by Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive Director of UNWomen; Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric Egger, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross; Ms. Bineta
Diop, Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission;
12/31

07/03/2023

and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, activist and representative
of civil society.
I would like to begin by acknowledging the
significance of resolution 1325 (2000) as one of the
most representative decisions ever adopted by the
Security Council. Its content articulates the most
important elements of previous resolutions, particularly
resolutions 1261 (1999), 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000),
and constitutes a turning point in its recognition from
an intersectoral perspective that conflicts have a
disproportionate impact on the lives and integrity of
women and girls.
My country, Ecuador, is committed to the inclusion
of women in strategic spaces for the maintenance of
peace. At the local level we therefore underscore the
importance of increasing the numbers of women in
our armed forces and national police. Those women
are trained to be agents of peace and to mainstream
a spirit based on respect and the protection of human
rights. We are working on the national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with the
support of UN-Women and the substantive contribution
of civil society organizations. We believe that this will
allow us to increase the participation of women in all
areas and at all levels, and to empower their leadership.
We are a plurinational country and we recognize
the richness of diversity. Accordingly, I can affirm with
satisfaction that the active involvement and participation
of indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian, Montubio and rural
women as well as women from all sectors, in the round
table discussions and decision-making processes,
together with the will of the national Government, have
resulted in the creation of the first Ministry for Women
and Human Rights, from which we will ensure the
implementation and mainstreaming of the principles of
resolution 1325 (2000).
As an elected member of the Security Council,
Ecuador has upheld the women and peace and security
agenda as a priority in the Council’s processes and
products. It should be noted that Ecuador is a signatory
of the Statement of Shared Commitments on Women,
Peace and Security. We will continue to work to fight
sexual and gender-based violence, which is a constant
present in almost all conflicts: Afghanistan, Central
African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo,
Yemen, Syria, Mali, Myanmar, Somalia, South Sudan,
Sudan, among others.
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

We believe that political violence, hate speeches
and sexual violence are tactics of war; they only serve
to dehumanize the actors, exacerbate differences,
deepen gaps and delay the possibilities of negotiation.
A few hours before commemorating International
Women’s Day, it is more pertinent than ever to refer
to the transformative role of women in processes of
political transition and peacebuilding. One success
story is that of Colombia, which is known as a milestone
in the integration of gender considerations in conflict
resolution. Women survivors of violence in that
country have contributed substantively to the processes
of mediation, negotiation and the establishment of
sustainable peace.
We salute and pay tribute to women mediators and
peacebuilders, and we hope that these bold examples
multiply for the good of societies in general. We also
express our admiration for women humanitarian
aid workers. Their leadership is fundamental for
international aid to reach women who are heads of
household, sick, disabled, refugees or displaced. We
call for the cessation of all gender-based violence,
which has been recurrent against female personnel.
Let us hope that in future open debates we can
celebrate that the Taliban regime’s discriminatory
policies against Afghan women and girls have finally
been reversed, that the victims of sexual violence
in Haiti or in any other country in conflict will be
consigned to an infamous past, and that, in general,
women will feel safe in times of war or of peace.
I conclude my statement by emphasizing that
Ecuador believes that achieving peace and preventing
conflicts are fundamental objectives, and that, in order
to achieve them, the Security Council must, in view of the
imminent twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), continue to activate the relevant mechanisms.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Gender, Children and Social Protection of Ghana.
Ms. Abudu (Ghana): Let me congratulate you,
Madam President, and your country, Mozambique,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. We also commend
you, Madam, on the able manner with which you are
presiding over this meeting and look forward to your
continuing leadership.
As we recall the promise that resolution 1325 (2000)
held when it was adopted in this very Chamber under

S/PV.9276

the Council presidency of Namibia (see S/PV.4213), we
salute not only the efforts of the members that worked
tirelessly to ensure the unanimous adoption of the firstever resolution on women and peace and security, in
October 2000, but also the support of women-led civil
society organizations and women’s advocacy groups
whose efforts brought it to life.
We commend the Mozambican delegation for
affording the Security Council the opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and to set goals towards its further implementation and
advance the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in peace and security. In this regard, we also
express appreciation to all the briefers for their rich
perspectives, which rightly point us towards the actions
required to fulfil the commitments we have all made.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), there
has been a significant increase in the frequency of
gender-specific provisions in the mandates of United
Nations peace operations among other decisions and
elements of the Security Council. We have also witnessed
a steady rise in the number of women, women’s groups
and gender experts who serve as official or unofficial
negotiators, mediators and advocates, as well as the
number of women who brief the Council.
However, in spite of the encouraging progress, in
many conflict contexts all over the world, women are
seen only as powerless victims to be exploited, rather
than as agents of change whose capabilities could be
useful. Indeed, while we are proud witnesses of the
remarkable work done by women peacebuilders and
women’s advocacy groups all over the world, we are
equally disheartened by the fact that in many societies
today women have been robbed of their will to celebrate
or even live.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban’s continuing and
progressive closure of the public space to women is
unacceptable and represents an erosion of the gains
made in the area of women’s rights. In Colombia, AfroColombian women have historically faced multiple
forms of discrimination, abuse and exclusion from
political and economic decision-making processes due
to the intersection of their race, gender and economic
status. From Myanmar to Yemen, mothers, sisters,
wives and daughters continue to be subjected to sexual
violence, harassment and many other violations, often
as weapons of war. Torture, arbitrary detentions and

23-0682313/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

harassment are also directed at the women who risk
their lives defending women’s rights.

increase Ghana’s protective abilities through national
legislation and policies.

It is in these contexts that we urge Governments,
regional
organizations
and
the
international
community at large to take concrete steps to protect
the rights of women and ensure their participation in
decision-making processes. In this regard, we welcome
the immense courage and resilience shown by women
civil society actors and peacebuilders in Africa over the
years. Their ability to achieve considerable gains despite
financial, cultural, technical and security challenges is
a shining example of the well-known resourcefulness
and bravery of the African woman.

In conclusion, as we mark this day dedicated to
women, let us remember that women’s voices bring real
gender perspectives to peace discourses, leading to the
development of better policies and more sustainable
peace deals. Therefore, the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peacebuilding deserves our
zealous and concrete action. We look forward to the
twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and
hope that our redoubled efforts will bring us closer to
our goals.

In West Africa and the Sahel, women’s groups
have played a critical role in advocating peace and
reconciliation. In Mali and Nigeria, networks of
women’s civil society organizations work tirelessly,
inter alia, to promote dialogue and understanding
between different ethnic and religious groups, rescue
abducted women and girls in occupied territories and
provide rescued survivors with assistance and support.
Those organizations and many others like them on the
continent are making a real difference in the lives of
women in Africa, and I wish to reiterate the importance
of joining international efforts with those that are
already happening at the grass-roots level.
At the national level, we urge Governments not to
lose momentum or diminish their ambitions. In Ghana,
under the coordination of the Ministry of Gender,
Children and Social Protection, the Government will
continue to effectively implement resolution 1325
(2000) through the second national action plan, which
spans the period from 2020 to 2025. With the support
of stakeholders, such as the Kofi Annan International
Peacekeeping Training Centre and the West Africa
Network for Peacebuilding, my Ministry, under the
national action plan, is overseeing the training of
women in peace and security, including on issues such
as conflict detection, prevention and mediation at the
community level.
We appreciate the contributions of the Elsie
Initiative Fund, which has made it possible for
appropriate facilities to be available for our female
troops deployed to the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and also to maintain a commitment to
enhancing the levels of Ghanaian women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We will continue to
14/31

The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States and member of
President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Madam President, for bringing
us together for this important discussion today. I would
like to welcome all our guests, including the President
of the Swiss Confederation and all the Ministers who
are in the Chamber with us today. Their presence
reflects the high priority they give to this important
issue. Today’s meeting is an opportunity to discuss our
collective efforts to fully implement the women and
peace and security agenda as we approach 25 years
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and as we
kick off the sixty-seventh session of the Commission
on the Status of Women. I would also like to thank
Nobel Peace Prize winner Leymah Gbowee for her
briefing, as well as Executive Director of UN-Women
Sima Bahous, President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross Mirjana Spoljaric Egger and African
Union Special Envoy Bineta Diop for joining us for this
important debate and for their thoughtful and insightful
interventions. All their messages were very powerful.
We welcome Mozambique’s efforts to focus on
the unique impact of conflict on women and girls, the
need for gender mainstreaming and the importance of
the meaningful participation of women at all levels
in decision-making processes. When I travelled to
Mozambique earlier this year, I met with women driving
positive change through entrepreneurship — women
such as Marta Uetela, who founded a company that
produces high-performance prostheses from recycled
ocean plastics. It is our collective responsibility to
continue to uplift and empower women change-makers
across Africa and the globe, because the simple fact
is that when we do, we create a more peaceful, more
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

prosperous world for all. It has been proven time and
time again that women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace processes as leaders, negotiators,
peacekeepers and peacebuilders increases the chances
of establishing a just and lasting peace.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) at
the start of the twenty-first century, the Security
Council has adopted 10 stand-alone women and peace
and security resolutions. But while those efforts
are commendable, we need to focus on how to most
effectively implement the women and peace and security
agenda. As the Secretary-General made clear last year
(see S/PV.9064), the Security Council’s implementation
of those goals remains an ongoing challenge, especially
in the Council’s regional mandates.
We see that most acutely in Afghanistan, where the
Taliban has reneged on its promises to the international
community and to Afghan women and has implemented
draconian, oppressive measures against women and
girls. Afghan women are now barred from working in
non-governmental organizations, and they are unable
to attend universities and secondary schools. That is
a profound crisis. It will prevent Afghanistan from
achieving stability, economic prosperity and future
growth. It places women and girls at increased risk of
gender-based violence and sexual exploitation, and it
hinders life-saving humanitarian aid from reaching
Afghans in desperate need. The Security Council must
continue to insist that the Taliban reverse those horrific
edicts and honour its commitment to the people of
Afghanistan. We welcome Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed’s recent visit to Afghanistan, but we remain
concerned that the Taliban has not changed course. If
anything, it has become more entrenched.
Of course, the challenges ahead of us are not
confined to one country or one region. Over the past
year, women and girls have faced violence, repression
and exclusion in Iran, Ukraine and elsewhere around
the world. Last November, while in Kyiv, I met with
victims of Russia’s war of aggression, women who
had been raped and tortured by Russian forces. And
I can tell you I will never forget the pain etched into
their faces. There must be accountability for those
atrocities. In January, I travelled to Somalia and saw
the devastation wrought by the ongoing drought. In
particular, those dire conditions have exacerbated
gender-based violence, which has been compounded
by the backsliding of women’s political participation,
peacebuilding and access to humanitarian assistance.

S/PV.9276

Let us be clear: lasting peace and an inclusive,
prosperous society depend on women’s leadership and
political participation in Somalia.
But even as we confront those immense challenges,
we must highlight the bright spots and celebrate our
progress. In that vein, I want to applaud my colleagues
from Ghana for adopting the most recent women and
peace and security national action plan and for hosting
the next United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial
Conference. We will continue to work with Ghana to
encourage troop- and police-contributing countries
to increase the number of women deployed to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in military and police
contingents and to ensure that women peacekeepers
serve in positions of leadership.
On the subject of peace and security, I would like to
note that with United States funding, the United States
Institute of Peace supports women leaders in Kenya,
Tanzania and Uganda who work to counter violent
extremism and advocate for women’s leadership in
local, regional and national strategies on countering
violent extremism. We have also engaged in similar
programmes in Mali and the Niger, and we will continue
to connect with women leaders across the Sahel. Such
engagement is imperative as groups, including the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko
Haram, Al-Shabaab and the Taliban, directly target
women and girls to achieve their ideological and
tactical objectives. By supporting women and young
people as prevention actors, we can more effectively
and sustainably address the conditions conducive to
terrorism. I also want to note that along with Romania,
the United States is serving as co-Chair of the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network for 2023. We
look forward to working with our Namibian colleagues
to standardize the approach to establishing and
sustaining centres of excellence for women and peace
and security.
The United States is proud to be the first country
with a comprehensive law on women and peace and
security and the first with a strategy that cuts across
our entire Government. We urge all countries to take
the necessary step of codifying resolution 1325 (2000)
into their national laws. Women and girls around the
world are counting on us. They are counting on us to
build a more just, secure and equitable future. Let us do
that work together.

23-0682315/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by first thanking you, Madam President, and
Mozambique for taking the lead in our vital discussions
today and setting our sights on the twenty-fifth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). And in doing so,
I join others in recognizing the insightful, valuable and
expert contributions of Sima Bahous, Executive Director
of UN-Women; Mirjana Spoljaric Egger, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; my
dear friend whom I see on the screen, Ms. Diop — it is
always good to see and hear from her — and, of course,
the inspirational Leymah Gbowee.
Peace and security mechanisms must be built on
the needs of all people everywhere, and they must be
shaped by the voices of all people. Indeed, those were
the founding principles of the very Organization in
which we sit today, the United Nations. The Security
Council knows that time and time again, mediation,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution have proved
more successful when they are inclusive. They work
better and last longer when women are central to peace
and to building progressive societies. The evidence
is staring us in the face. Yet it is an undeniable fact
that tragically, as we sit here in 2023, we are seeing a
stagnation of the women and peace and security agenda
and a regression in women’s rights around the world.
As we were most notably reminded, that is happening
not just through the barrel of a gun, but as Ms. Gbowee
reminded us, through a shared denial of women’s rights,
whether economic, social or educational.
We are seeing concerted efforts to weaponize
gender and attempts to weaken the international
system and destabilize the principles and fundamentals
of democracies around the world. For its part, the
United Kingdom has resolved not just to protect but to
strengthen gender equality, and that should remain an
absolute commitment for us all. I therefore call on all
my colleagues and the nations represented here to stand
together against the rollback of fundamental human
rights. When the rights of women and girls are pivotal
and central to society, societies and countries progress
and prosper. The United Kingdom is committed to
and passionate about seeing and ensuring progress on
women and peace and security in all its aspects. I was
delighted that we launched our fifth national action plan
only last month, setting out how we will ensure that
we put women at the centre of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding programmes over the next five years. It
is a new and reinvigorated plan for a new global context.
16/31

07/03/2023

Our colleagues have listed the tragedies of
conflicts around the world — from the suppression
of the rights of women in Iran to the tragedy of the
Taliban takeover in Afghanistan, where we have seen
the Taliban’s suppression of the rights of women and
girls, using the false, erroneous narrative of trying to
justify their abhorrent actions through religion and
culture. Let us be absolutely clear in saying that there
is no religion or culture that calls for the suppression of
women’s rights. The Taliban should realize that point
and face the reality that their country’s progress will
be guaranteed only when the rights of women and girls
are secure in all their elements. We are also seeing the
suppression of the rights of women through the tragedy
of war and the weaponizing of rape in conflicts such as
that in Ukraine. The war on Ukraine continues and the
rights of women continue to be suppressed.
In other areas, such as Tigray and Yemen, where
conflicts continue, we are also witnessing a regression
in women’s rights. It is therefore important that we
recognize, as we are doing at the current session of
the Commission on the Status of Women, that those
threats are not just limited to national contexts. There
are also transnational threats in areas such as climate
and cyberspace. But the issue is not only about our
commitment overseas. We are embedding the same
principle in ensuring that women are central and
pivotal to all solutions in every facet of society — in
our democratic domestic systems, military cooperation
and international diplomacy. Frankly, all countries that
talk that narrative will have to walk the walk together if
we want to make genuine progress by 2025.
One of the key objectives of our new plan is to
prevent gender-based violence, including conflictrelated sexual violence, and, importantly, to support
its incredible and courageous survivors in their
recovery and in seeking justice to rebuild their lives.
As the United Kingdom’s Prime Minister’s Special
Representative for Preventing Sexual Violence in
Conflict, I was honoured and humbled to host our recent
conference in November 2022, which demonstrated
a sustained international resolve to ending those
heinous crimes. We saw 53 countries come together,
and Pramila Patten, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
signed the political declaration. Forty countries made
tangible national commitments on steps they intend to
take. The truth is that it is a fundamental and tragic
fact that in 2023, sexual violence in conflict is real.
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

It is happening. I was therefore delighted when my
friend and colleague James Cleverly, Foreign Secretary
of the United Kingdom, announced a new three-year
initiative on preventing sexual violence in conflict,
backed by more than £12 million in new funding, to
build accountability and justice around the world.
Looking ahead, it is important that we hold
ourselves to account through the new international
alliance, which I am delighted to announce, on
preventing sexual violence in conflict, and which will
bring together leading Member States. I am delighted
that we are also joined in the Security Council by
my friend the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, who again, as we were reminded by the
Minister for Women and Human Rights of Ecuador, has
made great strides on this important agenda. I therefore
call on my colleagues and all nations represented here
today to join us in strengthening that alliance to ensure
that those incredible, courageous survivors of sexual
violence are not just given a voice but are pivotal and
central to building our international strategy to ensure
that we prevent sexual violence in conflict.
We ensure that accountability is inherent and
that we fully engage with survivors’ voices. I ask
Governments to embed survivors’ voices in their own
peacebuilding systems. We would be glad to share our
experiences. For me personally, working with such
incredible survivors has demonstrated that, through
their direct input and action, there is a direct impact on
our policies and programmes in a most positive way,
enriched by their experience and their valuable advice
and courage in speaking out.
Twenty-three years on from the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we must not resolve just to
stabilize and strengthen rights. We should work to
ensure that we put women at the heart of every conflict
resolution and of building stability and security around
the world. Let us not look back in another 25 years to
say that we squandered the opportunity. Indeed, I know
that we will not do that. We owe it to those who suffered
in the past, to the women and girls who suffer today
and to all the incredible women and girls around the
world who suffer at the hands of repressive, regressive
regimes. We must not let this tremendous opportunity
pass us by. We must act now. Simply put, it is our duty
and our obligation.
Ms. Schiappa (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having

S/PV.9276

convened this open debate. I wish to commend your
exemplary commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda. I would also like to thank our briefers
for their valuable insights into our debate.
On the eve of 8 March, and at a time when we are
witnessing unprecedented setbacks in women’s rights
throughout the world, the Security Council’s strong
commitment to fully implementing the 10 resolutions
making up the women and peace and security agenda
in its four dimensions is crucial.
First, in the area of prevention, the segregation
policy practised by the Taliban in Afghanistan, which
massively and systematically violates the rights and
freedoms of Afghan women, is intolerable and serves
to plunge the country into crisis.
Secondly, in the area of protection, in all conflict
and crisis situations, to take the current examples of
Ukraine, Yemen and Somalia, women are particularly
affected, even deliberately targeted, by sexual and
gender-based violence. Those responsible must be held
accountable for their actions. In that regard, France
welcomes the role of the International Criminal Court
in combating impunity. We call on all our partners
to step up the pressure on the perpetrators of such
crimes by placing the perpetrators of such violence
under sanctions.
Thirdly, in the area of women’s participation, only
28 per cent of peace agreements include provisions on
the role of women. In the past 25 years, only 2 per cent
of mediators and 8 per cent of negotiators were women.
Yet the involvement of women in peace talks increases
the probability of a sustainable peace agreement by
35 per cent, according to UN-Women. Our Council
must work to implement the “never without them”
principle in its work.
In the context of its feminist diplomacy, France is
fully committed to implementing the women and peace
and security agenda through its third national action
plan. We will continue to support the establishment of
robust mandates and provision of adequate resources
to ensure the protection and participation of women
in United Nations missions and operations. We will
continue our efforts to promote the gender balance
of staff and the full, equal, meaningful and effective
representation and participation of women at all levels
of responsibility in such operations. To that end, France
funds projects to train French-speaking female officers
and gender advisers in peacekeeping operations. We

23-0682317/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

will continue to act against all forms of violence, threats
or reprisals against women peacebuilders.

Syria, Haiti, the Central African Republic, Mali, the
Sudan and Somalia.

Such ongoing support for the women and peace and
security agenda is reflected by the convening in Paris in
June 2021 of the Generation Equality Forum, co-chaired
by Mexico and organized in cooperation with UNWomen. We call on all States to join the momentum
generated by the Forum, which mobilized more than
$40 billion in pledges, and to endorse the Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action,
launched at that event.

Malta deplores the Taliban’s relentless and
systematic gender persecution of and discrimination
against women and girls across political, economic
and sociocultural spheres. We cannot risk normalizing
those violations. The perpetrators must be held
accountable. Our expectations are clear. The full
spectrum of the rights of Afghan women and girls
must be respected — women’s right to live in dignity
and their rights to political participation, work and
education and to defend their rights without fear of
reprisals. The world cannot watch as the progress made
over the past 20 years, including on gender equality, is
reversed. As an international community, we are obliged
to respond to abuses of governance that institutionalize
discrimination. We must refocus on the implementation
challenges of the women and peace and security agenda
in the following ways.

We support civil society organizations in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, in particular through the Support Fund for
Feminist Organizations, which France established, and
which has mobilized more than €120 million since 2019
to fund the activities of women’s movements worldwide.
We will preserve the Fund so that women’s rights are
supported on the ground.
It is through concrete commitments that it will be
possible to fully implement the women and peace and
security agenda. In that regard, Member States can be
assured of our unwavering support.
Ms. Buttigieg (Malta): I begin by thanking you,
Madam President, for having convened this open
debate to reflect on the challenges of and opportunities
for accelerating the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. We also greatly appreciate
the contributions of today’s briefers, and we thank them
for enriching the discussion with their insights.
Last year, the United Nations pronounced that
the unconditional defence of women’s rights and the
protection of women human rights defenders should be
among the most visible markers of the United Nations
work on peace and security. That must remain our goal,
and we must immediately accelerate action. Despite
ample evidence that gender equality offers a pathway
to sustainable peace, the Security Council’s robust
normative framework, comprising 10 resolutions on
women and peace and security and 16 presidential
statements, has yet to be effectively resourced and
made operational.
Despite such commitments, we continue to witness
harrowing violations against women all over the world,
including in many countries on the Council’s agenda,
including Afghanistan, Ukraine, Myanmar, Yemen,
18/31

The protection of women human rights defenders
is a collective moral responsibility. The United Nations
system must ensure that the risks facing women are
never used as an excuse to exclude them. The mandates
that we authorize must monitor and respond to such
risks and reprisals against all human rights defenders
and peacebuilders.
The United Nations must lead by example. We must
ensure women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in all peace and security efforts, beginning with those
authorized and led by the United Nations. Only then can
we ensure that processes are inclusive and sustainable
and meet the needs of the communities that they are
meant to protect.
Funding must be directed so as to reverse the
funding deficit with regard to gender equality in
crisis situations. In all actions to prevent conflict and
build peace, we must also address the distinct and
disproportionate impact of the climate crisis on women
and girls.
Our actions to prevent and counter terrorism and
violent extremism must respond to the misogyny
and patriarchal violence used by terrorist and violent
extremist groups regarding their propaganda,
recruitment tactics and victims.
To address impunity, we believe that the Security
Council can make more proactive use of targeted
sanctions against those who perpetrate and direct
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

sexual violence in conflict and, where appropriate,
include sexual violence as a stand-alone designation
criterion. We must also ensure survivor-centred
approaches in preventing and responding to conflictrelated sexual violence.
Finally, we welcome the women and peace and
security national action plans adopted by 105 countries.
Malta adopted its first national action plan in 2020 and
is working on increasing outreach and awareness on
this important agenda both locally and internationally.
We actively encourage those who have not done so to
develop strategies that strengthen their domestic and
foreign policies in relation to the women and peace and
security agenda.
Malta is a proud women and peace and security
shared commitments’ holder. Resolution 1325 (2000)
was an evolutionary step forward in the Security
Council’s architecture and repertoire of practice. It is
indeed one the most-quoted and well-known resolutions.
However, we must ensure that resolution 1325 (2000)
does not remain a topic of discussion in academic or
political circles. We must use it as a catalyst to bring
about transformative change, sustainable and inclusive
peace and gender equality for all.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
Culture and Youth of the United Arab Emirates.
Ms. Al Kaabi (United Arab Emirates): We thank
Mozambique for organizing this open debate on the eve
of International Women’s Day, and Foreign Minister
Dlhovo for presiding over today’s meeting. Throughout
Mozambique’s history, its women have proven time
and again that we should not underestimate women’s
contributions to peace. As Dame Graça Machel said
in 2015,
“[g]ender equality is the goal that will help abolish
poverty, that will create more equal economies,
fairer societies and happier men, women
and children”.
That is a necessary reminder that women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation is part and parcel of
nation-building and efforts for security and stability.
The United Arab Emirates would also like to thank
UN-Women Executive Director Bahous, International
Committee of the Red Cross President Spoljaric Egger,
Special Envoy Diop and Nobel Peace Laureate Gbowee
for their powerful briefings.

S/PV.9276

The message is clear — globally, with every step
forward for women and girls, we take two steps back.
There are continued misogynistic, violent attacks
against women and girls who try to build and sustain
peace across conflicts. Afghan women and girls
continue to be systematically erased from their society.
Women and girls are forced to take refuge away from
their homes because of the devastating impacts of both
the earthquakes in the Middle East and the war in
Ukraine. In fact, just today, during First Lady Olena
Zelenska’s visit to the United Arab Emirates, she met
with Ukrainian women and girls who escaped the war.
For this mid-term review, and as we advance
towards the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), I would like to share the following three
goals that the United Arab Emirates believes support
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
First, the women and peace and security agenda
must be a key prism through which we look at emerging
and new threats. Climate change, for instance, is
the greatest threat that this world is facing, and it
disproportionately impacts women and girls, affecting
their education and employment opportunities, as well
as their health and physical safety. We must support
their participation and amplify their voices in efforts to
mitigate, adapt to and address climate-induced issues.
As the United Arab Emirates prepares to host twentyeighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, two thirds
of the Emirati leadership team and more than half of the
management team are women. Excuses for excluding
women are no longer acceptable, and we must all hold
ourselves to the same standards.
Secondly, to advance the women and peace and
security agenda, the international community, and
in particular the Security Council, must pay equal
tribute to its four pillars. If the goal is to mainstream
this agenda, it must be implemented in its entirety,
consistently, into all policy and programming — with
partners from all segments of society. That is why
one year ago, the United Arab Emirates convened a
ministerial open debate (see S/PV.8989) on the occasion
of International Women’s Day that focused on the relief
and recovery pillar, in our view an underdeveloped one.
Our approach to the women and peace and security
framework must be balanced if we are to address crises
and conflicts holistically. We must strengthen women’s
roles throughout the entire conflict continuum.

23-0682319/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

Thirdly, the protection of women and girls is one
of the strongest tools to defend their participation
and empowerment. Crimes of sexual and genderbased violence continue to be the cheapest weapon of
war, terrorizing and controlling whole communities.
As we heard today from President Spoljaric Egger,
all parties to conflict should incorporate a gender
perspective into the application and interpretation of
international humanitarian law. We must also face the
reality that — all too often — perpetrators of sexual
violence enjoy impunity for their actions. To deter
such heinous acts, States and conflict parties must
also implement a robust and consistent accountability
framework in order to address conflict-related sexual
violence, including by building the capacity of relevant
accountability institutions and promoting a survivorcentred approach.
Today’s taking-stock exercise does not just mean
listing missed opportunities. The women and peace
and security agenda has also made great strides since
2020 that we can and must build on. Initiatives such
as the Generation Equality Forum’s Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action
has brought together 196 signatories, all committed to
advancing the role of women and girls. More Member
States, including my own, are utilizing tools, such as
national action plans, to implement resolution 1325
(2000). Also last month, an additional senior women
protection adviser was deployed to another United
Nations peace mission, now a total of eight. While
still a low number, it reminds us of the objective we
continue to work towards.
There is no doubt that those of us present
today are united in our endeavour to succeed in this
important work. But for that to happen, we must
uphold our commitments to implementing the agenda
in our individual countries’ policies as well as in the
international arena.
Ms. Escorel de Moraes (Brazil): Brazil
congratulates Her Excellency Minister Verónica
Nataniel Macamo Dlhovo and the presidency of
Mozambique for providing us with this opportunity to
reflect upon the women and peace and security agenda as
we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). We also thank all the briefers for their
eloquent and inspiring presentations. It is always good
to see in practice the increase in the number of women
briefers — one of the concrete results of a process
20/31

07/03/2023

formally initiated with the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000).
The advances brought about by the women and
peace and security agenda should not be underestimated.
Today it is widely recognized that women have an
indispensable role to play in matters of international
peace and security. Such an assumption can be
considered by some as commonplace. It is, however,
part of a gradual mindset shift engendered by women
and peace and security resolutions. Women — like
children — were once generally seen solely as victims
of conflict and in need of protection. They are now also
seen as indispensable agents of peace, especially if the
primary objective is sustainable peace. It is also clear
now that gender equality is a driving force for peace
within and among nations.
Women contribute to building societies that
are less susceptible to violence, more resilient and
inclusive. They help promote community reconciliation
and lead successful pro-peace movements. But women
and peace and security resolutions have come to
formally identify a serious flaw — women have not
been given the same space and opportunity as men
to act in favour of peace. That is the message behind
the calls that we often hear in this Chamber for the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
peace negotiations, peacekeeping and post-conflict
situations. It will not suffice to have more women at
peace negotiating tables or in peacekeeping operations,
for instance, if we do not ensure that their voices are
heard and their perspectives are taken into account. We
must ensure that women’s views count — and that we
do not count only the women.
Since 2000, women and peace and security
resolutions have also identified important protection
gaps, as they recognize that women continue to face
serious and multiple challenges in conflict situations.
Sexual violence against women and girls, as well
as against men and boys, for instance, was formally
identified as a tactic of war in resolutions that call for
the prevention, investigation and punishment of such
acts and emphasize the need for support and services
for survivors. That has led to the inclusion of more
specific protective measures in the mandates designed
by the Council. However, as pointed out in the most
recent resolution on women and peace and security,
resolution 2538 (2020), the United Nations must step
up its efforts to also protect women peacekeepers from
sexual harassment and other security threats.
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

The list of normative contributions brought about
by the women and peace and security agenda is long,
but the implementation gap is also wide. Brazil is proud
to be part of the group of Council members that have
made the women and peace and security agenda one
of the priorities of their mandates in order to work for
effective implementation. The group made up of the
signatories of the statement of shared commitments has
called for more women briefers, as well as more specific
discussions of the Council on areas of concern. It has
also used media stakeouts to draw attention to countryspecific situations. We decided to sign the statement
of shared commitments because we believe women’s
perspectives should inform the Council’s decisions on
all the items under its agenda. We stress that the idea
has always been to integrate women’s perspective into
the daily practice of the Council and not to have those
issues discussed in separate meetings attended only by
women. That is why women and peace and security
resolutions call for the increased participation of women
briefers, panellists and delegates in all our meetings.
Brazil will continue to advocate for the
implementation of the women and peace and security
resolutions, not just in theory but also in practice. We
need to guarantee the integration of gender-sensitive
approaches in the design, planning, implementation
and evaluation of all United Nations programmes
and policies. That approach should be applied at all
levels, from the Security Council to the country level.
We also need to find ways to increase funding and
resources for women-led organizations and grass-roots
movements working on peacebuilding and conflict
resolution. Women-led organizations often work
in difficult conditions, with limited resources and
funding, as Ms. Bahous has often reminded us in this
Chamber. Yet they play a pivotal role in peacebuilding
efforts. Therefore, we should provide them with the
necessary means and tools to enhance the impact
and sustainability of their actions. The Peacebuilding
Commission has made efforts in that regard, which
Brazil commends and supports. We thank UN-Women
and the other organizations that have strived to collect
and analyse sex-disaggregated data to ensure that we
have a comprehensive understanding of how women
are affected by conflict and peacebuilding efforts.
Such data can inform evidence-based policymaking
and programme design, helping to ensure that woman’s
experiences and perspectives are fully integrated into
our endeavours to achieve sustainable peace.

S/PV.9276

Before concluding, I would like to refer to the
fact that the Brazilian Government recently recreated
the Ministry for Women and has been working
to substantially increase the number of women in
Government leadership positions. That is part of our
general commitment to gender equality and women
and girls’ empowerment. As the annual open debate
on women and peace and security will be held during
Brazil’s presidency of the Council in October, we
intend to follow up on the discussions being held here
today and focus on women as agents of peace — women
mediators in parliaments and the judiciary and women
diplomats, peacebuilders and peacekeepers. We need
women in all those areas and in decision-making
positions so that they can make a difference in how
States handle defence and security matters. If we truly
want to give peace a chance, women must be given a
chance too. That, in our view, is the true spirit behind
the women and peace and security resolutions.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mozambique for convening today’s
meeting. We thank our briefers: Ms. Sima Sami Bahous,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric
Egger, President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross; Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission; and Ms. Leymah Gbowee.
The discussion today confirms the continued
importance of resolution 1325 (2000). The Council’s
regular debates on women’s issues provide an
opportunity for evaluating the progress made, providing
guidance on further strengthening women’s role in and
contributions to conflict prevention and resolution and
post-conflict recovery, and strengthening measures to
protect women in armed conflict.
As set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council is imbued with the authority to
specifically define its contribution to the international
women’s agenda. In order to make progress, we believe
that it is important to avoid duplication in the work of
the various organs of the Organization. The work of the
Security Council should seamlessly dovetail with that
of the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council,
the Commission on the Status of Women and the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Security Council must
remain focused on preventing and eliminating violence
against civilians in armed conflict. Unfortunately,
despite the many efforts made, women continue to fall
victim to armed hostilities. Protracted and low-intensity

23-0682321/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

conflicts create an additional layer of problems. Issues
involving women’s advancement, overcoming poverty
and access to education in countries in armed conflict
must receive increased attention. The family is of
particular value, and protecting it is a top priority.
We are focused on cooperating constructively with
all interested States to harmoniously advance women’s
issues on the Council’s agenda. In October 2025, we
will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). We should approach that
anniversary in solidarity, while demonstrating the
Council’s weighty achievements and unity.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We appreciate your
focus on this issue during your presidency, Madam
President, and we also thank the briefers for their
information today.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, in October 2000 marked a
historic moment. Over the years, the women and peace
and security agenda has become a normative focal point
for addressing the challenges, interests and aspirations
of half of the world’s population — women and girls.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Council has adopted nine other resolutions on women
and peace and security. And the issue has turned into
one of the most dynamic and attention-grabbing topics,
not only for the members of the Security Council but
also for the wider United Nations membership. In that
regard, the role of the Security Council in creating a
comprehensive normative framework is undeniable,
especially in integrating operational language and
references to women and peace and security in its
various resolutions.
However, reality still needs to catch up with
our common aspirations and determination. The
implementation of the women peace and security agenda
remains problematic, revealing a gap between promise
and practice. That is especially glaring when it comes to
women’s continued underrepresentation, and sometimes
extreme marginalization, in formal decision-making on
peace and security, including in peace negotiations and
the general impunity still afforded to perpetrators of
violence and abuses against women and girls, including
conflict-related sexual violence.
The gap has been widened further in different
parts of the world. In Ukraine, the lives of millions
of Ukrainian women and young girls have been
devastated. In Afghanistan, the Taliban is a disaster
22/31

07/03/2023

for women, and they continue to fail the Afghan people
in every respect. In Iran, Mahsa Amini launched an
unstoppable struggle for basic dignity, and her tragic
case demonstrates the brutality that women face in that
country. The events in Syria, the Sudan, South Sudan,
Myanmar, Haiti and Mali, to name only a few, have
threatened not only the fragile gains of the women and
peace and security agenda, but also the lives and work
of women peacebuilders themselves. They have also
tested the international community’s ability to fulfil the
Council’s mandate of maintaining peace and security.
As we have heard from many, the increased global
pushback on womens’ and girls’ enjoyment of human
rights is alarming. For that reason, we must redouble
our efforts to make the women and peace and security
normative framework a reality. We need to support and
connect the work of the women at the grassroots level,
including in conflict zones and in peace processes, to the
women and peace and security agenda. In that regard,
United Nations country teams and mediation teams,
as well as Special Envoys, Special Representatives
and other relevant stakeholders, should play a more
proactive role. In that context, Albania strongly
supports the Secretary-General’s call to action urging
peacekeeping partners to invest in grassroots women’s
networks and to support women’s mobilization for
peace. And we need men to stand up and support those
calls as strongly as the women do.
The women and peace and security agenda is
central to Albania, which sits atop of the most genderbalanced Governments, with 75 per cent of ministers
being women. The agenda is also our core priority in the
Security Council. During our presidency in June last
year (see S/PV.9064), we invited 19 briefers from civil
society, 15 of whom were women. Also, in our capacity
as Coordinator of the Shared Commitments initiative,
Albania will continue to work to ensure that the women
and peace and security agenda is fully integrated into
all aspects of the Council’s work. Of course, the women
and peace and security agenda is also central to our
priorities for rejoining the Human Rights Council. If
elected, we will advance the agenda and explore closer
synergies between the two Councils.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that there are no
shortcuts. No lasting peace can be achieved without the
meaningful participation and engagement of women.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Madam President, for convening
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

today’s important open debate on women and
peace and security. I thank all the briefers for their
comprehensive briefings.
Over the past 25 years, the Security Council
has discussed this important agenda extensively.
Nevertheless, many women and girls are still suffering
around the world. It is of course of the utmost importance
that all parties to conflicts abide by resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions, including with full
respect for international law applicable to the rights
and protection of women and girls. Nonetheless, we
must not forget that the women and peace and security
agenda requires all Member States to act. In that
context, I fully agree with the relevance of the scope
that you set out for today, Madam President, asking us
to elaborate on what each of us can do.
I believe that the national action plans on women and
peace and security hold the key to securing appropriate
engagement. Japan announced its first national action
plan on women and peace and security in 2015 and
revised it after its initial three-year implementation
period. We are currently in the process of formulating
our third action plan, and our experience has shown
that three elements are particularly important, namely,
comprehensiveness, inclusiveness and reviews.
First, national action plans have to be comprehensive.
In our action plan, numerous concrete actions are
specified, and relevant Government ministries and
agencies are required to exercise their ownership and
report on their progress. We have also included actions
that pertain to natural disasters, since they also pose
significant human security challenges and are relevant
to the protection and empowerment of women and girls
in fragile situations. The inclusion of international
cooperation and sharing experience with countries in
need is another important feature.
Our action plan covers a wide range of international
cooperation to address human security crises. For
example, Japan has been a major contributor to the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We have
supported its expert teams in building capacity in
the judicial and security sectors. Our recent activities
involve those in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic, Somalia and Iraq. At the
same time, our action plan also includes other human
security concerns, such as water and sanitation, health
and education. It also recognizes the necessity of

S/PV.9276

providing seamless assistance. Based on our plan, Japan
funded 69 projects run by international organizations
and 18 by non-governmental organizations during the
second three-year period, an increase from 52 and 10,
respectively, during the first period.
Secondly, inclusiveness needs to be ensured.
Women and peace and security is not only about the
public sector — civil society also matters. That is
why we have included a periodic external review
mechanism by academic and civil society experts in
the action plan. Their findings are also accessible to
the public. As a result of growing public awareness, a
parliamentarians’ network was launched last month.
Such political commitment will be a huge boost.
Thirdly and finally, reviews are necessary for
accountability and beyond. Publishing an action plan
is not an end in itself; we need actions and, more
specifically, refined and enhanced actions. A proper
review process improves our efforts. I trust that our third
action plan will exceed our second with that process.
The Security Council must live up to its words and
not just welcome the efforts of the willing. I hope that
everyone here will recommit to the women and peace
and security agenda and develop national action plans,
and that this debate will be of great help to that end.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now call on the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal
Opportunities of Slovenia.
Mr. Mesec (Slovenia): Slovenia aligns itself with
the statements to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/740) reveals significant setbacks in the global
situation of women in recent years. That trend is cause for
concern and is further compounded by global security
developments, including environmental degradation,
which is one of the biggest threat multipliers for women
and girls.

23-0682323/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

We thank Mozambique for organizing this debate
and welcome the opportunity to engage in taking stock
of the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. Allow me to underline the following.
First, national action plans are major contributions
that every United Nations Member State can make to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). They
represent a commitment to prioritize the promotion of
women’s participation and protection in all aspects of
peace and security. In our experience, drafting an action
plan can have a catalytic effect not only on women’s
participation, but also on the activities of all relevant
stakeholders. Slovenia therefore started drafting its
third plan this year.
Secondly, we must recognize the important role of
women in preventing and resolving conflicts, as well
as in building and sustaining peace. Slovenia’s Peace
Operations Training Centre conducts training sessions
on gender equality and gender mainstreaming in
international missions and operations, as well as on the
interplay among water, climate change and peace and
security. We also welcome the inclusion of women in
the discussions and outcomes of the Security Council.
A systematic and inclusive approach is therefore
important, as is taking into account peacekeeping
mission mandates and country-specific work.
Protecting women from reprisals for having shared
information on specific topics and situations with the
Security Council is an area in which more efforts are
needed. Those brave women are true agents of change,
and any attempt to silence their voices is reprehensible.
The Security Council needs to do everything in its
power to enable their safe work.
Thirdly, we need to address the prevention of sexual
and gender-based violence and harmful practices more
effectively, as that remains a pervasive and systemic
problem in many conflicts. We should do more to ensure
accountability and end impunity for the perpetrators of
those crimes and to deliver justice to survivors. That is
why we support the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies initiative.
On the eve of International Women’s Day, allow
me to stress that prioritizing women’s empowerment
in peace and security settings must remain an ongoing
effort. We are proud that women in Slovenia now hold
the highest political and security offices in the country.
We believe that only by working together will we
be able to ensure the full, effective and meaningful
24/31

07/03/2023

participation by building more inclusive, resilient and
peaceful societies for all.
The President: I now call on the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Labour and Social Affairs
of Czechia.
Mr. Jurečka (Czechia): Czechia aligns itself with
the statements to be delivered by the representative
of the European Union and on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Let me thank Mozambique for calling today’s
meeting to remember the deep purpose of the first
Security Council resolution on women and peace and
security (resolution 1325 (2000)), which was adopted
23 years ago.
As the Russian aggression against Ukraine
continues, Czechia continues to stress the urgent need
to truly work together to advance the women and
peace and security agenda in practice. It is essential to
integrate it into all aspects of the work of the Security
Council. It is widely accepted that peace and security
efforts are more sustainable when women fully and
equally participate, but there is still a huge gap between
words and actions. The number of women involved in
peace processes has not increased much. The world
is facing many security challenges, for example, new
crises, new conflicts, global health problems and
climate change. Those are all obstacles to fulfilling the
agenda. They amplify gender inequality and increase
gender-based violence.
Russia’s war is a serious violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and of international law. It has
cast a significant shadow over the progress made
in implementing the women and peace and security
agenda. Vulnerable civilians, including women and
girls, are being killed every day. They are victims of
horrible conflict-related sexual violence. Millions of
people have fled Ukraine since the beginning of the
Russian aggression one year ago. Czechia is one of
the target countries. Almost half a million refugees
from Ukraine have already been granted temporary
protection in Czechia, 80 per cent of whom are women
and children. We are working together with civil
society and academia to reflect that new situation in
the implementation of women and peace and security
principles through our second national action plan.
Women must have their seat at the table during
all stages of peace dialogues — it is that simple. That
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

includes representatives of civil society organizations
and human right defenders. It includes all stages of
peace dialogues, peacebuilding, peacekeeping, postconflict reconstruction and accountability-seeking
processes. Only working together will bring us closer
to the peace and security we need.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
Solidarity, Social Integration and Family of Morocco.
Ms. Hayar (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am pleased to congratulate the Republic of
Mozambique on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I welcome Ms. Verónica
Nataniel Macamo Dlhovo, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Mozambique, and thank her for
choosing the subject of today’s open debate on women
and peace and security, more than two decades after
the adoption of the historic resolution 1325 (2000). I
would also like to thank Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive
Director, UN-Women, Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric Egger,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy on Women and
Peace and Security of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission; and Ms. Leymah R. Gbowee, for
their excellent briefings.

S/PV.9276

of His Majesty King Mohammed VI for promoting
gender equality and protecting women’s rights.
The women and peace and security national plan
was subject to a broad consultation among all relevant
departments and sectors as well as civil society, with
valuable contribution and support from UN-Women.
The Kingdom of Morocco has adopted a comprehensive
integrated approach in the preparation of that
national plan, with a view to addressing new security
threats, including emergency situations, such as the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The Moroccan national
plan empowers women in all areas to face emerging
threats in a regional and international context that is
increasingly complex.
Our national plan was launched in March 2022
in New York, at an event chaired by my colleague
His Excellency Mr. Nasser Bourita, the Moroccan
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Cooperation
and Moroccans Residing Abroad. That event was also
attended by his counterparts, the Foreign Ministers
of Gabon, Ghana, Colombia and the State Minister of
Norway, the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on Women and Peace and Security.

Nevertheless, a great of work remains to be done to
address all the challenges that prevent the empowerment
of women, particularly in conflict and crisis situations.
There needs to be a greater effort by the international
community to ensure that women’s issues are placed
at the core of all efforts pertaining to peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

Under the guidance of His Majesty King Mohammed
VI set forth in his address at the ceremony celebrating the
twenty-third anniversary of his accession to the throne,
the Kingdom of Morocco has been implementing the
national plan by following a result-oriented approach
with the support of its international partners. Based on
best international practices and outcomes of the African
Union’s implementation of its women and peace and
security agenda, our national work plan is a platform
for action, with three main areas: first, preventive
diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping; secondly,
strengthening a culture of peace and equality; and
thirdly, women’s economic participation. Our national
work plan also serves as a springboard for addressing
the regional and global challenges that threaten women’s
rights, security and participation in all areas of life
in Africa. The implementation of our national work
plan includes South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation with sisterly African countries.

In August 2021, the Kingdom of Morocco adopted
its first national plan for women and peace and security,
which consists of a comprehensive political framework
pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
Council resolutions. Our initiative translates the vision

The Kingdom of Morocco has sought to serve the
principles of peace and security since the 1960s through
its participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The Royal Armed Forces have been present
in peacekeeping operations on four continents, but

Resolution 1325 (2000) stresses the importance
of the equal participation of women and their full
participation in all efforts aimed at maintaining peace
and security at all levels of decision-making, as well
as their protection from physical and gender-based
violence. A great deal has undoubtedly been done to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) demonstrated by
the participation of more women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. There is also greater attention
to the rights of women and gender equality in United
Nations political efforts aimed at conflict resolution.

23-0682325/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

mostly in Africa. Like the other royal institutions, the
Royal Armed Forces implement the directives of His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, who, as the Supreme
Commander of the Armed Forces, attaches particular
importance to the full and entire participation of
Moroccan women. Since 1992, 2,100 Moroccan women
have prevented violence against women and protected
women’s rights in conflicts and in post-conflict contexts
by participating in peacekeeping operations. They have
also contributed to strengthening the role of women in
resolving conflict, establishing peace and protecting
civilians, as provided for under the mandates of the
peacekeeping operations in which those Moroccan
women serve.
In addition to peacekeeping, Moroccan women
have served in many other areas including health,
telecommunications,
logistics,
administration,
social aid and military operations. Moroccan women
currently participate in four peacekeeping operations,
namely, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(MONUSCO). There is in fact a women’s unit of the
rapid intervention brigade of the Royal Armed Forces
within MONUSCO peacekeepers.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity,
as we will soon be celebrating the International Women’s
Day, to stress that gender equality and the participation
of women are basic human rights for women and that
they must be upheld if we are to bring peace to societies
and strengthen their ability to realize the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
Equality between Men and Women of Luxembourg.
Ms. Bofferding (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I thank the Mozambican presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s open debate.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself to the statements to
be made on behalf of the European Union in its capacity
as observer and of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
Since the Security Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000), progress has been made towards the goal of the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
26/31

07/03/2023

peace processes. The Council has played a crucial role
in advancing the rights of women and girls, including
by recognizing acts of sexual and gender-based violence
as a tactic of war. However, as we approach the twentyfifth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution, it is
important to recognize that much remains to be done.
Despite that progress, women and girls continue
to face multiple challenges with respect to their
participation in decision-making processes and in
conflict-prevention and conflict-resolution efforts.
This is especially true for LGBTIQ+ persons as well
as women with disabilities. People, especially women,
including migrant women, must be politically and
economically empowered and equally represented at
all levels of decision-making. That is why we continue
to fund initiatives to promote the empowerment and
participation of women and girls, including through
our official development assistance. As a signatory
of the Compact on Women, Peace and Security
and Humanitarian Action, and guided by its new
humanitarian strategy, Luxembourg pays particular
attention to gender issues and contributes to the efforts
of our humanitarian partners to prevent and respond
to sexual and gender-based violence, including in
forgotten and underfunded crises.
In line with its feminist foreign policy, Luxembourg
continues to implement its national action plan on women
and peace and security through which it is committed
to promoting the situation and representation of women
in civilian missions. We welcome the strengthening in
2022 of the language on women and peace and security
in the resolutions on the United Nations missions in
Afghanistan and Yemen, and we encourage members
to continue to integrate these concerns into the
Council’s decisions.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that it is essential
to ensure the safety of Council briefers, in particular
women human rights defenders, by preventing and
effectively responding to any attempts at reprisals. As
the report of the Secretary-General for 2022 indicates
(S/2022/740), the world is experiencing a reversal of
generational gains in women’s rights. That trend affects
women and girls in the growing number of conflict
situations in Ukraine and beyond. For that reason
it is now more important than ever to translate our
commitment into action.
The President: I now call on the Minister of Social
Development of Jordan.
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

Ms. Mustafa (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you, Madam President,
on Mozambique’s presidency of the Council this month,
and to wish you every success. We also thank Ms. Sima
Bahous, the Executive Director of UN-Women, and all
the other briefers for their valuable statements.
For many decades now the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan has been living up to its international
commitments to ensuring respect for human rights on
our lands. We have ratified a number of conventions
pertaining to the promotion of human rights, including
the rights of women, and on enhancing the effectiveness
of women’s roles in the society. Jordan has been
expanding its efforts regarding the participation of
women in decision-making, making meaningful
amendments to laws on elections and political parties
in order to increase women’s leadership in society. We
have also developed and adopted national legislation
aimed at protecting the safety of women and girls,
including laws on domestic violence and human
trafficking. We have added an article to the Jordanian
Constitution guaranteeing the State’s protection of
women from all forms of violence and discrimination.
Jordan was among the first Arab countries to adopt
a national plan for implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and has been commended by the United Nations for
linking that plan to two major issues, the first being
the enhancement of women’s role in fighting extremism
and terrorism, and the second the protection of women
refugees from violence. The plan also includes a
number of measures for helping and protecting Syrian
victims and refugees. The relevant national authorities
have adopted a strategy of action for providing services
to refugees, including in combating gender violence,
building service providers’ capacities and improving
their infrastructure. We have also implemented
several measures designed to incorporate the women
and peace and security agenda into our national
strategies, including our strategies on women and on
social protection.
Jordan’s national plan for its response to the
Syrian crisis includes many aspects within two
major sectors — first, the protection of refugees, and
secondly, support and empowerment for the local
communities hosting refugees, instituting effective
measures to enhance the protection and social care
of refugees, especially women. We have continued
to host women refugees in all our shelters and social
centres, regardless of their nationality, and our

S/PV.9276

Ministry of Social Development has received a United
Nations award for public services related to protection
from domestic violence. We are now about to launch
our second national plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Jordan has always been a pioneer in supporting
United Nations peacekeeping operations and an
example to follow in discipline and sound behaviour.
We have been always ready to take part in United
Nations missions in conflict areas worldwide. Under
the guidance of His Majesty King Abdullah II,
Jordan’s contribution to and participation in United
Nations missions will remain an example to follow, as
they reflect the humanitarian role we have played in
helping to achieve security and stability in regions all
over the world. In that context, Jordan is undertaking
a comprehensive review of its national legislation and
policies with a view to increasing the number of women
participating in United Nations peacekeeping forces.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm that the best way
to guarantee the implementation of all the commitments
in resolution 1325 (2000) is by providing the necessary
financial support and adopting a normative framework
with an accountability mechanism for the objective and
meaningful implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
Ms. Lin Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I congratulate
you, Madam President, on steering today’s meeting, and
I thank Executive Director Bahous, President Spoljaric
Egger and Special Envoy Diop for their briefings. I
am pleased to be attending today’s Security Council
meeting in my capacity as the Vice-Chairperson of the
National Working Committee on Children and Women
under the State Council of China.
Twenty-three years ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
redefined the relationship between women and peace
and security. Since then, women have begun to be seen
not merely as victims of war but as contributors to
peace, and their active role and participation in the field
of peace and security has continued to grow. More and
more women are serving as special representatives and
envoys and becoming mediators for hotspot issues. More
and more are sitting at negotiating tables and signing
peace agreements. More and more are wearing Blue
Helmets and becoming defenders of peace and security.
More and more are devoting themselves to humanitarian
relief and becoming guardians of vulnerable groups

23-0682327/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

in conflict areas. She-power continues to grow, and
the foundations for lasting peace continue to be
consolidated. At the same time, in many countries and
regions, women are still suffering in conflicts and from
instability, hunger and poverty, gender discrimination
and violence. We still have a long way to go in building
a world where women are free from the scourge of war
and fear and where societies are founded on gender
equality and inclusive development.
The Beijing Declaration of the Fourth World
Conference on Women pointed out that peace is
attainable and is inextricably linked to the advancement
of women. The Platform for Action adopted at the
Conference lists women and armed conflict as one of
its 12 priority areas, emphasizing that if women are to
play an equal part in securing and maintaining peace,
they must be empowered politically and economically.
In 2025 we will mark the thirtieth anniversary of the
World Conference on Women held in Beijing and
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We call on the
international community to make greater efforts to
fulfil its commitments on the women and peace and
security agenda at an accelerated pace, achieve synergy
between it and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
and inject new momentum into the cause of global
gender equality and women’s development.
China is an advocate of gender equality and has
taken concrete actions to empower women. In the grand
process of promoting China’s path to modernization,
the status of Chinese women has undergone tremendous
changes and their sense of achievement, happiness and
security has continued to improve. We have made it a
national priority to protect women’s rights and interests
and have established a legal system for that purpose
that includes more than 100 laws and regulations. We
support the active participation in politics of women
from all walks of life and continue to expand the channels
for women to participate in decision-making and
administration. Women currently make up more than
40 per cent of the workforce in China, approximately
45.8 per cent of scientific and technological workers
nationwide and 55 per cent of digital entrepreneurs.
From rural revitalization to scientific and technological
innovation, from social governance to international
exchange, China’s women have increasingly become
leaders in all walks of life, writing exemplary and
heroic chapters in our national history.
28/31

07/03/2023

In the course of maintaining our common security,
promoting our common development and building a
common future, the positive contributions of China
and China’s women are manifest. Over the past 30
years, China has deployed more than 1,000 female
uniformed personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, who have performed tasks such as mine
clearance and the removal of explosive ordnance,
security patrols and medical treatments, bringing hope
to people in conflict areas. In recent years, we have
helped developing countries implement 100 maternal
and child health projects and worked with UNICEF
to improve maternal and newborn health in various
African countries. We have provided emergency food
aid to women and children facing the threat of hunger
in the Horn of Africa and helped to eliminate poverty
for low-income women and their families by promoting
Juncao technology. We have trained more than 130,000
women from developing countries and founded the
UNESCO Prize for Girls’ and Women’s Education in
order to enable more women to use knowledge and
skills to change their lives.
Tomorrow is International Women’s Day. I would
like to take this opportunity to extend my best wishes
to all female colleagues and all the women of the United
Nations family. When more women are able to create
value and gain the opportunity to realize their dreams,
our world will be one step closer to peace, civilization
and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Ms. Katana (Kenya): Kenya congratulates
Mozambique on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March.
The occasion of International Women’s Day is an
important reminder that gender equality and women’s
empowerment are essential to international peace and
security. I thank all the briefers for their insights and
recommendations. As we take stock of where we are
with the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, we must look ahead to where we need
to be in anticipation of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), which was
spearheaded by Namibia in October 2000. It is a tragedy
that, more than two decades on, women remain on the
periphery of decision-making, including in peace and
security processes. At the same time, women’s rights
continue to be violated in many parts of the world, while
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

the financing of women’s organizations in conflictaffected countries remains minimal. And yet women
continue to work for peace despite the threats of human
trafficking and sexual and gender-based violence and
in the face of the brutality of conflict itself.
Indeed, women’s preventive role and their
leadership in the whole peace continuum — as first
responders, peacekeepers, peacebuilders, mediators,
peace signatories, activists, advocates and human
rights defenders — have been clearly demonstrated.
Considering the impact that armed conflicts and
non-inclusive structural and cultural norms have
had, particularly in rolling back decades of progress,
it is important to enhance women’s livelihoods and
operationalize their role in building, negotiating and
keeping the peace. At all levels, we need to make women’s
work, experiences and accomplishments visible,
amplify their voices and invest in their competencies.
At the international level, the Security Council
can play an important role in implementing the
existing women and peace and security normative
framework by supporting and investing in regional and
local efforts, all of which are reflected in the shared
commitments initiative that Kenya was honoured to
co-found, alongside Mexico and Ireland. The Council
should also invest and utilize local women’s agencies as
interlocutors in security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration mechanisms.
At the regional level, my delegation commends
our sister, Ms. Bineta Diop, and her Office for their
strong advocacy for the domestic integration and
comprehensive implementation of the women and peace
and security pillars, encouraging intergenerational
dialogues and promoting women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in peace processes in Africa.
We encourage enhanced social integration of the
pillars and objectives of our region’s women and peace
and security frameworks and policies, including the
African Union Gender Policy, and their linkages to
Agenda 2063 of the African Union and Silencing the
Guns in Africa.
At the national level, Kenya places great
importance on supporting women’s leadership at all
decision-making levels, as informed by our Constitution,
laws and policies. We are currently implementing and
conducting a mid-term review of our second women
and peace and security national action plan. We
place women’s economic security at the heart of our

S/PV.9276

continued implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. On 2 March, the Government
revamped and digitized our Women Enterprise Fund
to enhance financial inclusion and accelerate women’s
economic empowerment. A contextual approach
that utilizes local women’s expertise also remains a
priority, especially when it comes to collecting genderdisaggregated data to address challenges and enhance
opportunities for our local women and girls. Kenya
also sees the value of enhanced gender mainstreaming
in early warning and response mechanisms, including
through local peace committees and local mediation
networks. In that regard, we have developed a genderresponsive, community-led, early warning and early
response framework.
To conclude, I underscore the need to inspire young
and future generations and all segments of society with
regard to the centrality of the women and peace and
security agenda for the peace, prosperity and stability
of communities.
The President: I now call on the Minister of Social
Affairs and Community Development and Minister of
State for Women and Children Affairs of Kuwait.
Ms. Al-Baghli (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, I would like to congratulate
your friendly country on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council in March. I wish
you and your delegation every success. I also thank you
for convening today’s important public debate on the
theme “Women and peace and security: towards the
twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)”,
as well as the briefers for the valuable information and
views they shared.
Today’s important meeting is being held on the eve
of International Women’s Day, which is an important
opportunity to highlight women’s achievements across
the world and their vital role in all political, economic
and social sectors. It is also an opportunity to remind
all of us that greater efforts are still needed nationally,
regionally and internationally in order to empower
women, strengthen and protect their rights, ensure
that their voices are heard and their participation
guaranteed in decision-making processes, and reduce
the gender gap.
Our world is faced today with challenges and
crises, including armed conflicts, climate change,
natural disasters, economic and financial crises, food
insecurity and many more serious challenges. We must

23-0682329/31

S/PV.9276

Women and peace and security

recall that those challenges are interrelated, intertwined
and complex, and have immediate effects on the lives
of hundreds of millions of people, especially women
and girls. That should compel us to give them more
attention, time, effort and work, in order to reach that
to which we all aspire — namely, achieving goal 5 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
is to achieve gender equality and empower all women
and girls.
Resolution 1325 (2000), which established the
women and peace and security agenda more than
two decades ago, and the nine subsequent resolutions
adopted by the Council to endorse that agenda, have
been a cornerstone of international multilateral action
and an important tool for enhancing the effectiveness of
national, regional and international efforts in conflict
prevention and resolution as well as societal progress in
the social, economic, development and political fields.
History demonstrates that women are always the first
victims of wars and conflicts and in security, social,
economic, political and even climatic crises. As a
result, women have proven, time and again, that they
are capable of being resilient in the face of difficulties.
They have played important and essential roles in
preventing and resolving conflicts, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, political processes, humanitarian
responses, reconciliation and mediation efforts, and
rebuilding and recovery after conflicts and wars. In
that context, we emphasize that their participation in
political processes and peacebuilding has a positive
impact on the outcome of those processes, as reports
and statistics indicate that women’s participation
increases the likelihood that peace agreements will
be sustainable.
In that regard, I must point out that my country
was keen on the participation of Yemeni women in the
peace negotiations held in the State of Kuwait in 2016
under the auspices of the United Nations. I take this
opportunity to reiterate the State of Kuwait’s support for
involving women in all political negotiation processes
held in our region and around the world.
The State of Kuwait attaches great importance to
the issue of advancing Kuwaiti women, empowering
them and promoting and protecting their rights. In
that regard, we reaffirm that Kuwaiti women have
been increasing their gains in recent years, especially
since they obtained political rights and ran for office
in 2005. Today I consider myself a vivid example of
those successive gains that Kuwaiti women have
30/31

07/03/2023

obtained, as I participate in this Council session not
only as the Minister for Social Affairs and Community
Development, but also in my capacity as Minister
of State for Women and Childhood Affairs, a new
ministerial post in the State of Kuwait, which reflects
the keenness of the political leadership in my country
to empower Kuwaiti women, promote their rights and
support their vitally important role in the advancement
and development of the country, pursuant to the
constitutional provisions of the State of Kuwait and the
implementation of the New Kuwait Vision 2035.
In conclusion, I extend my respect and gratitude to
the women in my country, the women of Kuwait, for their
great sacrifices over time. Our history demonstrates
that Kuwaiti women faced the occupation with courage,
as martyrs of Kuwait, until rights were regained and
my country was liberated by Council resolutions.
Kuwaiti women also played a pivotal role in building
and developing our society, contributing to all fields
and sectors, and were an essential element in Kuwait’s
efforts to confront the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and
Youth of Ireland.
Mr. O’Gorman (Ireland): I would like to thank
Mozambique for organizing today’s important open
debate as we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). I also
thank Executive Director Bahous, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross Egger and
Special Envoy Diop for their briefings, as well as
Ms. Gbowee, whose work has inspired a generation
of women.
This year, we will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the pivotal Good Friday Agreement, which ended 30
years of conflict in Northern Ireland. As we reflect on
the achievements of the women and peace and security
agenda, I am reminded of the women of Northern Ireland,
who fought to be included in the peace process. Along
with women across the world in the most challenging of
environments, their persistence and courage paved the
way for the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Yet, sadly, real participation remains the
exception, and women continue to be excluded from
decision-making. Their perspectives and experiences
are too often ignored. There have, of course, been
bright spots. In Liberia and Colombia, women have
23-06823

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

been instrumental in driving change and shaping a
more peaceful future.
Yet there is an alarming and accelerating pushback
on gender equality and women’s rights more broadly.
In many cases, we are actually going in the opposite
direction. Nowhere is that more evident than in
Afghanistan, where girls and women are being
systematically erased from public life by the Taliban.
Yet Afghan women and girls continue to bravely speak
out, demand their rights and insist on their participation
despite great personal risk.
Meanwhile, Russia’s illegal, full-scale invasion
of Ukraine has forced millions of women and girls to
flee their homes, increasing their risk of trafficking
and sexual exploitation. For Ukraine to emerge
from the war and continue along its European Union
path, it is essential that women be represented in all
decision-making platforms on de-escalation, conflict
prevention and mitigation.
In Haiti, Libya, Myanmar, Syria, Yemen, Iran,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic — across the Council’s
agenda — women are seeing either their rights denied
or their interests sidelined in key political processes,
including United Nations-led processes. We can, and
we must, do better.
That is why the upcoming twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) must be an
urgent call to action. As Member States, we need to
look at the challenges that women face in a holistic
way. But we cannot afford to wait another two years

S/PV.9276

to make resolution 1325 (2000) and all the subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security a reality
for women and girls the world over.
During its recent term on the Security Council,
Ireland sought to amplify the voices of women directly
affected by war and conflict. Together with Kenya
and Mexico, Ireland initiated a set of commitments on
women and peace and security during our respective
presidencies, which included striving to ensure
women’s participation and civil society representation
at Council discussions. Fifteen Council members in
total have participated in that initiative. We hope that
more will do so.
At the country level, Ireland is committed to
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
through national action plans and an all-of government
approach. Yet we know that there remains much more
to do to close the gap between rhetoric and reality.
In conclusion, I want to stress that having women
in this Chamber and at this table matters. They
should never face intimidation, threats or harm as a
result. Not only must their voices be heard, but also
their perspectives taken into account and their safe
participation ensured if we are ever to fully fulfil the
promise of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

23-0682331/31
