United Nations

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6650th meeting
Wednesday, 9 November 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Đurbuzović
Mr. Vargas
Ms. Liu Bing
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Traffe
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Eick
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Ziadeh
Mrs. Aguwa
Mr. Ustinov
Ms. Machaba
Mrs. Stevens
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-58661 (E)

*1158661*

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia and Azerbaijan to
participate in the meeting. I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): At the outset, let me thank
the Portuguese presidency and you personally, Sir, for
convening this important debate, and President Cavaco
Silva for having presided over the meeting this
morning. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks, and all others the speakers who set the
stage for today’s discussion.
We sit here this afternoon in New York to discuss
the vital importance of protecting civilians in armed
conflict, as rockets continue to rain down on more than
1 million men, women and children in southern Israel.
There is no question that Hamas and other terrorists in
Gaza deliberately target civilians in these attacks. In
the past two weeks alone, many dozens of Grad rockets
and long-range missiles have been fired into the heart
of major Israeli cities, onto the playgrounds of our
kindergartens, and into the living rooms of our homes.
The pain caused by these attacks is permanent.
The scars are both physical and psychological. Less
than two weeks ago, a man was killed when a rocket
exploded on top of his car in a city called Ashkelon.
Many others have been injured in recent attacks. One
million Israelis were compelled to stay home from
work last week to ensure their safety, while 200,000
children were kept home from school.
These stories should shock and appal the Security
Council and all decent people. Yet, surprisingly, not a
single word of condemnation has been uttered by this
Council — not one word. The silence speaks volumes.
And as the rockets continue to roar out of Gaza, it is no
coincidence that silence also echoes from the Ramallah
headquarters of Palestinian Authority President
Mahmoud Abbas.
One of the most fundamental human rights is the
right of all people to live their lives without fear of
terrorist attacks. Day after day, Israeli citizens are

2

denied this right. Like any country, Israel has the
inherent right and responsibility to defend its
population. Yet, whenever we exercise our legitimate
right to self-defence, Israel goes to extraordinary
lengths to avoid harming civilians. Israel’s Supreme
Court and other independent mechanisms oversee all
military operations, even during active combat, to
ensure that they comply with our laws, values and
obligations.
The contrast with the terrorists we face could not
be clearer. When Hamas is not deliberately attacking
Israeli civilians, it is oppressing and endangering its
own people. For Hamas, the people of Gaza serve as
permanent human shields. Schools have become
launching pads for rockets, homes have become
experimental weapons laboratories, and mosques have
become missile storage lockers. Entire residential
neighbourhoods have become bases for terror.
Hamas and other terrorists in Gaza show the same
blatant disregard for the safety of international
organizations. They abuse access privileges and
insignia, endangering international humanitarian
personnel and obstructing the movement of aid.
Underlying the violence that continues to
emanate from Gaza is a deeply rooted culture of
incitement. Just two weeks ago, Wafa al-Biss was
released from prison as part of Israel’s exchange for
the release of our kidnapped solider, Gilad Shalit. She
had been serving a sentence for trying to blow herself
up in an Israeli hospital. Moments after arriving in
Gaza, she told a crowd of cheering schoolchildren at a
Hamas rally: “I hope you will walk the same path that
we took and, God willing, we will see some of you as
martyrs”. These are the poisonous values that are being
fed to the next generation of children in Gaza. When
Israel looks at children, we see the future. When
Hamas looks at children, they see suicide bombers and
human shields.
Incitement is not confined to Gaza. It also
pervades the official institutions of the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank and many other corners of
our region. In schools, mosques and the media,
generation after generation of children across the
Middle East have been taught to hate, vilify and
dehumanize Israelis and Jews. The international
community has a duty to end that culture of incitement.
We need education that promotes peace instead of hate,

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

tolerance
instead
of
violence,
understanding instead of martyrdom.

and

mutual

In Syria, Bashar Al-Assad remains the world’s
only ophthalmologist dedicated to cutting his people’s
vision of hope and freedom. His regime is slaughtering
his people in the streets day after day. Yet, some
members of the Council remain blind to his brutality.
The Syrian people’s cries must not go unheard.
The great Jewish philosopher Samuel ibn
Naghrela once said, “the truth can hurt like a thorn, at
first; but in the end it blossoms like a rose”. It is time
for the Security Council to speak the complete,
unvarnished and sometimes difficult truths about those
who ruthlessly target and employ civilians in armed
conflict. The Governments and terrorist organizations
that display such callous disregard for human life
should find no refuge in this Chamber. Let us bring
new clarity to this debate, for the sake of our children,
our security and our common future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for Portugal’s commitment and efforts in
the preparation of this debate, including organizing a
very fruitful workshop on accountability for violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law and
the Council’s role therein. Let me also express our
appreciation
to
the
Secretary-General,
High
Commissioner Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General
Bragg and the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their very instructive
briefings.
Austria aligns itself with the statements made or
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union, the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians and the
Human Security Network.
We very much welcome the focus of today’s
debate on accountability for serious violations against
civilian populations. In the light of her Office’s role in
an impartial monitoring of human rights violations and
fact-finding, we are particularly pleased about the
participation of High Commissioner Pillay in this
debate.
As the Council is aware, the protection of
civilians was one of Austria’s priorities during our
membership in the Security Council. Resolution 1894
(2009) clearly recognizes the role of the Council in

11-58661

ending impunity. As outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2009/277) on the protection
of civilians, the mandating of commissions of inquiry
by the Council is an important step towards ensuring
that perpetrators are held to account, either at the
national or international level, while drawing on the
full range of justice and reconciliation mechanisms. We
call on the Council to ensure a systematic and firm
response in cases of serious violations and, to that end,
to use the full range of tools at its disposal. Also, we
would like to underline the importance of reparations
for victims of violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, which might take various forms.
Let me say that international mechanisms for
monitoring compliance with international humanitarian
law and providing reparations for victims of violations
will also be dealt with at the thirty-first International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Conference, to be held in
Geneva at the end of this month. We look forward to
that discussion.
Let me take this opportunity to thank the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
consistent work and support in enhancing the
implementation of protection mandates. The training
modules on the protection of civilians, as well as on
sexual violence, will be crucial for better preparing
United Nations peacekeeping personnel for those tasks.
Furthermore, we look forward to the guidance on
reporting on the protection of civilians for United
Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions. It
will contribute to ensuring systematic and
comprehensive reporting on the protection of civilians,
and thus allow for appropriate action and firm
responses by the Council in cases of serious violations
committed against civilian populations.
On our part, we in Austria have taken first steps
to design adequate training modules for our peace
workers in the field. An interdisciplinary training
programme on the protection of civilians will be
finalized in 2012. The programme will be designed for
management and key personnel in various fields of
responsibility and should allow those actors to better
translate protection mandates into operational reality.
In conclusion, allow me to address two issues of
particular concern for Austria. First, with regard to the
threat posed to civilians by explosive weapons,
explosive remnants of war such as cluster munitions

3

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

continue to endanger the lives and well-being of
civilians, even decades after their use. The adoption of
the Convention on Cluster Munitions was therefore a
landmark in international humanitarian law with regard
to the protection of civilians. In that light, Austria is
deeply concerned about the draft text for an alternative
legal instrument on cluster munitions to be considered
by the upcoming Review Conference of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. As
currently drafted, that protocol on cluster munitions
would clearly undermine the existing international
norms against cluster munitions and would contradict
the humanitarian objective of the Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons aimed at the protection
of civilians.
Secondly, with regard to attacks against
journalists, the increase in the targeted killing of
journalists in recent years — both in conflict situations
and in times of peace — is a worrying development.
Impunity for those responsible for attacks constitutes
the biggest obstacle for effective protection. As
suggested by the Secretary-General in his latest report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, we
believe that the Human Rights Council has an
important role to play in strengthening the protection
of journalists. We have therefore decided to make the
protection of journalists one of our priorities during
our membership in the Human Rights Council. Our
objective is to strengthen the protection framework for
journalists through concrete initiatives, which will
focus on the fight against impunity as well as on
preventing future crimes against journalists. We look
forward to closely cooperating with interested Member
States, civil society and other stakeholders in preparing
the initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Honduras.
Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our appreciation to your
delegation, Mr. President, as well as to Portugal, for
the timely initiative to organize this important open
debate on the responsibility to protect and the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also
welcome the presence here this morning of His
Excellency President Aníbal António Cavaco Silva of
Portugal and of the Secretary-General, as well as that
of High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem
Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Catherine Bragg, and of Mr. Philip Spoerri,

4

Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Their
participation is a forceful affirmation of the urgent
need to address the sensitive issue before us today.
We can state without any doubt that the most
recent armed conflicts that have unfortunately broken
out in various parts of the world, and which we have
seen grow with feelings of sadness and disbelief, have
touched the conscience of the entire world. All
confrontations that claim lives cast shadows over the
universal desire for harmonious coexistence among all
peoples and the search for peaceful solutions to
differences, especially when there are innocent victims
and unprotected civilians who are pulled in by the
maelstrom of a brutal confrontation.
Such horrendous acts of repression and
indiscriminate State violence against innocent civilians,
in utter neglect of the responsibility to protect human
life — especially unarmed non-combatants — present a
painful scenario that cries out for greater involvement by
the international community. The Security Council plays
a guardianship role in the fervent quest for international
peace. Seeking and maintaining that peace are essential
to creating a more stable and secure world that
guarantees collective well-being.
At this point along the path we have traced since
51 countries founded the United Nations, we would
wait in vain for the realities of our day to resemble the
circumstances of that time, or for the post-Second
World War model to satisfy the expectations of the 193
States that today make up the Organization. If indeed
we want our resolutions to carry greater credibility and
legitimacy, then it makes no sense, in the twenty-first
century, to carry on with “provisional” rules of
procedure. Because we believe that it is imperative to
preserve the Organization’s institutional integrity, we
cannot evade the need to make decision-making
processes more transparent and democratic. They must
be updated at every procedural stage in order to bring
them into line with new experiences and the
developments that the world has undergone to date.
We must overcome the distrust that has paralyzed
us so many times, so as to find solutions to pressing
conflicts. The urgent duty to preserve lives and to
rescue vulnerable populations fighting for survival, in
appalling helplessness, demands robust actions,
decisions and procedures — and ones that do not come
so late that nothing is left but to place wreaths on the

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

graves of hundreds of thousands of innocents who died
for lack of the urgent help they cried out for.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.

Having said that, we do not mean to take any
credit away from the Council for the fair and
courageous decisions it has taken aimed at saving lives,
just as we highlight the efforts launched at previous
meetings. We take note of the fact that the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations has
informed us that the Secretariat has finished drafting a
conceptual framework for the responsibility to protect
as part of a comprehensive strategy that includes
setting up protection training modules. It is
encouraging to learn that consultations are being held
with troop-contributing countries on requirements for
the protection of civilians.

Mr. Ali (Bangladesh): I congratulate your
country, Sir, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November. I
especially thank the President of Portugal for presiding
over this important meeting this morning. I also
express the appreciation of my delegation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, High Commissioner for Human
Rights Navanethem Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Catherine Bragg and Director
for International Law and Cooperation at the
International Committee of the Red Cross Philip
Spoerri for their excellent presentations on this topic.

Normally, human rights violations are among the
main drivers of conflicts. The Security Council
recently held an open debate on the protection of
children in armed conflict (see S/PV.6581) and adopted
resolution 1998 (2011). A step forward would be to
expand the listing criteria to include parties to a
conflict who attack schools and hospitals. Although the
Council has decided to broaden the provisions of
sanctions regimes in connection with violations of
international law in the context of the protection of
children, it is worth mentioning that there is still room
to broaden such protection mechanisms. We commend
the presidential statement adopted at the conclusion of
the Council debate of 28 October on women and peace
and security (S/PRST/2011/20), which condemns all
violations of applicable international law against
women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
International peace and security require the
institutional reliability and strength that over the years
since the Second World War we have instituted and
built up at the United Nations. The Charter expresses
no small wish when it assigns the United Nations the
duty to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. For that reason — with so much apocalyptic
talk, with a lack of civility in dealing with differences
and of brotherhood in living together, and with the
abuse of the planet’s precious resources — we must,
today more than ever, pledge to renew that lofty
commitment, so that it rises to the scope of the
challenge we originally took on. It must be the right
fit — neither so big that it falls off nor so small that it
chafes.

The protection of civilians is a basic principle of
humanitarian law. The 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their 1977 additional Protocols contain specific rules to
protect civilians. In situations that are not covered by
those treaties, in particular internal disturbances,
civilians are protected by the fundamental principles of
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important tools available to the United Nations to
protect civilians in armed conflict. Resolution 1894
(2009), resolutions relating to children and armed
conflict and to women and peace and security, the
mandating of peacekeeping missions to protect
civilians, the creation of the informal expert group on
the protection of civilians and the adoption of aidesmemoire on the protection of civilians have been
important steps forward. However, more needs to be
done in the implementation of peacekeeping mandates
and to fill protection gaps.
Of the current seven United Nations
peacekeeping operations with a protection mandate —
in Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Haiti, Lebanon, Liberia, South Sudan and
Darfur — five have developed comprehensive
strategies on the protection of civilians. Those five are
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
However, in spite of those positive developments,
challenges in the field continue. Last year, UNAMID

11-58661

5

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

and MONUSCO continued to experience difficulties in
implementing their protection mandates. It remains to
be seen whether the new policy documents developed
in New York have a tangible impact on how
peacekeeping operations are conducted at the field
level. In that regard, the establishment of the new
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which
includes a protection-of-civilians mandate, will be an
important test case for United Nations peacekeeping.
We feel that adequate capacity will be the most
important element for the effective protection of
civilians.
We have observed two noticeable initiatives by
the Council since it held its last debate on this topic in
May (see S/PV.6531). First, resolution 1998 (2011),
adopted in July, expanded the listing criteria in the
Secretary-General’s reports on children and armed
conflict to include parties to conflict who attack or
threaten schools and hospitals. Secondly, during its
annual debate on women and peace and security last
month (see S/PV.6642), the Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/20) on women’s
participation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution, in which it reiterated its condemnation of
all violations of applicable international law committed
against women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
As I commend those developments, may I add that the
presence of uniformed female personnel may also play
a pivotal role in a State’s ability to protect its citizens. I
take this opportunity to refer to the efforts of the allfemale formed police unit from Bangladesh working in
the peacekeeping Mission in Haiti.
My delegation would like to highlight a few
issues to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The first relates to prevention and the building
of a culture of peace. Prevention is at the heart of
protection. The preventive capacity of the Organization
must be enhanced. At the same time, Member States
need to take steps to inculcate the values of peace,
tolerance and harmony that contribute to long-term
prevention.
Secondly, the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be enhanced. Given
that Bangladesh is one of the largest troop-contributing
countries, my delegation feels that the main challenge
to the implementation of protection mandates is the
lack of adequate resources.

6

Thirdly, we also believe that there needs to be a
closer dialogue between the Council and troopcontributing countries, as they can provide valuable
information about the situation on the ground.
Fourthly, compliance with international legal
obligations by parties to conflicts must be enhanced
and accountability mechanisms should be strengthened.
Fifthly, international efforts, including those involving
the use of force, should be a last resort, respecting the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, since the country concerned has primary
responsibility for protecting its civilian citizens.
Finally, my delegation urges all parties to
conflicts to comply strictly with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law in order to
ensure protection of the lives and property of civilians
and their unimpeded access to humanitarian aid. We
call on parties to conflicts to strengthen the protection
of civilians through heightened awareness at all levels,
particularly through the training, orders and
instructions given to armed forces.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): I would like to thank
Portugal for convening this open debate today. Canada
welcomes the opportunity to focus on accountability
issues related to the protection of civilians. The
evolving situation in Libya and the ongoing protection
challenges in countries such as Somalia, Yemen, Syria,
Côte d’Ivoire and Afghanistan demonstrate the need
for sustained international attention to meet the
protection needs of populations affected by violence
and armed conflict.
Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including rape as a weapon of war
and other acts of sexual violence, continue to occur at
an alarming rate. Those who commit such acts must be
held to account for their actions. In his November 2010
report (S/2010/579), the Secretary-General identified a
number of key recommendations for enhancing
accountability to better protect civilians. I would like
to draw attention to a number of issues and countryspecific contexts that we consider particularly
important.
First, it is important that we acknowledge that
progress has been made in advancing a legal
framework for civilian protection. This has allowed us

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

to take decisive action to protect civilians. Libya offers
a key example of how the international community can
work together successfully to achieve a common
purpose. Resolution 1973 (2011) mandated the use of
all means necessary to protect civilians under threat of
attack in Libya. Resolution 1973 (2011) and, before
that, resolution 1970 (2011), sent a clear message to
the then Libyan regime, and to the wider international
community, that deliberate and targeted attacks on
civilian populations and gross violations of human
rights carry serious consequences. Canada is proud to
have played a key role in Libya, both politically and
militarily, in protecting civilians against a cruel and
oppressive regime.
Yet despite some successes of that kind,
implementation gaps remain all too often in our efforts
to ensure that our collective words of support are
effectively translated into concrete actions. The
Council must continue to exercise the range of options
it has at its disposal to prevent and stop violence
against civilians in armed conflict, including mediation
and diplomatic missions, sanctions, United Nations
mandated missions and, when necessary, the use of
force.
Secondly, it is also important that those who
commit violent and deadly attacks on aid workers be
brought to justice. The attack on the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in Kandahar, Afghanistan, on 31 October
served as a reminder of the great risks run by those
who work tirelessly to deliver humanitarian assistance.
Tragically, three UNHCR staff lost their lives in the
attack, and our condolences go out to the families of
the deceased. Those attacks underscore the importance
of continued and sustained cooperation between the
international and Afghan security forces in ensuring
that civilians are protected from indiscriminate acts of
violence. Canada is proud to play a role in Afghanistan
through our work in training the Afghan National
Security Forces so that they are capable of protecting
all civilians in the country, while ensuring that those
who target civilians are brought to justice.
Thirdly, we must be unrelenting in denouncing
violence directed against women and girls in acts such
as sexual violence, including rape as a weapon of war,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy
and enforced sterilization. We will continue to promote
the empowerment of women and girls. In Afghanistan,
for example, Canada has frequently stressed the need

11-58661

for the Afghan Government to promote and protect
human rights, including freedom of expression and
religious belief. Canada supports programmes designed
to implement Afghanistan’s 2009 law on eliminating
violence against women and to help Afghan human
rights institutions promote equal rights for all citizens
and investigate and act on violations.
(spoke in French)
Fourthly, we must vigorously defend the rights of
vulnerable religious minorities in situations of armed
conflict who are persecuted for their religious beliefs.
We also encourage key United Nations actors to
develop strategies to tackle the persecution of religious
minorities more effectively, with a view to preventing
their displacement. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. John Baird, emphasized in his address to the
General Assembly during the general debate (see
A/66/PV.26) that the Canadian Government is in the
process of establishing an Office of Religious Freedom
within the Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade that will serve to promote the
protection of the freedom of religion as a key objective
of Canada’s foreign policy.
Fifthly, for our efforts to succeed in the long
term, we must find ways of strengthening
accountability mechanisms in national jurisdictions. It
is the primary responsibility of every State to
investigate those suspected of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes and to bring them to justice.
The recent sentencing of four former military officers
for their role in a massacre of civilians during the
armed conflict in Guatemala — the first such
conviction of military officers in that country — is a
good example of national accountability mechanisms at
work. That underlines the need for States to meet their
obligations to investigate and prosecute persons
suspected of serious international crimes, and where
appropriate, cooperate with international institutions to
ensure that those responsible face justice.
Finally, Canada also supports the Secretary-General’s
call for Member States, United Nations agencies,
international
organizations
and
non-governmental
organizations to continue to work to better understand
and address the impact of explosive remnants of war in
populated areas. Canada is supporting such efforts in
concrete and meaningful ways. Most recently, our
Prime Minister announced that we will be contributing
Can$10 million to help secure weapons of mass

7

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

destruction and remove and dispose of explosive
remnants of war in Libya. These measures are essential
for ensuring that civilians are protected and Libya can
move forward.
It is essential that we back our principles with
concrete action. Vulnerable populations around the
world must be able to rely on the Security Council’s
continued attention and sustained efforts. And the
Council can continue to rely on Canada to support its
efforts to protect civilian populations and to promote
freedom, democracy, human rights and the rule of law
on a global scale.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Iceland, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves
with this statement.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the AssistantSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Director of International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
introductory statements.
We align ourselves with the following quote from
the recent Fourth Committee statement on
peacekeeping made by Côte d’Ivoire, a country whose
citizens were under siege earlier this year and where
peacekeepers implemented their mandate to protect
them with resolve and with results. In his statement,
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire said:
(spoke in French)
“Today, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict undeniably lies at the very heart of
peacekeeping operations and requires the
adoption of concrete effective measures to
properly fulfil that mandate. The widespread
danger to which the civilian population was
exposed during the post-election crisis in Côte
d’Ivoire emphasizes the relevance of that new
mandate and strikingly illustrates the pressing
need for the international community to work

8

together to adopt urgent and effective measures to
ensure legitimacy and uphold international law.”
(spoke in English)
It is estimated that, in contemporary armed
conflicts, 90 per cent of the casualties are civilians and
only 10 per cent are active combatants. In Côte
d’Ivoire, as in Libya and other countries, the Council
saved lives by mandating the protection of civilians. In
doing so, it upheld what the International Court of
Justice has described as one of the intransgressible
principles of customary international law.
Another international court, the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
concluded that the obligation to protect the civilian
population was in force not just during an international
conflict, but also during times of national strife. We
call on all parties to conflict, including non-State
actors, to fully comply with their international legal
obligations to protect civilians and to prevent
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law. Compliance with international
humanitarian law also contributes to securing and
sustaining humanitarian space and access. International
law first and foremost tasks sovereign States with the
protection of civilians — it is their job to do it and to
do it well.
At the same time, international law asks the
international community to play a role in ensuring that
the protection of civilians is respected, which for
various reasons is unfortunately not always the case.
For example, in Syria today we see a brazen regime
that is brutally repressing its own people and violating
their human rights. That violence must stop now and
those who wield it in order to hang on to power must
be held accountable. We urge the Council to shoulder
its responsibilities and to take robust action in
situations of human rights violations. As the SecretaryGeneral has said,
“in many conflicts it is to a large degree the
absence of accountability, and, worse still, the
lack in many instances of any expectation
thereof, that allow violations to thrive.”
(S/2010/579, para. 82)
Aside from delivering justice for its own sake,
accountability also acts as a deterrent from future
injustice. Fighting impunity should therefore be an
important priority at both the national and international

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

levels. When States cannot or will not bring
perpetrators to justice, the international community
should be able to act. In that regard, we continue to call
on those that have yet to accede to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court to do so, and on all
Member States to extend their full cooperation to the
Court.
Commissions of inquiry can be a helpful tool to
pave the way for national or international prosecution.
That is why, as the Secretary-General recommended
last year, the Security Council should not hesitate to
mandate them. To be sure, accountability is not just
about investigation, prosecution and meaningful
reparations. It is also about assisting countries in
promoting the rule of law, because in the long run that
is the best way to help to promote the protection of
civilians. When the rule of law is strong enough,
civilians do not have to depend on the benevolence of
their rulers or on Security Council resolutions — they
will be protected under the law.
As we have seen over the past decade,
peacekeeping operations can play an important role in
establishing and strengthening a legal and political
framework under which all individuals and institutions,
including the State itself, are accountable. We need to
make that framework also work for vulnerable groups,
including women, children, internally displaced
persons and detainees, thereby ensuring that they have
access to justice.
Aside from the rule of law tasks assigned to most
missions, several are also expressly mandated to
protect civilians. Thanks to the work accomplished by
the United Nations membership in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and in the
Security Council, we have moved beyond the
conceptual stage. Now it is about further improving the
way that protection-of-civilians mandates are
implemented, building on what certain missions have
already been doing. Missions need clear and practical
guidance.
As the scenario-based training package is rolled
out this fall and as relevant missions translate the
strategic framework operation-specific strategies, we
look forward to seeing concrete results. Let me point to
the landmark resolution 1894 (2009), in the drafting of
which I had the honour to be involved, in my former
capacity. Pursuant to that resolution, all relevant
United Nations operations should develop specific

11-58661

benchmarks against which to measure and review
progress in the implementation of mandates to protect
civilians. That need is particularly acute in the context
of mission drawdown. To further enhance the
implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates, we
also encourage missions to sharpen and strengthen
their early-warning instruments. All too often, the new
generation of peacekeeping operations still relies on
old-generation tools. The systematic use of modern
monitoring and surveillance technologies could greatly
increase the capacity of the United Nations to prevent
atrocities.
As the United Nations continues to work on
building that capacity, we will keep a close eye on its
efforts, not only because we want United Nations
peacekeeping to become more effective, but also
because we want to draw lessons for our own European
Union missions and to revise guidelines. That will help
us to better protect civilians and to become better
partners in that regard with the United Nations and
other regional organizations, especially the African
Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
We warmly congratulate the Portuguese
presidency of the Council for organizing this bi-annual
debate on the protection of civilians, which has taken
on particular importance against the backdrop of the
developments in North Africa and the Middle East in
recent months.
The Security Council assumed its responsibilities
by authorizing, in resolution 1973 (2011), the operation
to protect civilians in Libya. The determined
intervention of the international community made it
possible to save the lives of countless Libyan men,
women and children. The international community had
to act. As the Deputy Prime Minister of Luxembourg
stated in the General Assembly in September,
“We did not want to reproach ourselves yet again
for having hesitated too long, for having
neglected our responsibility to protect those
unable to defend themselves against the cruelty of
their own authorities. We did not want once again

9

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

to be the powerless witnesses of large-scale
violence.” (A/66/PV.24, p. 2)
We must now support the new Libya along the difficult
path towards democracy and the rule of law.
Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict lies at the heart of the Council’s work to
maintain international peace and security, not only in
the Libyan context. The protection of civilians is the
noblest task of our peacekeepers, and possibly the most
difficult and the most delicate.
We therefore commend the Council for giving
peacekeeping operations increasingly explicit mandates
to protect civilians. The Council has an excellent tool,
the aide-memoire (S/PRST/2009/1, annex), to do so in
a systematic and coherent fashion. Is it essential to
translate the mandates set by the Council into rules of
engagement on the ground that enable Blue Helmets to
successfully discharge their protection-of-civilians
mandate. While the expectations of the populations in
areas where peacekeeping operations are deployed are
enormous, the resources available to our peacekeepers
are often too limited.
In that regard, we commend the initiatives taken
in recent years by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in cooperation with the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and in consultation with
the Security Council, to better prepare the military,
police and civilian personnel deployed under the
auspices of the United Nations for their task of
protecting civilians. They do so in ever more complex
environments and conflicts, in which civilians continue
to be the first victims of the acts of violence committed
by parties to the conflict.
The efforts of the Council to better protect
children in armed conflict and to fight sexual violence
in conflicts are part and parcel of the agenda for the
protection of civilians. We encourage the Council to
continue to press ahead on all these fronts and to
continue to include violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law as criteria for imposing
targeted sanctions.
United
Nations
peacekeeping
operations,
however many and however big they may be, will
unfortunately never be enough to protect all civilians
who are victims of violation of their fundamental rights
during armed conflicts across the globe. Therefore, we
must spare no effort in fighting impunity of the

10

perpetrators of these crimes wherever they may be.
Important progress has been made through the
prosecution of the perpetrators of these crimes in
national, international and mixed criminal tribunals,
commissions of inquiry, and specialized chambers in
national tribunals.
The unanimous decision by the Security Council
to refer the situation in Libya since 15 February 2011
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
sent a clear signal to the Qadhafi regime and to all
combatants in Libya that they will be have to answer
for their acts. The international community will not
tolerate impunity for the most serious crimes. The
important preventative function of the activities of
these mechanisms and bodies deserves to be
highlighted as well.
Allow me to conclude by paying tribute to all the
men and women, at all levels of the hierarchy of
peacekeeping
operations,
who
through
their
courageous presence and their decisive action strive
day after day to give the civilian population during
armed conflict a sense of security, and thereby human
dignity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the President of
Portugal, His Excellency Aníbal Cavaco Silva, for
convening this debate. We welcome the reports
presented by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Catherine
Bragg, and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri.
Over the last four years, in over 60 countries,
there have been armed conflicts in which the civilian
population has been most affected by the havoc and
suffering caused. Mexico expresses its concern at the
increasingly frequent and deliberate attacks on
civilians, the destruction of infrastructure and assets
that are essential for their survival, forced
displacement, and the methods and means of
indiscriminate war that are employed, particularly in
populated areas.
It is essential to guarantee respect for the
principles of distinction, proportionality, military

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

necessity and limitation. Violations do not arise only
from the conduct of hostilities, but are also closely
linked with the use of increasingly sophisticated
weapons that have indiscriminate effects. Explosives in
densely populated areas and cluster munitions are but
two examples of weaponry the use of which totally
ignores these basic principles.
The existing international instruments regarding
international humanitarian law provide a solid basis of
principals and standards that should be respected by all
parties to a conflict. The lack of application of
international humanitarian law and the restrictive and
inexact interpretation by the parties in armed conflicts
are the main generators of serious violations of this set
of standards, to the detriment of the civilian
population.
Mexico agrees with the Secretary-General that it
is appropriate to focus this debate on measures to
promote accountability in the light of violations of
international humanitarian law and of the human rights
of civilian populations. Ending impunity is essential
for a society in conflict or in a post-conflict situation
that seeks to repair the damage caused by abuses of the
past, to prevent repetition of such abuses and to create
a solid culture of respect for human rights.
States have a primary responsibility to prosecute
those responsible for the commission of violations of
international humanitarian law, including war crimes.
Therefore all States should have a national legal
framework that appropriately reflects such provisions
and facilitates their implementation. In this regard I am
pleased to report that my country is working on a draft
reform of federal criminal legislation for the
classification of international crimes. The intent is to
ensure that national legislation takes into account not
only the applicable provisions of the Rome Statute but
also the complementary substantive standards
contained in other international instruments to which
Mexico is a party.

provide them with strategies for monitoring and
oversight on the ground in terms of civilian protection.
The Security Council can also establish
investigation commissions and turn to the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission. Likewise, the
Council, under the Rome Statute, can refer situations to
the International Criminal Court. That is a useful tool
in efforts to prevent future violations of international
humanitarian law.
I conclude by affirming that our obligation to
respect, and ensure respect for, international
humanitarian law means that we must use the tools that
we have at our disposal to ensure international peace,
security and justice, but also we must formulate a solid
culture of respect that eradicates impunity and repairs
the harm done to civilians affected by armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Aquino (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): May I
begin, Mr. President, by thanking you for organizing
this open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, and Ms. Navanethem Pillay, High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Catherine
Bragg, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their presentations.
We have been seeing a series of conflicts around
the world in which, unfortunately, civilians, including
women and children, continue to be the victims of
attacks and violations of their fundamental rights,
including the right to life.

The primary obligation of States goes hand in
hand with the responsibility of the international
community, in particular of the Security Council on
this subject.

Despite regular meetings held by this forum to
discuss this subject, it is clear that the United Nations
can and should do more on the ground to respond to
needs related to protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. The determination of mechanisms and
operational guidelines for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the recommendations adopted by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations are
a concrete demonstration of what the Organization can
do in tackling this delicate subject.

The Security Council must promote concrete
measures to ensure accountability, such as measures to
further the rule of law and transition justice in
post-conflict situations. Likewise, it should strengthen
the mandates of the peacekeeping missions so as to

However, despite these major steps forward, we
must clearly point out that most of them occur
essentially at a normative or legislative level. These
advances contribute to a better understanding and
development of the common conceptual framework

11-58661

11

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

that we seek. However, we must be aware that many
challenges remain to be dealt with, so we must
concentrate our efforts on implementing the norms. In
other words, we must do more concrete work on the
ground. It involves specifically preventing threats to
the lives of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
As has been pointed out repeatedly, the protection
of civilians is a fundamental aspect for achieving
peace, for the sustainability and viability of political
processes and for the credibility and legitimacy of this
Organization.
While the parties to a conflict have an obligation
and responsibility to adopt the measures necessary to
protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian aid,
political commitment must also be bolstered not only
among the parties but also within this Organization,
primarily the Security Council, bearing in mind that, as
stated in resolution 1894 (2009), deliberate targeting of
civilians and the commission of systematic violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law in
situations of armed conflict may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
In this regard, it is essential that protection of
civilians mandates be clear, feasible and precise so that
they can be implemented in a way that is not subject to
interpretation by actors on the ground. Likewise, it is
important that these mandates provide for the
appropriate and sufficient allocation of the resources
needed to carry them out and that they reflect existing
limitations in order not to create expectations beyond
the capacity of missions to deliver, particularly in
terms of the use of force.
We are also of the view that it is important to
develop the analytical preventive dimension prior to
the deployment of a mission mandated to protect
civilians, with a view to ensuring the best possible
knowledge of the parties to the conflict, as well as the
reasons and circumstances of the conflict. That will
allow for specific and appropriate mandates and better
coordination on the ground in order to deal with the
obstacles that prevent the provision and delivery of
humanitarian aid. As part of this preventive analysis, it
is also necessary to continuously assess the threats on
the ground both to civilians and to actors who
participate in their protection, particularly in
peacekeeping operations.
Another aspect that must be addressed when we
talk about the protection of civilians relates to

12

combating impunity. In this regard, Peru considers it
necessary to improve and step up the fight against
impunity for violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law and the responsibility to protect
civilians. We should not forget that there is an
international criminal responsibility for such
violations.
That is why the international community has
provided for mechanisms through the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols, as
well as in international customary law, so that States
can prosecute and punish those responsible for war
crimes. Moreover, through the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, jurisdiction has been
established for that supranational body to prosecute
those who commit war crimes, regardless of which
party to the conflict commits them, under the principle
of complementarity and through effective cooperation
with the Court.
My delegation affirms the importance of the
periodic holding of these debates and reiterates its view
that it is necessary to add value to them by seeking to
move beyond the mere formal exchange of positions to
the drafting of documents that underpin real and
concrete progress that can be felt by civil society, on
whose behalf we are meeting here today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): A major obstacle to
strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a general lack of respect for international
humanitarian law and the way in which its rules are
interpreted and implemented. Another challenge is to
continue efforts to further strengthen international
humanitarian law.
There can be no doubt that the protection of
civilians must include conflict and post-conflict
situations alike. Increased accountability is key to
ensuring better compliance with fundamental
international norms to protect civilians. Let me address
three points that relate to situations where populations
remain vulnerable in the face of armed hostilities.
First, an indispensable building block for
accountability is data on the civilian harm being
experienced in conflict situations. Since the 2010
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians of civilians in armed conflict (S/2010/579),

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

we have seen further evidence of the pattern of harm
caused by explosive weapons used in populated areas
in a number of country contexts, such as Côte d’Ivoire,
Libya and Syria. Stronger data-gathering on the impact
of explosive violence on civilians would allow us to
better understand this pattern of harm and to strengthen
accountability. Norway would welcome discussions
with partners on this issue ahead of the next debate on
the protection of civilians.
In addition, we need to enhance the effectiveness
of accountability mechanisms. We welcome the
commitment of the Security Council to establishing a
stronger protection framework against sexual violence
in conflict and for children in armed conflict, most
recently through resolutions 1960 (2010) and 1998
(2011). We further encourage the Security Council to
strengthen its monitoring and oversight in the area of
the protection of civilians.
Secondly, the protection of civilians cannot be
seen in isolation from the principle of the
responsibility to protect. While it is the responsibility
of States to protect civilians by promoting and
protecting their human rights, the international
community has a responsibility to assist in ensuring
that civilians are protected from mass atrocities. The
United Nations must continue to expand its range of
tools for preventive capacities in order to avert mass
atrocities, including a focus on crisis response through
diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful means.
Thirdly, perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law must be brought to justice. It is
States that bear the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute breaches of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In cases where
national judicial systems fail, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) is an indispensable vehicle for
ensuring justice and accountability. In February of this
year, the Security Council for the second time used the
powers granted to it by the Rome Statute to
unanimously refer the situation in Libya to the Court.
That is yet another acknowledgement of the fact that
the ICC is a necessary tool for ensuring that
perpetrators of international crimes are brought to
justice. It follows that security sector reform must be
given a higher priority, with a particular emphasis on
the justice sector.
While respect for existing rules is of key
importance, the rules of international humanitarian law

11-58661

also need to be continually reviewed and strengthened
in order to keep up with new developments in warfare
and new emerging humanitarian concerns.
Over the past 15 years, fundamental norms, such
as the Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, have been developed with a view to
outlawing
conventional
weapons
that
cause
unacceptable harm. We remain concerned about the
ongoing efforts within the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons to negotiate a new protocol on
cluster munitions. The current draft would in fact
perpetuate, rather than prevent, the civilian suffering
caused by cluster munitions. These concerns are widely
shared by other States, the International Committee of
the Red Cross, United Nations field organizations and
other humanitarian organizations. To ignore the advice
of those entities and the facts they have provided on
the humanitarian realities on the ground would be a
very negative signal.
We urge all States to work to strengthen
international humanitarian law and to keep our focus
on the humanitarian realities in the field.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): Georgia welcomes
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I take this opportunity to commend the
Portuguese delegation’s efforts in convening this
important meeting.
More than 10 years have passed since the first
debate was held in the Security Council on this issue,
yet armed conflicts still affect millions of persons who
are deprived of basic necessities and who are
vulnerable to violations of their rights, displaced from
their homes, targeted through indiscriminate attacks
and other violations. In many cases, the principal
victims of armed conflicts are women and children.
The United Nations must protect the dignity of
each and every one and uphold the rights of all those
who have been affected by conflicts. It goes without
saying that we need to do more at the international,
regional and national levels.
The August 2008 war has had devastating
consequences for civilians, especially for those who
have been ethnically cleansed from two regions of my
country, Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region. Since our
previous statements in the Council, nothing has

13

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

changed on the ground with regard to civilians living
under occupation in these territories. At least 20 per
cent of sovereign Georgian territory remains under
illegal foreign occupation in violation of the six-point
ceasefire agreement brokered by France on behalf of
the European Union. Hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons and refugees continue to
suffer. They are denied their right to return to their
homes and villages — a right referred to numerous
times in this very Chamber. The practices of forced
displacement, denial of property rights and other
massive, gross and systematic human rights violations
continue to occur there.
Safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
actors to people in need of protection and assistance is
another important element. Regrettably, the occupying
Power, in clear violation of the six-point agreement,
has continued to block the access of humanitarian aid
and international humanitarian actors to the Tskhinvali
region. Clearly, the denial of the access of
humanitarian personnel to victims of conflict amounts
to a flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law.
Almost a year has passed since Georgia
announced the non-use-of-force commitment. Although
the Charter of the United Nations authorizes us to do
so, Georgia has renounced military means in order to
restore its territorial integrity. The relevant letters have
been sent to the Secretary-General and to other
international organizations, but instead of a
reciprocation to that gesture of peace, the response we
have received has come in the form of the illegal
installation of an additional military contingent,
missiles and rockets in the occupied regions. We
believe that the geopolitical ambitions of one particular
country cannot stand in the way of international efforts
aimed at easing the plight of those suffering from
forced displacement and ethnic cleansing.
Although the topic I will touch on is not
technically part of the debate, it may affect the issues I
have highlighted. Earlier today, Georgia and Russia
signed a package of documents that pave the way for
Russia’s accession to the World Trade Organization.
We hope that Russia can demonstrate the same level of
pragmatism it has shown during these talks when it is
faced with resolving other bilateral issues, first and
foremost the right of more than 400,000 men, women
and children to return to their homes in Abkhazia and
the Tskhinvali region in safety and dignity.

14

One of the purposes of today’s debate is to see
the international community more engaged in
addressing all of the relevant challenges. In conclusion,
I wish to underline that Georgia fully supports and
encourages the continued efforts of the international
community in making the protection of civilians a
reality for all of those who are caught up in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): It is my honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand,
South Africa as an observer, and my own country,
Slovenia.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
priority of the Human Security Network. We highly
welcome the Security Council’s attention to this key
issue. While the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579) highlights several challenges to the
implementation of the concept — including the need to
enhance humanitarian access and protection by United
Nations peacekeeping and relevant missions — in all
brevity, we would like to reflect on three main points
with regard to the issue of accountability, which we
understand to be the central sub-theme of today’s
discussion.
First, respect for international humanitarian and
human rights law and accountability for its violations
are not only indispensable to the protection of
civilians, but are key ingredients in achieving
sustainable peace and thus preventing relapse into
violence. The protection of civilians in armed conflict
cannot be achieved without promoting respect for and
observance by States of their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law, first
and foremost with a view to ensuring accountability in
the event of grave violations. Special attention should
also be given to those in vulnerable situations, such as
women and children, who face great and multiple risks
during conflicts.
Secondly, the Security Council plays a crucial
role in helping to ensure accountability, including
individual criminal accountability. On the one hand,
experience shows that the use of fact-finding missions
helps to strengthen the credibility of United Nations
actions in response to allegations of violations of the

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

rules of international law on the protection of civilians,
and that they pave the way to establishing individual
responsibility for perpetrators of violations. Factfinding missions ought to be used within the Security
Council’s respective mandates with greater regularity
and frequency, while ensuring a consistent approach.
On the other hand, while it is the States’ primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, the
International Criminal Court today stands at the centre
of the system of international criminal justice to ensure
justice and accountability where national judicial
systems have failed. The Security Council has a key
role to play in preventing impunity by referring
situations to the Prosecutor of the Court. In doing so, it
must be consistent. It must be able to say which cases
are referred to the Court and which are not. And once it
has referred a case, it must provide its full support to
the Court in fulfilling its mandate.
Thirdly, the Human Security Network would like
to draw the Council’s attention to the recent creation
by the Human Rights Council of a mandate for a
special rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence. The new
mandate was created by a consensus of all regional
groups. We welcome that creation as a clear
acknowledgement of the insight that accountability —
along with truth-seeking processes, reparations to
victims and institutional reforms designed to guarantee
that past abuses do not reoccur — must be an integral
part of a more holistic and people-centred approach of
United Nation strategies, including on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
As reaffirmed in its declaration of 23 September,
the Human Security Network encourages promotion by
the United Nations of a comprehensive approach to
fostering truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of
non-recurrence after gross human rights violations and
serious violations of international humanitarian law
have occurred, especially in the strategic and
operational planning of peace operations and in the
domain of donor coordination. We view the Security
Council as uniquely placed to bring this to bear in the
field. In that regard, we commend the World
Development Report 2011 on conflict, security and
development and the recently released report of the
Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies
(S/2011/634).

11-58661

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to welcome Portugal’s initiative in
holding this important debate on the protection of
civilians, an issue of particular importance to my
country. I thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement and Ms. Navanethem Pillay,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for her briefing. We also thank Ms. Catherine Bragg,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their contributions to the debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
Human Security Network, to which Chile belongs.
Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), the
subject of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
has been a permanent item on the Council’s agenda.
Successive debates have been held, special emphasis
has been placed on the protection of women and
children in armed conflict, and the concept has been
incorporated into the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Chile welcomes that progress.
However, much work remains to be done. Some
conflicts continue to this day, others have given way to
peacebuilding processes, while regrettably, since 1999
new and bloody conflicts have emerged, to which the
Council and the international community should devote
particular attention and cooperation in order to bring
them to an end.
I would like to focus at this time on the issue of
accountability, which lies at the heart of today’s debate.
Accountability is the core of the protection of civilians.
We cannot protect civilians, much less build just and
stable societies, without an adequate system for
accountability, which should be in place even during a
conflict. We should not wait for peace in order to
activate accountability. However, by virtue of the
nature of conflict, a national system’s ability to act is
in all likelihood diminished, which leads to my next
point.
We need an efficient national and international
accountability system. In that regard, I would like to
call attention to the Inter-American System of Human
Rights, which has a Commission and the Inter-

15

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

American Court of Human Rights. Since their creation
in 1969 with the Pact of San José, Costa Rica, both
bodies, which operate in a complementary and
sequential manner, have participated in the protection
of the human rights of the populations of our countries.
More recently, at the international level the
International Criminal Court has been established, to
which high profile cases have been referred, proving
that impunity for human rights violations has no place
in today’s world.
The Human Rights Council has created
commissions of inquiry to establish the facts in cases
of grave human rights violations and to use them to
take appropriate action. Chile has co-sponsored those
initiatives, because we believe that the mechanisms
established by the international community itself
should be activated whenever necessary.
That brings me to my next point, which is that the
sovereignty of States remains the cornerstone of
international relations. In that regard, in order for
commissions of inquiry of the Human Rights Council
to visit countries of concern, they need those countries’
permission. Chile urgently calls on States to open their
doors to such commissions so that together they can
duly meet their international obligations.
Moreover, the Human Rights Council, in its
consensus resolution 18/7, has established the mandate
of a special rapporteur on the promotion of truth,
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
Chile supported the creation of that post; there can be
no alternative. Since 1990, Chile has created three
successive commissions of truth and reconciliation,
which have sought the truth, and through it
reconciliation among Chileans. The work does not end
with one commission; reconciliation is built day after
day, and in this respect human rights education plays a
decisive role.
Despite the foregoing and the role that the
international community needs to play in the matter of
protection of civilians, the primary responsibility
remains with States. It is they that need to protect their
own civilian populations. In that regard, they have the
duty to promote and strengthen the rule of law and
judicial institutions. Those are basic elements of States
and of their development and stability.
The Security Council has already incorporated
the concept of the protection of civilians into numerous
mandates of its peacekeeping operations, and Chile

16

hopes that will continue to be the case. That mandate
should be carried out in compliance with the guiding
principles of each operation. Similarly, the matter has
been incorporated in resolutions that address complex
political crises, especially resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) on Libya. Experience teaches us that such
mandates must be clear, precise and time-bound. The
prestige and credibility of the Council, and of the
Organization itself, depend on the clarity and
specificity of its mandates, as well as on their correct
enforcement.
I hope that this debate and the inclusion of the
concept of the protection of civilians in relevant
resolutions of the Council will serve to ensure that
tragedies such as those of Rwanda or Srebenica never
recur.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere congratulations to Portugal on its accession to
the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank it
for holding this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their respective
briefings.
At the most recent open debate on this item
(S/PV.6531), the Government of Japan welcomed the
effective and timely role played by the Security
Council in response to the situations in Libya and Côte
d’Ivoire in May. However, the difficulties surrounding
the protection of civilians in conflicts have been
further complicated, as we have seen in the recent
unrest in Syria and Yemen, which have witnessed an
increasing number of civilian casualties.
Although the Government of Japan regrets that
the Security Council failed to adopt a resolution on
Syria, it nevertheless welcomes the end of conflict in
Libya and stresses that the verification of actions taken
during that conflict will be crucial to ensuring
accountability. The Government of Japan also hopes
that the Government of Libya will steadily implement a
process to build a democratic State governed by law, in
cooperation with the United Nations. With regard to
Yemen, the Government of Japan welcomes resolution

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

2014 (2011) requesting that attacks against civilians be
suspended and that human rights and humanitarian law
be respected. My Government looks forward to the
close monitoring of the implementation of that
resolution.
The Security Council is responsible for
international peace and security, and its role in the
protection of civilians is important. Nonetheless, the
Security Council needs to address the issue in a
comprehensive manner, and in this regard collaboration
with a wide range of partners, such as the International
Criminal Court (ICC), the Human Rights Council, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
and other humanitarian agencies and regional
organizations, is truly indispensable. Côte d’Ivoire and
Libya are good examples of such collaboration
between the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council.
Securing the rule of law and ensuring that justice
is done can pave the way for the prevention and
suppression of conflict. It is important for the Security
Council to respond promptly and to continue to fight
against impunity by, for example, referring cases to the
ICC, as appropriate. However, I would like to stress
that in order for referrals to the ICC to be viable, the
genuine cooperation of all Member States, including
parties to the Rome Statute, is indispensable.
In addition, we should note that there exist other
measures to ensure accountability when cooperating
with the countries in question, such as dispatching an
international commission of inquiry through the
Human Rights Council, as well as the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, established
under the First Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949.
There exist various mechanisms within the
United Nations that contribute to the protection of
civilians. The challenge remains to ensure their
effectiveness. The Government of Japan is resolved to
continue to make genuine efforts to ensure that the
United Nations addresses the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in a comprehensive and
effective manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kahona (Sri Lanka): Let me join the
previous speakers in thanking Portugal for convening

11-58661

this open debate under its presidency. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
presentations.
The Sri Lanka delegation associates itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
movement by the representative of Egypt.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report on the
subject (S/2010/579), issued in November 2010,
focuses on recurring and emerging concerns regarding
the protection of civilians, the proliferation and
fragmentation of non-State armed groups, the
displacement of populations within and across borders,
the predicament of women and children, and the
continuing impunity in certain situations. By all
accounts, in 2011, the state of civilians in conflict
situations has not qualitatively improved despite the
concerted efforts made by the United Nations, and the
Security Council, in particular. Ad hoc approaches do
not appear to achieve the desired results.
The slow change underlines that the protection
task cannot be addressed solely in theoretical terms, as
it requires us to be conscious of a multiplicity of
different factors, ranging from political realities, socioeconomic factors and basic individual rights to the
proliferation of small arms and the increasing
sophistication of terrorists. The use of modern
technology and subtle propaganda tools by terrorist
groups and their networks of sympathizers are
becoming an increasing challenge in protecting
civilians and require the detailed attention of the
Organization. Many a time, the reality is obscured by
clever terrorist propaganda. Based on the experiences
of Member States, particularly those that have
successfully countered terrorism, the practical realities
must be seriously looked at, instead of theoretically
applying a one-size-fits-all humanitarian framework.
Sri Lanka has taken serious account of the
principles underlined in the Council’s thematic
resolutions
since
1999.
Its
commitment
is
demonstrated by the manner in which Sri Lanka
addressed civilian protection issues during the conflict
with the very ruthless terrorist Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and its aftermath. While adopting

17

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

a zero civilian casualty policy, at a cost to itself,
despite the use of vast numbers of civilians as human
shields by the terrorists, it subsequently addressed the
question of the resettlement of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) with remarkable speed and efficacy.
The robust nature of its ongoing post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation and the committed
pursuit of accountability and reconciliation processes
are noteworthy.
In the post-conflict phase, the State has invested
heavily in an ambitious development programme in the
former conflict-affected areas, focusing on civilian
infrastructure and livelihood development. Billions of
dollars have been committed for the purpose. Sri Lanka
set up special women’s protection units with female
police officers and women’s centres in former IDP
camps, and continues to provide counselling services
in the north and east. The Government has given
special consideration to raising the social and
economic status of war widows. Bilateral assistance
has already been obtained to initiate a self-employment
programme for war widows in Batticaloa, in
collaboration with the Self Employed Women’s
Association of India.
Children have been a special focus, and over 900
schools damaged during the conflict have been
restored, largely using State funds. The protection of
war-affected women and children is a priority for the
Government, and every effort is being made to ensure
that their lives are returned to normalcy as soon as
possible. The role of UNICEF has been vital in that
respect.
The nature of contemporary conflicts has posed
new challenges to the concept of the protection of
civilians. The LTTE terrorist group, for example, made
the civilian population under its control a part of its
military strategy. During almost three decades of
combating LTTE terrorism in our country, we took the
utmost care to draw a distinction between civilians and
terrorists, while the terrorists callously used the
civilians as a human shield. Their objective was
Machiavellian. The coerced presence of thousands of
civilians around the retreating terrorists was designed
to slow the advance of the security forces and as a
means of formulating an escape strategy for its
leadership. If all else failed, it would provide a useful
foundation to later develop allegations of breaches of
global humanitarian standards.

18

Throughout the final phase of the armed conflict,
from 2006 to 2009, Sri Lanka engaged with the United
Nations, its agencies, the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and representatives of the
international community and civil society, both in Sri
Lanka and outside. The challenges that Sri Lanka faced
in protecting its civilians was a challenge to the State
itself and its institutions. Yet, the Government
remained committed to its zero casualty policy. Our
troops underwent training to distinguish between
combatants and civilians. Assistance was obtained
from the ICRC in the training of troops in human rights
law. However, the inevitable casualties of a conflict
imposed on the State, ruthlessly affected by the
terrorists, are now the basis of a massive propaganda
campaign.
I specifically wish to address the question of the
Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission, to
which some delegations have referred. In keeping with
the principle that it is first and foremost the
responsibility of the State itself to investigate
infractions of global humanitarian standards, the
Government established the Commission to address a
range of issues relating to the conflict —
reconciliation, confidence-building, accountability, and
so on. The Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission was given a wide mandate that allowed it
to recommend measures to ensure reconciliation and
restitution for victims and to address the root causes so
as to discourage the repetition of any internal armed
conflict.
The
independent
Lessons
Learnt
and
Reconciliation Commission conducted an exhaustive
inquiry and is due to submit its report this month,
which will subsequently be presented to Parliament.
The Commission has made interim recommendations,
many of which have already been implemented by an
inter-ministerial mechanism. Sri Lanka will submit
itself to the Universal Periodic Review of the Human
Rights Council in October 2012, and looks forward to
that interaction with the Council.
Sri Lanka takes the view that it needs to be given
the time and space to deal with such issues. As
President Rajapaksa said in his address to the General
Assembly in September:
“I am deeply mindful that the battle for
peace is every bit as important and difficult as the
struggle against terror. After the eradication of

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

terrorism, my Government has turned its
undivided attention to building anew the
foundations of a unified and vibrant nation,
drawing upon the inherent strengths of our
country”. (A/66/PV.19, p. 15)
My delegation hopes that the Council discussion
on the protection of civilians will facilitate practical
outcomes based on ground realities, which differ from
situation to situation. It is also hoped that the Council’s
efforts will be channelled towards assisting countries to
achieve the noble goals to which we all subscribe. For
that reason, my delegation has sought to share our
experience, and for all of us to invest greater efforts in
preventing conflicts and their recurrence and to
respond practically and proportionately to situations
affecting civilian populations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to thank your friendly country,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate. Its
ongoing consideration provides us the opportunity to
take stock of progress made and best practices so as to
jointly identify the areas that require additional efforts
to ensure a better protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The opening of this debate by His Excellency
President Cavaco Silva demonstrates Portugal’s active
commitment to the topic. It is an interest and
commitment that goes beyond Portugal’s presence at
the centre of the Council.
I would also like to welcome the contributions of
Ms. Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Also, the presence and
observations of the Secretary-General at our debate
shows his personal commitment to the topic.
To be effective, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict requires a comprehensive approach,
bringing together the legal, humanitarian and security
aspects. It is essential that the civilian and military
actors under this complex and multidimensional
mandate have a shared definition and a clear
distribution of the tasks entrusted to them.
Peacekeeping operations have certainly become more
complex given their broader mandates, which have
gone from strictly military to peacebuilding tasks,
combining a broad range of activities, be they electoral

11-58661

assistance, capacity-building in the rule of law, security
sector reform or institutional support.
The complexity of these new functions calls for a
process to integrate the components of the
peacekeeping mission, requiring a clear definition of
mandated tasks and effective coordination among
actors.
This is particularly true for the protection of
civilians, when mandated. In that regard, we stress that
the tasks of peacekeeping operations are contingent
and do not replace those of the host country, which
bears the ultimate responsibility for the protection of
civilians. In that context, the Security Council,
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security, must formulate realistic and clear
peacekeeping mandates, in particular with respect to
the protection of civilians.
Seven peacekeeping operations are now
mandated to protect civilians, and most have developed
civilian protection strategies. This significant
development should be bolstered by mainstreaming the
use of optimal protection of civilians practices in
mandated peacekeeping operations. An assessment of
the implementation of such strategies would also allow
valuable lessons to be drawn in order to improve their
effectiveness.
With regard to training, much progress has been
made, particularly in the development of protection of
civilians modules for Blue Helmets and the senior staff
of peacekeeping operations. These many conceptual
advances must nevertheless be reflected on the ground.
In that context, three primary challenges must be met.
The first is that of feasibility. Blue Helmets
cannot guarantee protection for all. A simple
consideration of the ratios of troop levels to civilian
populations should make that clear. The protection of
civilians also requires significant equipment and
logistical means that are often inadequate or not
available to missions. This situation gives rise to the
broader question of the calibration of mandates to
resources.
The second challenge is that of defining tasks and
a clear division of labour. Confusion continues to
prevail with respect to what is expected of the military,
police and civilian components of missions in the
protection of civilians. This confusion leads to
unrealistic expectations among locals and in

19

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

international public opinion that could undermine a
mission.
The third challenge is that of sustainability. Far
from being limited to civilians under imminent threat,
the protection of civilians requires the support and
capacity-building of the host State to ensure that the
latter can fully discharge that function after the
withdrawal of the United Nations peacekeeping
mission.
In order to better protect civilians and allay their
suffering, we must collectively strengthen respect for
international
law,
particularly
international
humanitarian law and refugee law. At the normative
level, States have done a good job of strengthening the
lead role of the United Nations in the development of
international law. Nevertheless, much remains to be
done with respect to compliance and accountability.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict requires
the strict compliance of parties to a conflict with
international humanitarian law.
Clearly, in many situations the militarization of
refugee camps, counter to international law, prevents
humanitarian actors from carrying out their mission of
providing care and assistance to civilians. The control
of civilian populations by non-State actors, working in
complicity or unbeknownst to the authorities of a host
country, represents another considerable challenge that
the international community must meet. This grip on
civilian populations often extends to the refusal to
undertake the basic and natural tasks of census-taking
and registration.
Many are the challenges to the protection of
refugees, including the effective legal protection of that
vulnerable population. It falls to the host State and the
United Nations to apply international law consistently
to all situations.
As the need to protect civilians in armed conflict
has clearly become the very raison d’être for the
United Nations presence on the ground, its
implementation must follow clear and simple rules that
will ensure effective protection. Today’s debate will
contribute to that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Durrani (Pakistan): Pakistan would like to
thank Portugal for having organized this important
debate on the issue of the protection of civilians in

20

armed conflict. We warmly welcome the presence of
the President of Portugal, His Excellency Mr. Aníbal
António Cavaco Silva, and thank him for opening this
important debate. The Pakistan delegation also
commends Portugal for its able presidency of the
Council for this month and for the constructive role it
has played in general.
Regardless of the circumstances, attacking or
killing civilians cannot be condoned. Pakistan has
always condemned such acts. During a recent debate
on this subject in the Security Council, Pakistan
expressed its concerns over the frequent and pervasive
violations of the rights of civilians around the world, in
particular in the situations of foreign occupation. These
violations continue unabated, and the very fact that
there is no robust mechanism of accountability, in
particular for those who have enjoyed continued
immunity despite well-known attacks and killings of
civilians on various pretexts, has led to its spread in
many other instances.
The lack of accountability for such acts and the
impartial or politicized handling of specific situations
have resulted only in increased suffering for innocent
civilians in areas of armed conflict or under foreign
occupation. We hope that the Security Council, in
accordance with its mandate, will take impartial and
non-politicized action in all situations, in particular on
those situations that have been on its agenda for
decades.
Pakistan has been a strong and active supporter of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Over the
years, Pakistan has contributed to international efforts,
particularly those led by the United Nations, to protect
civilians in armed conflict. The most tangible
demonstration of this, as members of the Council are
well aware, is our participation as one of the leading
troop-contributors in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We will continue to work closely within the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations for the
development of protection of civilians strategies in
peacekeeping missions, in compliance with their
mandates, in accordance with international law and in
full respect for the primary responsibility of host
States.
The importance of objective reporting, a
prerequisite for the consideration of this important
issue, cannot be overemphasized. We call upon all
concerned to cooperate in this exercise, and urge those

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

involved in the reporting of such violations to perform
their duties with the utmost care and impartiality.
Pakistan would also like to reiterate the
importance of framing the debate in its proper context.
The Security Council should address situations arising
from armed conflicts and of people living under
foreign occupation. We hope that future reports on this
issue will be balanced and more carefully drafted to
avoid politicizing important questions relating to
international humanitarian law.
Pakistan would also like to stress some of the
important elements raised by a number of Member
States, such as the importance of observance by all
parties to an armed conflict of their obligations under
the United Nations Charter and international law,
including humanitarian law, which prohibits the
targeting of civilian populations, properties and
installations, including attacks on humanitarian
personnel and relief material. The United Nations must
take the lead in promoting knowledge and observance
of these principles among Member States.
In conclusion, Pakistan expects that, in situations
of armed conflict, the basic canons of international
humanitarian law — including accountability, which is
crucial to ending impunity — shall be applied.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
join others in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I wish you well in that
important task. I also wish to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their
presentations.
Malaysia is pleased with the Council’s decision to
make this meeting an open debate, which allows for the
participation of the general membership of the
Organization, thereby contributing further to openness
and transparency in the work of the Council, to which
Portugal and others are strongly committed.
My delegation also wishes to associate itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

11-58661

Since the last open debate on this topic in May
(see S/PV.6531), the Council has established the
United Nations Organization Interim Security Force for
Abyei and the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan (UNMISS), with both peacekeeping
missions having mandates on the protection of
civilians. The presence of Malaysian peacekeepers in
UNMISS underscores Malaysia’s firm commitment and
its belief that United Nations peacekeeping operations
are an indispensable instrument that has contributed
immensely to the resolution of many armed conflicts.
However, this instrument must be wielded with great
care.
While my delegation recognizes the efforts made
by the Council to prevent unnecessary loss of innocent
life, we reiterate that the responsibility to protect
civilians lies with the host Governments to
peacekeeping missions. In that regard, missions with a
civilian-protection mandate should conduct their tasks
without prejudice to that responsibility. My delegation
also wishes to stress the importance of impartiality as a
guiding principle for United Nations peacekeepers
mandated to protect civilians.
Malaysia is of the view that the successful
protection of civilians by United Nations peacekeeping
missions requires a more comprehensive and holistic
approach that incorporates the provision of resources,
support and training. That should be complemented
with the requisite key enablers, such as strong
coordinating mechanisms and an effective flow of
information. We believe that such an approach would
bridge some of the existing gaps in implementing
civilian-protection mandates.
One aspect of the protection of civilians that my
delegation particularly feels has not been given
adequate attention is the protection of journalists and
media professionals. Resolution 1738 (2006) and
resolution 1910 (2010) attempted to provide protection
for journalists, respectively, in the general context and
in Somalia. Unfortunately, that was too little, too late. I
regret to inform the Council that a Malaysian journalist
was killed recently while in Somalia to report on a
humanitarian aid mission. In that regard, my delegation
is of the view that the Council should explore the
possibility of strengthening provisions to ensure the
safety of journalists, within the framework of the
protection of civilians.

21

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

On our part, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to ensuring that our peacekeepers are trained to face, to
the best of their ability, the multitude of challenges that
are prevalent in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Last week, our peacekeeping training
centre jointly organized a course with the United
Nations Development Programme entitled “Promoting
peace through mainstreaming gender in peacekeeping
operations”, which I am pleased to note included the
protection of civilians as part of its syllabus. We will
continue to enhance the quality of training for
Malaysians, as well as foreign participants, based on
United Nations best practices and our country’s
51 years of experience in participating in United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
Finally, allow me also to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the work of our valiant United Nations
peacekeepers, who risk making the ultimate sacrifice
while serving to protect civilians in conflict zones. It is
only appropriate that the Council deliberates this topic
with the utmost care that it deserves, given the dangers
that our Blue Helmets face while carrying out their
mandates.
The President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Mateya Kelley, of the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission.
Ms. Kelley: It is my honour to make this
statement on behalf of the President of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission,
who was prevented from coming to New York on short
notice.
In the name of the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission, I thank the Security Council
and Portugal for the opportunity to speak and
participate in today’s important discussion. The
Commission would also like to thank the delegations of
South Africa, Germany, Switzerland and Japan for their
support today, and the Council itself for having
envisaged, in resolution 1894 (2009), of 1l November
2009, making use of the services of the Commission. I
would like to reiterate the preparedness of the
Commission to face that challenge. The Commission
feels that there are opportunities to do so, including in
particular allegations currently being made in respect
of the situation in Libya.
In the name of the Commission, I would like to
briefly restate reasons that the Security Council might
consider for entrusting the Commission with such a

22

task. The most important point is the legitimacy of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
as a treaty body established under the Geneva
Conventions. The very treaty regime that is the source
of the obligations the respect of which is at stake in the
inquiries to be undertaken is also the basis for the
inquiry Commission. That fact, together with an
election process that ensures the independence and
impartiality of its members, instils confidence in the
Commission’s work. We submit that this will enhance
the acceptance of its findings.
There is a variety of expertise in the current
composition of the Commission, which is crucial for
meaningful and successful inquiry, as recommended
during the excellent preparatory workshop held on
1 November. There is a medical doctor experienced in
dealing with victims of violence; a psychiatrist
renowned for her ability to deal with traumatized
persons; former and active military or police officers;
and judges and lawyers with expertise in the relevant
fields of law. The Commission has continuously
worked to be well prepared for such a task, by having
its members participate in various field missions and
practical exercises, as well as through information
gathering and contingency planning.
A mandate given by the Council may certainly be
elaborated in consultations. In that process, the
Commission will have the flexibility required by the
circumstances. The Commission considers that such a
mandate, obligatory as it would be pursuant to Article
25 of the Charter, should enjoy the agreement of the
parties to a conflict. We are convinced that the specific
features of the Commission I have just described would
facilitate obtaining such mandate and agreement. The
Commission would be honoured and proud if it could
thus assist in the work of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to express my gratitude to the
presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral,
the Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their statements.

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

Tunisia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
My delegation would first like to underscore the
importance of integrating a civilian-protection strategy
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, it is essential to develop civilian protection
strategies in the context of the planning of such
operations, including the full involvement of the State
concerned and in close cooperation with regional
organizations. Such a strategy should be based on welldefined, realistic and measurable priorities, thereby
making it possible to make genuine progress on the
ground.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2010/579) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, issued on 11 November 2010, it is also
important that the withdrawal of peacekeeping
missions not be undertaken on the basis of an arbitrary
time frame, but rather once the core objectives have
been achieved, in particular with regard to the
protection of civilians.
Secondly, with regard to the importance of
national ownership of international instruments on
human rights and international humanitarian law, as
mentioned by the statement made on behalf of NAM, it
is crucial to raise greater awareness and promote
respect by States for their commitments emanating
from their adherence to such instruments, including the
four international conventions relating to refugees.
In that regard, we reiterate our deep concern
about the situation of the civilian population in
occupied Palestine, which has for too long been the
easy target of constant, flagrant and systematic
violations of fundamental rights and international
humanitarian law by the occupying Power, Israel. That
has prevented those people from meeting their most
elementary needs and from reclaiming their right to a
State — all in a climate of total impunity.
All parties to a conflict, States and non-State
armed groups, must not fire upon non-military targets,
particularly civilians, humanitarian personnel and
journalists. The indiscriminate use of weapons and
explosives in densely populated areas and the illegal
arms trade have adverse effects on civilian populations
in neighbouring countries, and must be banned.

11-58661

Respect for fundamental rights and international
humanitarian law are inseparable from the fight against
impunity and the prosecution of those guilty of war
crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law. In the
belief that it is essential to combat that phenomenon,
Tunisia, having acceded to the Rome Statute some
months following its revolution, deems it equally
important to promote international cooperation to
support justice and national reconciliation measures,
especially through capacity building.
Thirdly, internal and external displacement of
refugees is one of the characteristics of conflict. It is
critical to encourage States to participate in protecting
refugees from conflict by keeping their borders open.
Convinced of the key role of neighbouring States in
alleviating civilian suffering in armed conflict, my
country, which hosted thousands of refugees fleeing the
conflict in Libya, has just approved opening an office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, which will certainly act as a nexus of
regional cooperation in humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, it is absolutely essential to
concentrate particular focus on preventive action,
which is still the best means to avoid zones of tension
becoming zones of conflict. In that regard, we must
adopt a global approach that effectively addresses the
underlying causes of conflict, especially by supporting
States’ efforts aimed at promoting economic growth,
eliminating poverty, security sector reform, national
reconciliation and propagating a culture of human
rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, at the outset, to express my congratulations to
you, Mr. President, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
as well as thank you for devoting our deliberations
today to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I
also thank you for the concept paper that you
distributed to inform our discussion of this issue.
We should note that 12 years have passed since
the Secretary-General presented his first report
(S/1999/957) to the Security Council on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We continue to hope that
the ongoing deliberations of the Council on this subject
will eventually lead to a clear, comprehensive and

23

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

holistic approach and an objective vision of the best
means to protect civilians. The most important thing is
to deal with the root causes of armed conflict. That,
along with supporting comprehensive and sustainable
political solutions, is the best way to ensure the
protection of civilians.
We note that all previous reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including the most recent (S/2010/579), have
focused primarily on ways of activating the role of
United Nations peacekeeping missions in the area of
protecting civilians. In that connection, we would like
to draw attention to an important fact that must be
borne in mind. In many areas of conflict, the targeting
of civilians is now being used by insurgents and armed
groups in a premeditated way in order to inflict
casualties among civilians, including women and
children, so as to turn the international community
against Governments and to appeal to it to intervene.
Various armed groups and movements are currently
deliberately attacking populated areas and using
civilians as human shields — for example, in Darfur
and in the recent situation in the Nuba Mountains and
Blue Nile State regions, where forces of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army have attacked various cities
and other populated places.
The priority should always be successfully
implementing peacebuilding efforts and political
settlements by compelling armed groups to enter into
peace negotiations and political processes to achieve
their demands, rather than resorting to military action
and attempting to deceive international public opinion
by causing casualties among civilians. Needless to say,
practical experience in various countries has clearly
proven that peacekeeping missions, however capable
they may be when it comes to providing protection,
will not be able to achieve their desired goals in the
absence of peace itself. Peace provides the primary
protection for civilians.
Further protecting civilians entails swiftly
implementing development projects, relief and
reconstruction efforts, carrying out demilitarization and
reintegration, and quickly restoring public services, so
as to allow for the return and resettlement of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). Such steps also contribute to
encouraging civilians to leave IDP camps, return to
their homes and resume normal activities. In that
context, we appeal to the Security Council, and
through it to all members of the international

24

community, to support the peace efforts of the
Government of the Sudan through the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, whose implementation has already
begun in order to achieve lasting peace in Darfur.
The principle of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, to which we all aspire, is a noble one.
What is troubling, however, is that efforts are being
made to use this principle to achieve specific political
objectives — such as in the case of the current
propaganda for the so-called responsibility to protect.
We would like to emphasize in this forum that,
although the principle of the responsibility to protect
was incorporated into the Outcome Document of the
Millennium Summit in 2005 (General Assembly
resolution 60/1), it remains, as the Council well knows,
subject to varying interpretations by Member States in
the light of the solid foundations established in the
Charter of the United Nations concerning respect for
Member States’ sovereignty, legitimacy and primary
full responsibility for the protection of their civilians. I
should also like to remind the Council that the right of
civilians to protection in armed conflict is only one
component of the comprehensive and closely linked
host of rights and duties that were reaffirmed in the
Outcome Document of the Millennium Summit.
Primary among those are achieving development,
combating poverty and preventing conflicts by dealing
with their root causes and, as I explained earlier, by
having the Security Council play an active role in
supporting and leading efforts for political
reconciliation and resolution. That role should be
complemented by the parallel role of the Secretariat
and the various agencies dealing with humanitarian
issues, and include the promotion of economic growth,
reconstruction, recovery and sustainable development.
Lastly, I would like to comment on some points
made in various statements. We have heard about the
human rights situation in Abyei. I would like to
emphasize that the current state of affairs in Abyei is
the best it has been in the terms of human rights and
the humanitarian situation, if we compare the situation
now to what it was before May, when the forces of the
popular movement were present. Since the restoration
of order in May and the arrangements that were put in
place, I can assure the Council that not a single
incident conducive to instability in the area has taken
place. This should not be overlooked by anyone. We
hope that the internally displaced persons will return to

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

their villages once order and security are completely
restored — a process that has already begun.
I should also like to refer to another point raised
in the statement by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights that also is contrary to the facts. Referring to
disturbing reports, the High Commissioner called for
an inquiry into the human rights situation in Blue Nile
and Southern Kordofan States. I would like to inform
the Council that this is not true. And I would also like
to remind the Council of the national committee that
was established by the Ministry of Justice, which has
accomplished much of its work. We will soon inform
everyone about its results. Any call for an inquiry
outside the national context would then be illogical and
unrealistic. The current situation in those two areas is
stable. Internally displaced persons have returned to
their homes following the defeat of the insurgents.
Finally, I would advise the staff of international
agencies to seek out the facts in order to preserve the
credibility needed to support, and ensure respect for,
their work in all areas of conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Portugal’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
wish you success in your duties. We are grateful to you
for scheduling the subject of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict for discussion in this open debate.
The Security Council frequently acts selectively
when it comes to choosing which civilians merit
protection and which do not. While dealing with this
issue it is not unusual for a double standard to be
applied. Some members of the Security Council, while
promoting resolutions supposedly in order to protect
civilians, are actually seeking a position of political
and economic hegemony for themselves over
developing countries. This deplorable practice distorts
the principles established in the Charter of the United
Nations and degrades the noble goal of protecting
civilians. It is immoral to use the noble concept of the
protection of civilians in order to overthrow
Governments in developing countries, to despicably
interfere with the internal affairs of sovereign States,
and to benefit transnational corporations that profit
cynically
from
countries’
destruction
and
reconstruction. Some imperialist Powers have

11-58661

interpreted the protection of civilians in self-serving
ways, thereby worsening national conflicts and
compromising the reliability and impartiality of the
United Nations.
It is therefore commendable and noteworthy that
in today’s Council debate, several countries have
condemned the unscrupulous use of Security Council
resolutions, such as resolution 1970 (2011), for
furthering petty political and economical interests.
Those countries have spoken out on behalf of the
peoples of the world who are calling for peace, justice
and coexistence in solidarity among nations. The
protection of civilians in armed conflict should be
carried out by peaceful means. Diplomacy and
dialogue are the most appropriate ways to protect
civilians and the best guarantee of achieving
international peace and security. Using military force is
neither the sole or best way to protect civilians. In
those extreme cases where it is necessary, its
application should be based on the principle of
proportionality.
The economic greed of some Powers, which need
to perpetuate their neocolonialism to ensure their own
survival, is the main threat to human life in the world.
The growing influence of big economic and financial
transnational corporations on the decisions taken by
various agencies of the United Nations system,
particularly the Security Council, is therefore
deplorable.
We recognize the importance of the expressions
of democracy that have been demonstrated in North
Africa and the Arab and Islamic world. The Venezuelan
people stand in solidarity with the legitimate
aspirations of all peoples of the world who seek, in a
sovereign manner, to achieve their human rights and
enjoy democracy, freedom and independence. The
people are the only owners of their own destinies, and
therefore cannot countenance continuing foreign
interventions by imperialist Powers in the internal
affairs of the countries of the South, carried out on the
pretext of protecting civilians.
Inequality,
poverty,
unemployment,
the
inequalities of the international economic system and
foreign domination and occupation are all causes of
conflict in many countries around the world. To
prevent civilian conflict, what is needed first and
foremost is to promote policies of social justice. That

25

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

should be the
cooperation.

approach

taken

in

international

The Bolivarian Government believes that attacks
on civilians must be condemned regardless of who is
responsible. Attacks on civilians and civilian targets
are prohibited under international law, yet the world
has witnessed indiscriminate attacks on innocent
people, using missiles and bombs, which have caused
thousands of deaths in the name of the protection of
civilians.
The Security Council has acted selectively, as
some of its members have acknowledged today, in
choosing which civilians deserve protection. It also
uses the sanctions regime to punish the Governments
and peoples of developing countries. In contrast, it
remains silent in the face of massive human rights
violations, such as those committed against the
Palestinian people. Why is protection not given to the
Palestinian civilians whose human rights are
systematically violated?
The notion of the responsibility to protect has
been manufactured by the ideologues of neoliberalism
and unbridled capitalism so as to trespass on the
sovereignty and self-determination of nations. The
responsibility to protect is a lethal weapon used by
imperialists to justify and impose their interests. Its
most ardent proponents are precisely those countries
that, in the past, implemented colonial policies and
subjugated the peoples of the South.
This notion is a reformulation of the old
imperialistic political theories. The Western Powers
claimed back then that their superior civilization gave
them the right to invade sovereign nations, supposedly
to distance them from their allegedly barbaric
practices. That ominous history gave rise to the
international regime of protectorates, established by
the League of Nations.
We categorically declare that the responsibility
for the protection of civilians is solely the purview of
States, and that any assistance given by the
international community, as applicable, must always
have the consent of the affected State.
By delegitimizing the principle of sovereignty —
the main political institution of the post-war
international order — the imperialists and neoliberals
are rejecting the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

26

In the name of the responsibility to protect, acts
of aggression have been carried out that violate
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The case of Libya has
been emblematic in that regard. The so-called
collateral damage of death and destruction wrought by
NATO in that country must be thoroughly examined by
the Council, as suggested by some of its members. That
collateral damage has a human face, seen in the
children, the women and the elderly of Libya, which
cannot be forgotten, and it cannot go unpunished, as
those who caused it would wish.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, I would like to stress the
importance of the political and legal analysis just given
by my colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Venezuela.
The international community has understood that
the issue of the protection of civilians cannot be dealt
with selectively or on a discretionary basis, but is
exclusively limited to situations of armed conflict. We
therefore believe, along with the majority of the
international community, that the protection of
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese civilians suffering
under Israeli occupation is part and parcel of this
much-appreciated international effort in the context of
the full and impartial implementation of the mandate to
protect civilians in armed conflict. I say this in
particular because the Security Council has long been
involved in debating this important matter, while
Israel, rightly referred to as the occupying Power, has
all the while continued its gross violations against
civilian populations in occupied Arab territories.
We are concerned that some of the countries
whose representatives have delivered relevant
statements on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict during today’s debate have sometimes
espoused their own special and selective views of
civilians and armed conflicts. Those views contradict
international humanitarian law and international
jurisprudence. We are also concerned that some
countries are trying to transform the suffering of
civilians in some areas of conflict into unacceptable
and controversial academic debates, which does not
help to alleviate the suffering of civilians.

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

Jurisprudence has shown that international efforts
to protect civilians in armed conflict must be carried
out in strict observance of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations — which affirm the need to
respect the sovereignty of States, their political
independence and their territorial integrity, as well as
the principle of non-interference in their internal
affairs — and be consistent with the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and international humanitarian
law. Every international instrument has affirmed that
national Governments bear the primary responsibility
for protecting their own citizens, and that such
responsibility is exclusive and cannot be substituted for
or influenced by any given political agenda.
We must therefore not confuse the issue of the
protection of civilians, on the one hand, with threats to
international peace and security, on the other. We must
also avoid using loose interpretations of the question of
the protection of civilians, as well as the use of
controversial terminology outside United Nations
documents and materials, such as the responsibility to
protect and humanitarian intervention. Were that to
happen, it would inevitably jeopardize the credibility
and neutrality of the United Nations, be it at the level
of Member States or the Secretariat. That will, in turn,
lead to the undermining of the noble efforts made to
protect civilians in armed conflicts. Paradoxically,
while concepts of international law — in its two
divisions, namely, public law and international
humanitarian law — have developed over the past
several decades, the suffering of civilians has
worsened. Indeed, the number of conflicts has also
increased. Those countries that have militarily
occupied other countries in violation of international
law, and have shown disrespect for the principles of
international humanitarian law have benefited from
impunity.
Allow me to put the following questions to the
Council. Have the occupation and military invasions of
Member States of the United Nations and the killing of
millions of innocent citizens furthered the goal of
providing protection for civilians, while some countries
in the Council today, and on previous occasions, have
called for regime change in some countries under the
pretext of providing protection for the civilians of
those countries? Was this call seen as a noble objective
allowing for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts? Are such pretexts consistent with the
provisions of the Charter? Does the suffering of

11-58661

millions of civilians resulting from unilateral financial
and economic sanctions serve the well-being of the
citizens? Does it protect them or does it weaken them,
jeopardizing their right to live in dignity and
development?
How can we explain how some NATO members
have killed 130,000 Libyan civilians on the pretext of
protecting civilians in that country? How can we
understand the explicit call by the spokesperson of the
United States Department of State to armed groups in
Syria not to turn themselves in or their weapons to the
authorities of the Syrian Government, in line with the
Syrian Government’s decision to grant amnesty to all
those who turn themselves and their weapons in to
Government authorities? Does this not mean that the
United States is publicly and directly involved in
exacerbating discord and violence in Syria? Discord
and violence have caused our people — our army,
police and civilians — a lot of innocent victims.
Should this incitement to armed groups to
continue their criminal acts against the State and
civilians not be reason enough to hold those who were
responsible for the incitement accountable, at least in
the framework of providing protection for civilians?
Does the United States policy, supported by some
European countries, jeopardize the work of the Arab
League and its initiative aimed at putting an end to the
crisis in Syria and restoring security and stability for
its civilian population? Is remaining silent towards
Israel’s blatant settlement activities, which jeopardize
the principle of peace, not a contradiction of the most
fundamental rights of Palestinian and Syrian civilians
to live in their homelands in freedom and sovereignty?
We do not know how long we can close our eyes
to Israel’s continued inhumane practices and its
occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, Jerusalem, the Sheba’a farm lands and
al-Ghajar village. Why do we not see the same degree
of enthusiasm expressed in dealing with Israeli acts of
aggression by some countries that express their keen
interest in providing protection to civilians in some
parts of the world? They have used the Security
Council, which specializes in international peace and
security, to adopt a flawed and erroneous interpretation
of the question of providing protection for civilians in
armed conflict. That interpretation serves their interest
in interfering in the internal affairs of Member States
without any accountability. We have not heard any
responsible United Nations official who has taken part

27

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

in this important debate speak about the illegality and
illegitimacy of the unacceptable interference in the
internal affairs of Member States, pursuant to the
provisions of Article 2 of the Charter.
Those colonial countries, particularly France and
the United Kingdom, which spoke this morning before
the Council and used indecent terms against my
country, are wrong to think that human memory is too
short to recall the crimes against humanity that they
perpetrated during the eras of colonialism and slavery.
Is apologizing for these crimes compatible with the
concept of the protection of civilians? Or are there
different categories and classes of civilians — some
from the North, some from the South? Are they not
equal as human beings?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We are a
member of the Group of Friends on behalf of which the
representative of Switzerland made a statement earlier
in this debate, raising important issues, including the
question of reparations and amends. My remarks today
will concentrate on one single topic: the practice of the
Security Council in exercising its competencies under
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which was a central topic of the workshop that the
Portuguese delegation organized in preparation for this
debate. We commend that very useful initiative as a
way to make thematic debates in the Council more
meaningful.
The Security Council has a double competence
under the Rome Statute. First, it may refer situations to
the Court and, secondly, it may defer ongoing
investigations or prosecutions for a renewable period
of one year. These two functions are complementary,
but they are not precise mirror images of each other.
The deferral power is limited in time and requires an
active decision of the Council to be renewed, while the
referral is a one-time and irreversible act. It is also
worth noting that a decision to refer a situation does
not automatically trigger an investigation. That
decision remains with the Prosecutor and is based on
the merits of the case. As a third function, the Security
Council will have a role to play with regard to
exercising the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression — once the relevant regime under the Rome
Statute is activated, which can be no earlier than
January 2017.

28

In its history, the Council has resorted twice to
the use of article 16. It adopted resolutions 1422 (2002)
and 1487 (2003), which are widely considered as
contradicting both the Rome Statute and the Charter of
the United Nations. Also, it has made two referrals by
adopting resolution 1593 (2005), on the situation in
Darfur, and resolution 1970 (2011) on the situation in
Libya. There is no doubt that the unanimous adoption
of resolution 1970 (2011) in particular was a landmark
in the Council’s engagement on individual criminal
accountability, and that it is of outstanding importance
for the international acceptance of the Rome Statute
system.
States parties to the Rome Statute have therefore,
for the most part, celebrated these referrals as
significant gains in the fight against impunity. We
agree with that assessment. But we also believe that
referrals are not automatically effective tools in the
fight against impunity and, by extension, for the
protection of civilians. This is therefore a good
moment for the Council to reflect on its role vis-à-vis
the Court, to the mutual benefit of both the Council and
the Court.
The most important element in making referrals
effective is follow-up action by the Council, in
particular where cooperation with the Court is lacking.
Such cooperation is a legal obligation for the State in
question under Chapter VII of the Charter, and for all
States parties to the Rome Statute. The Council has a
broad range of means available to promote and enforce
such cooperation, but has so far not made use of them.
They could lead to ineffective and prolonged
proceedings before the Court that are expensive and
create a perception of ineffectiveness, compounded by
accusations of political bias.
For the Council, the effects could be equally
damaging, leading to the view that the referral was less
an expression of a genuine commitment to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law, than a decision based on political
expediency of the time. That is particularly true for the
practice of exempting certain categories of persons
from the referral decision — a practice that may at
some point have to stand the test of the Court’s judicial
scrutiny.
There are, of course, quite different perspectives
among individual Council members on this issue, given
that some are, and some are not, parties to the Rome

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

Statute. Finding the strongest possible support for
referral decisions — ideally unanimous — is therefore
a key component in that respect.
The Council has a rich experience as a source for
mechanisms to provide for individual criminal
accountability, dating back to the early 1990s. The
models it has adopted have been diverse in nature,
ranging from ad hoc to hybrid tribunals, incorporating
various financing modalities. They are still actively
functioning, and a final lessons learned exercise is
therefore not possible at this moment. It seems clear,
however, that this chapter of the Council’s history is
largely a thing of the past. For political and financial
reasons, it is unlikely that the Council will continue to
establish tribunals for specific situations on a regular
basis. Referrals to the Court will therefore likely
become the main tool of the Council to act in situations
where genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, and eventually crimes of aggression, have been
committed with impunity.
Resorting to the services of the Court will,
however, also require a fresh look at the financing of
such investigations. Under the current practice, those
costs are shouldered by the States parties to the Rome
Statute. This is at odds with the treaty, which foresees a
system under which the United Nations membership
should bear the costs arising from a Security Council
mandate — just as the Court reimburses the United
Nations for its services.
For example, the costs for the Libya investigation
next year will amount to a projected €7 million. That is
not much money compared to the costs of some of the
accountability mechanisms set up by the Council, not
to mention other activities it has mandated. But it
represents an increase of more than 5 per cent in the
Court’s budget. Competence in that respect of course
lies with the General Assembly, not with the Council.
We therefore hope that a constructive discussion can be
held in the appropriate forums in order to bring this
issue to a successful conclusion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mammadaliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

11-58661

Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. I would like to make a few additional
remarks in our national capacity.
Indeed, civilians continue to suffer from
inadequate protection in situations of armed conflict. A
defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts is still the
failure of parties to respect and ensure respect for their
obligations to protect civilians. The heightened
vulnerability of civilians in wartime — in particular
that of forcibly displaced persons, refugees, women
and children — brings an element of urgency to our
protection efforts and to the imperative of restoring the
rule of law.
Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts that have
been aggravated by population displacement and
foreign military occupation. There is an increasing
recognition of the need to address the impact of
conflict on housing, land and property, particularly in
relation to the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees.
More focused efforts are required in order to put
an end to illegal policies and practices in occupied
territories, including forced demographic changes,
destruction and appropriation of historical and cultural
heritage, and various forms of economic activity that
directly affect the property rights of the inhabitants
who are considering returning to their places of origin.
It is crucial that recognition of the right to return,
along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles that prevent return, be applied
more systematically by the international community.
Ensuring the right to return constitutes a categorical
rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing and offers
important measures of justice to those who have been
displaced from their homes and land and deprived of
their property, thereby removing a source of possible
future tension and conflict.
Azerbaijan is of the view that the lack of
agreement on political issues should not be used as a
pretext to avoid addressing problems caused by
continued and deliberate disrespect for international
humanitarian and human rights law in situations of
armed conflict and foreign military occupation. The
fact that illegal situations persist due to political

29

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

circumstances does not mean they should be tolerated
and allowed to go on forever.
We therefore proceed based on the importance of
reaffirming, with regard to such situations, the
continuing applicability of all relevant norms of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
efforts to invalidate actions aimed at consolidating
military occupations; in initiating urgent measures to
eliminate the adverse effects of such activities; and in
order to discourage any further practice of the same or
similar nature.
In that regard, it is important to emphasize that
ending impunity is essential not only in order to
prosecute those responsible for war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide and other serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, but also for ensuring sustainable peace, justice,
truth, reconciliation and the rights and interests of
victims, as well as the well-being of society at large.
Any steps aimed at advocating the culture of
impunity, including propagating wars of aggression,
glorifying perpetrators of the most serious international
offences or promoting odious ideas of racial
superiority, will contribute to further violations of
humanitarian law and human rights law, in particular
with respect to the uprooting of peoples from their
homes as a result of continued acts of foreign military
intervention, aggression and occupation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Mr. President, thank
you for organizing this essential debate. It is
commendable that the Security Council has continued
the practice of holding open debates on the protection
of civilians, featuring presentations from the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that
offer analyses of the Council’s action as compared with
previous years and also touch upon important
developments.
We would like to join previous speakers in
thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, for his
active involvement in addressing this important
subject.
The frequency with which the Council addresses
this issue signifies the urgency of the matter and the
need for the international community to fulfil its
commitment to protecting civilians through the

30

implementation of the provisions of international
humanitarian law. We therefore share the views
expressed by the Council members and other speakers
calling for more systematic attention to protection. We
believe that that should be completely reflected in the
deliberations of this body. We also believe that
increased efforts to fighting impunity at the national
and international levels are essential.
Armenia therefore welcomes the initiative of
Portugal to hold this open debate. We see this as an
opportunity to recap and reflect on the Council’s past
year of experience in addressing matters that involve
the protection of civilians, as well as to highlight the
priority aspects for united practical action. In a lessons
learned process, this debate should also enable the
Council to more effectively address specific concerns
related to the protection of civil populations. The
Council needs to send a clear message to all parties in
armed conflicts, reminding them of their obligations
and
condemning
violations
of
international
humanitarian and human rights law.
We welcome the fact that in the past the Security
Council made several important decisions regarding
the protection needs of vulnerable groups during armed
conflicts. Unfortunately, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, innocent civilians — including women
and children, refugees and internally displaced
persons — and international humanitarian personnel,
continue to suffer in conflict situations.
Armenia believes that the Security Council
should further contribute to strengthening the rule of
law and to upholding international law also by
supporting criminal justice mechanisms. We align
ourselves with the statement made earlier in this
Chamber that the best way to promote the protection of
civilians is to promote the rule of law. The notion of
the rule of law represents a concept that is
diametrically opposed to the rule by force or the use of
force. This principle stipulates a framework of peaceful
conflict resolution and democratic governance.
Strengthening the rule of law based on justice and
accountability therefore requires a deeper commitment
and a broader vision of the future. Ensuring such
accountability and enhancing compliance with
international legal obligations by the parties to a
conflict should be viewed as a key element of the
Council’s responsibility to maintain international peace
and security.

11-58661

S/PV.6650 (Resumption 1)

It is also important for the Council to focus on the
protection of civilians within the overall process of the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Our approach must be
built on the understanding that any comprehensive
resolution should impartially and fully address the root
causes of the conflict under discussion in order to
prevent recurrence in the future. It should also provide
reliable and adequate security protection guarantees to

11-58661

the populations concerned,
sustainable development.

thus

ensuring

their

The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6:05 p.m.

31
