NO COVER
(1)

NO COVER
(2)

RESOLUTIONS
adopted by the General Assembly

during its
TWENTY-FIRST SESSION
20 September -

20 December 1966

GENERAL ASSEMBLY

OFFICIAL RECORDS: TWENTY-FIRST SESSION
SUPPLEMENT No. 16 (A/6316)

UNITED NATIONS
New York, 1967

~OTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters COIllbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
The arabic and roman numerals identifying each resolution indicate, respectively, the number of the resolution and the number of the session at which
it was adopted.
The resolutions of the General Assembly are numbered in the order of their
adoption. A check list of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly during its twentyfirst session appears at the end of the present volume. Also at the end of the
volume is an index, by agenda item, to the resolutions and other action of the
General Assembly, and a list of organs whose composition appears in the volumes
of resolutions.

CONTENfS
Page

Allocation of agenda items

.....................

v

Appointment of the Credentials Committee
Composition of the General Committee ....

xi
.......................

Xl

Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council

Xl

Election of nine members of the Economic and Social Council

Xll

Election of five members of the International Court of Justice

Xll

Election of the members of the International Law Commission

xiii

Election of the members of the Industrial Development Board

XIV

Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during its twenty-first session
[2133 (XXI) - 2247 (XXI)]

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

.

1

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

.

9

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

.

19

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

.

23

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

.

45

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

.

67

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

.

79

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

.

95

Index of resolutions and decisions

.

101

Composition of organs

.

Check list of resolutions

.

107
108

ill

ALLOCATION OF AGENDA ITEMS1
Plenary meetings
1. Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Italy (item 1).
2. Minute of silent prayer or meditation (item 2).
3. Credentials of representatives to the twenty-first session of the General
Assembly (item 3) :
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee;
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee.
4. Election of the President (item 4).
5. Constitution of the Main Committees and election of officers (item 5).
6. Election of Vice-Presidents (item 6).
7. Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations (item 7).
8. Adoption of the agenda (item 8).
9. General debate (item 9).
10. Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization (item 10).
11. Report of the Security Council (item 11).
12. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapters XIII (section IX),
XVI and XVII] (item 12).2
13. Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency (item 14).
14. Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council (item 15).
15. Election of nine members of the Economic and Social Council (item. 16).
16. Election of five members of the International Court of Justice (item 17).
17. Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations (item 18).
18. Election of the members of the International Law Commission (item 19).
19. Admission of new Members to the United Nations (item 20).
20. United Nations Emergency Force (item 21) :
(a) Report of the Force. 3
21. Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity: report of the Secretary-General (item 22).
22. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples: report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (item 23).·
23. Report of the Committee for the International Co-operation Year (item 24).
24. Installation of mechanical means of voting: report of the Secretary-General
(item 25).
1 Unless otherwise indicated, all the items formed part of the agenda recommended by the
General Committee in its first report (A/6395) and adopted by the General Assembly at its
141Sth plenary meeting, on 24 September 1966. At the same meeting, the Assembly adopted the
recommendations of the General Committee on the allocation of agenda items, For the numerical
list of agenda items, see p. 101.
2 At its 1415th plenary meeting, on 24 September 1966, the General Assembly decided, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/639S,
para. 14 (a) (ij ), to draw the attention of the Fifth Committee to chapter XVI (section VIII)
of the report of the Economic and Social Council, dealing with the documentation of the
Council, and to chapter XVI (section XII), dealing with the financial implications of actions
of the Council.
8 For sub-item (b), see below, "Fifth Committee", item 4.
• At its 1415th plenary meeting, on 24 September 1966, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/639S,
para. 14 (a) (iij), to refer to the Fourth Committee all the chapters of the Special Committee's
report relating to specific territories.

v

25. Question of South West Africa: report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (item 65).5
26. Restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the
United Nations (item 90).6
27. Strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force in international relations, and of the right of peoples to self-determination (item 92).
First Committee
(POLITICAL AND SECURITY QUESTIONS, INCLUDING THE REGULATION OF
ARMAMENTS)

1. Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons: report of the Conference of the EighteenNation Committee on Disarmament (item 26).
2. Question of general and complete disarmament: report of the Conference of
the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament (item 27).
3. Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests: report of the
Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament (item 28).
4. Question of convening a conference for the purpose of signing a convention
on the prohibition of the use of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons: report
of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament
(item 29).
5. International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space: report of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (item 30).
6. The Korean question: report of the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea (item 31).
7. Conclusion of an international treaty on principles governing the activities
of States in the exploration and use of outer space, the Moon and other
celestial bodies (item 89).
8. Treaty governing the exploration and use of outer space, including the
Moon and other celestial bodies (item 91).
9. Withdrawal of all United States and other foreign forces occupying South
Korea under the flag of the United Nations and dissolution of the United
Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea (item 93).
10. Status of the implementation of the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of
Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of Their
Independence and Sovereignty (item 96).7
11. Renunciation by States of actions hampering the conclusion of an agreement
on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons (item 97).7
12. Elimination of foreign military bases in the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin
America (item 98).7
Special Political Committee

1. Report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (item 32).
2. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in
all their aspects: report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
(item 33).
5 At its l4l4th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1966, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/6395,
para. 13, para. 14 (d) and para. 17), to include this item in the agenda and to consider it in
plenary meeting, 0!1 the understanding that the petitioners asking to speak on the item would
be heard by the Fourth Committee, which would submit a report to the Assembly in plenary
meeting before the latter concluded its consideration of the question; the Assembly also decided
to give priority to the discussion of this item in plenary meeting concurrently with the general
debate.
6 At its 1481st plenary meeting, on 29 November 1966, the General Assembly rejected the
draft resolution submitted by Albania, Algeria, Cambodia, Congo (Brazzaville), Cuba, Guinea,
Mali, Mauritania, Pakistan, Romania and Syria (A/L.496 and Add.1). At the same meeting,
the Assembly rejected the draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Italy
and Trinidad and Tobago (A/L.500). See also resolution 2159 (XXI), p. 3.
7 At its 1415th plenary meeting, on 24 September 1966, the General Assembly decided, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its second report (A/6438),
to include this item in the agenda and to allocate it to the First Committee.

VI

3. The policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa: report of the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South Africa (item 34).
4. Effects of atomic radiation: report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (item 35).
5. Peaceful settlement of disputes (item 36).
Second Committee
(ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL QUESTIONS)

1. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapters II to IX, X (section
II), XII, XIII (sections II to VII), XIV 8 and XV] (item 12).9
2. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development: report of the Trade
and Development Board (item 37).
3. Establishment of a United Nations capital development fund: report of the
Committee on a United Nations Capital Development Fund (item 38).
4. United Nations Development Decade: report of the Secretary-General
(item 39).
5. Accelerated flow of capital and technical assistance to the developing countries: report of the Secretary-General (item 40).
6. Activities in the field of industrial development (item 41) :
(a) Report of the Committee for Industrial Development;
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the United Nations Organization
for Industrial Development;
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization.
7. Inflation and economic development: report of the Secretary-General (item 42).
8. Decentralization of the economic and social activities of the United Nations
(item 43).
9. Conversion to peaceful needs of the resources released by disarmament: report
of the Secretary-General (item 44).
10. Permanent sovereignty over natural resources (item 45).
11. Population growth and economic development (item 46).
12. World campaign for universal literacy (item 47).
13. United Nations Institute for Training and Research: report of the Executive
Director of the Institute (item 48).
14. Operational activities for development (item 49) :
(a) Activities of the United Nations Development Programme;
(b) Activities undertaken by the Secretary-General.
15. Programme of studies on multilateral food aid: report of the Secretary-General
(item SO).
16. Review and reappraisal of the role and functions of the Economic and Social
Council: report of the Secretary-General (item 51).
17. General review of the programmes and activities in the economic, social,
technical co-operation and related fields of the United Nations, the specialized
agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations
Children's Fund and all other institutions and agencies related to the United
Nations system (item 52).
18. International Tourist Year (item 53).
19. Development of natural resources (item 94).
XIV was also referred to the Third and Fifth Committees.
1966, the General Assembly decided, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/6395,
para. 14 (e)), to refer chapter XV of the report of the Economic and Social Council, dealing
with the review and reappraisal of the Council's role and functions, to the Third and Fifth
Committees also, for comments; the Assembly further decided to draw the attention of the
Third Committee to chapter X (section 1I) of the Council's report, dealing with population
questions, and to chapter XIII (section If), dealing with the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research.
8 Chapter

9 At its 1415th plenary meeting, on 24 September

vii

Third Committee
(SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL QUESTIONS)

1. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapters X (sections I, IH

and IV), XI, XIII (sections I and VIII) and XIV10] (item 12).
2. World social situation (item 54).
3. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (item 55).
4. Draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
(item 56).
5. Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination (item 57):
(a) Measures to implement the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
(b) Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination: report of the Secretary-General.
6. Manifestations of racial prejudice and national and religious intolerance
(item 58).
7. Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance (item 59) :
(a) Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious
Intolerance;
(b) Draft International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Religious Intolerance.
8. Freedom of information (item 60) :
(a) Draft Convention on Freedom of Information;
(b) Draft Declaration on Freedom of Information.
9. Creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(item 61).
10. Draft International Covenants on Human Rights (item 62).
11. International Year for Human Rights (item 63) :
(a) Programme of measures and activities to be undertaken in connexion
with the International Year for Human Rights;
(b) Report of the Preparatory Committee for the International Conference
on Human Rights.
12. Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
policies of racial discrimination and segregation and of apartheid, in all countries, with particular reference to colonial and other dependent countries and
territories (item 95).

Fourth Committee
(QUESTIONS R.ELATING TO TRUST AND

NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES)

1. Report of the Trusteeship Council (item 13).
2. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article

73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (item 64) :
(a) Report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
3. Question of South West Africa: report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (hearing of
petitioners) (item 65).11
4. Special educational and training programmes for South West Africa: report
of the Secretary-General (item 66).
5. Question of Territories under Portuguese administration: report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
(item 67).

--10 Chapter XIV was also referred to the Second and Fifth Committees.
11 See foot-note 5 above.

viii

6. Special training programme for Territories under Portuguese administration:
report of the Secretary-General (item 68).
7. Question of Fiji: report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (item 69).
8. Question of Oman (item 70):
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples;
(b) Report of the Secretary-General.
9. Offers by Member States of study and trammg facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories: report of the Secretary-General (item 71).
10. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples: report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (chapters relating to specific
territories) (item 23) .12
Fifth Committee
(ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY QUESTIONS)

1. Financial reports and accounts for the financial year ended 31 December 1965
and reports of the Board of Auditors (item 72) :
(a) United Nations;
(b) United Nations Children's Fund;
(c) United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East;
(d) Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
2. Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1966 (item 73).
3. Budget estimates for the financial year 1967 (item 74).
4. United Nations Emergency' Force (item 21):
(b) Cost estimates for the maintenance of the Force.P
5. Pattern of conferences: report of the Secretary-General (item 75).
6. Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of subsidiary bodies of the
General Assembly (item 76):
(a) Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
(b) Committee on Contributions;
(c) Board of Auditors;
(d) United Nations Administrative Tribunal;
(e) United Nations Staff Pension Committee.
7. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations: report of the Committee on Contributions (item 77).
8. Audit reports relating to expenditure by specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency (item 78):
(a) Earmarkings and contingency authorizations from the Special Account
of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance;
(b) Allocations and allotments from the Special Fund.
9. Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the
specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency: report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
(item 79).

10. Report of the' Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of
the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies (item 80).
11. Personnel questions (item 81):
(a) Composition of the Secretariat: report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Other personnel questions.
12 See foot-note 4 above.
18 For

sub-item (a), see above, "Plenary meetings", item 20.
IX

12. Report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board (item 82).
13. United Nations International School: report of the Secretary-General
(item 83).
14. Report of the Economic and Social Council [chapters I and XIV I 4 ] (item 12).15
Sixth Committee
(LEGAL QUESTIONS)

1. Reports of the International Law Commission on the second part of its seven-

teenth session and on its eighteenth session (item 84).
2. Draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum (item 85).
3. Technical assistance to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider
appreciation of international law: report of the Secretary-General (item 86),141
4. Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations (item 87):
(a) Report of the 1966 Special Committee on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States;
(b) Report of the Secretary-General on methods of fact-finding.
5. Progressive development of the law of international trade (item 88).
14 Chapter

XIV was '1150 referred to the Second and Third Committees.
its 1415th plenary meeting, on 24 September 1966, the General Assembly decided, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, as set forth in its first report (A/6395, para.
14 (e)), to refer chapter I of the report of the Economic and Social Council, dealing with
the work programme of the United Nations in the economic, social and human rights fields and
its 'budgetary requirements, to the Second and Third Committees also, for comments.
16 At its 1415th plenary meeting, on 24 September 1966, the General Assembly decided,
on the recommendation of the General Committee (l63rd meeting, paras. 26-38), to refer the
technical assistance aspects of this item to the Second Committee, for comments.
15 At

x

APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITIEE
(Item 3 (a»
In accordance with rule 28 of its rules of procedure, the General Assembly
appointed the Credentials Committee.l?
The Committee was constituted as follows: AUSTRIA, EL SALVADOR, GUINEA,
IVORY COAST, JAPAN, NEPAL, NICARAGUA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

1409th plenary meeting,
20 September 1966.

COMPOSITION OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE
(Items 4, 5 and 6)
The General Committee of the General Assembly for the twenty-first session
was constituted as follows:

President of the General Assembly:
Mr. Abdul Rahman PAZHWAK (Afghanistan).

1409th plenary meeting,
20 September 1966.
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly:
The representatives of the following Member States: AUSTRIA, BOLIVIA,
CHINA, COl'fGO (DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF), COSTA RICA, CYPRUS, FRANCE,
GABON, GREECE, HUNGARY, IRAQ, RWANDA, SENEGAL, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO,
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

1410th plenary meeting,
21 September 1966.
Chairmen of the seven Main Committees of the General Assembly:
First Committee: Mr. Leopoldo BENITES (Ecuador);
Special Political Committee: Mr. Max JAKOBSON (Finland);
Second Committee: Mr. Moraiwid M. TELL (Jordan);
Third Committee: Mrs. Halima WARZAZI (Morocco);
Fourth Committee: Mr. FAKHREDDlNE Mohamed (Sudan);
Fifth Committee: Mr. Vahap ASIROGLU (Turkey);
Sixth Committee: Mr. Vratislav PECHOTA (Czechoslovakia).
14lOth plenary meeting,18
21 September 1966.

ELECfION OF FIVE NON-PERMANENT MEMBERS OF THE
SECURITY COUNCIL
(Item IS)
The General Assembly elected five non-permanent members to the Security
Council to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of
JORDAN, the NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, UGANDA and URUGUAY.
17 See resolution 2219 (XXI), p, 7.
18 At that meeting the President of the General Assembly announced the results of the
elections held by the Committees.

XI

The following States were elected: BRAZIL, CANADA, DENMARK, ETHIOPIA
and INDIA.

1462nd plenary meeting,
11 November 1966.

*

*

*

As (J result of the above election, the Security Council will be composed of the following
members: ARGENTINA,. BRAZIL,·· BULGARIA,· CANADA,•• CHINA, DENMARK,·· ETHIOPIA.··
FRANCE, INDIA,·· JAPAN,· MALI,· NIGERIA,· UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

ELECTION OF NINE MEMBERS OF THE ECONOMIC AND
SOCIAL COUNCIL
(Item 16)
The General Assembly elected nine members to the Economic and Social
Council to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of
ALGERIA, CHILE, ECUADOR, FRANCE, GREECE, IRAQ, LUXEMBOURG, SIERRA LEONE
and the UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA.
The following States were elected: BELGIUM, FRANCE, GUATEMALA, KUWAIT,
LIBYA, MEXICO, SIERRA LEONE, TURKEY and UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA.

1462nd plenary meeting,
11 November 1966.

*

*

*

As a result of the above election, the Economic and Social Council will be composed of
the following members: BELGIUM,.·· CAMEROON •• CANADA,. CZECHOSLOVAKIA,·· DAHOMEY,·
FRANCE •••

GABON.

GUATEMALA •••

INDIA·

IRAN..

KUWAIT •••

LIBYA •••

MEXICO •••

MORocc~,•• PAKIS~AN,. PANAMA:·. PERU," PHILIP~INES,•• RO~ANIA,. S~ERRA LEONE;•••

SWEDEN,•• TURKEy•••• UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,·· UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,.· UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA.··· UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA. and VENEZUELA.··

ELECTION OF FIVE MEMBERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL
COURT OF JUSTICE
(Item 17)
The General Assembly and the Security Council, voting independently, elected
five members to the International Court of Justice to fill the vacancies occurring
on the expiration of the terms of office of the following judges:
Sir Percy SPENDER (Australia) ;
Mr. V. K. Wellington Koo (China) ;
Mr. Bohdan WINIARSKI (Poland) ;
Mr. Jean SPIROPOULOS (Greece) ;
Mr. Fouad AMMOUN (Lebanon).
The following members were elected:
Mr. Fouad AMMOUN (Lebanon) ;
Mr. Cesar BENGZON (Philippines);
• Term of office expires on 31 December 1967.
•• Term of office expires on 31 December 1968.
••• Term of office expires on 31 December 1969.
Xll

Mr. Sture PETREN (Sweden);
Mr. Manfred LACHS (Poland) ;
Mr. Charles D. ONYEAMA (Nigeria).

1456th and 1457th plenary meetings,
2 and 3 November 1966.

*

*

*

As a result of the above election, the International Court of Justice will be composed of
the [ollounno members : Sir Gerald FITZMAURICE (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland),tt Mr. V. M. KORETSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics),t Mr.
Kotaro TANAKA (Japan),t Mr. Jose Luis BusTAMANTE Y RIVERO (Peru r.t Mr. Philip C.
JESSUP (United States of America),t Mr. Gaetano MORELLI (Italy),t Mr. Isaac FORSTER
(Senegal),tt Mr. Andre GROS (France),tt Mr. Luis PADILLA NERvo (Mexico),tt Mr.
Muhammad ZAFRULLA KHAN (Pakistan),tt Mr. Fouad AMMOUN (Lebanon),ttt Mr. Cesar
BENGZON (PhiIippines),ttt Mr. Sture PETREN (Sweden),ttt Mr. Manfred LACHS
(PolandHtt and Mr. Charles D. ONYEAMA (Nigeria).ttt

ELECTION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL
LAW COMMISSION
(Item 19)
In accordance with its resolution 174 (II) of 21 November 1947 and with the
provisions of the Statute of the International Law Commission annexed thereto,
as amended by resolutions 1103 (XI) of 18 December 1956 and 1647 (XVI) of
6 November 1961, the General Assembly elected the twenty-five members of the
International Law Commission.
The following were elected:
Mr. Roberto AGO (Italy) ;
1\lr. Fernando ALB6NICO (Chile);
Mr. Gilberto AMADo (Brazil) ;
Mr. Milan BARTos (Yugoslavia) ;
Mr. Mohammed BEDJAOUI (Algeria);
Mr. Jorge CASTANEDA (Mexico);
Mr. Erik CASTREN (Finland) ;
Mr. Abdullah EL-ERIAN (United Arab Republic) ;
Mr. Taslim O. ELIAS (Nigeria);
Mr. Constantine Th. EUSTATHIADES (Greece);
Mr. Louis IGNACIO-PINTO (Dahomey) ;
Mr. Eduardo JIMENEZ DE ARECHAGA (Uruguay);
Mr. Richard D. KEARNEY (United States of America) ;
Mr. Alfred RAMANGASOAVINA (Madagascar);
Mr. Paul REuTER (France);
Mr. Shabtai ROSENNE (Israel) ;
Mr. Jose Maria RUDA (Argentina);
Mr. Nagendra SINGH (India);
Mr. Abdul Hakim 1'ABIBI (Afghanistan);
Mr. A. ]. P. 1'AMMES (Netherlands) ;
Mr. Senjin Tsunuoxx (Japan);
Mr. N. A. USHAKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) ;
Mr. Endre USTOR (Hungary) ;
Sir Humphrey WALDOCK (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) ;
Mr. Mustafa Kamil YASSEEN (Iraq).

1460th plenary meeting,
10 November 1966.
t Term of office expires on 5 February 1970.

tt Term of office expires on 5 February 1973.
ttt Term of office expires on 5 February 1976.
XIII

ELECTION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT BOARD
(Item 41 (b))

4 of section II of its
The Genera l Assemb ly, in pursuan ce of paragra phs 3 and
ve membe rs of the
forty-fi
the
elected
resoluti on 2152 (XXI) of 17 Novem ber 1966,
Board.
pment
Industr ial Develo
A, BELGIUM, BRAZIL,
The followi ng States were elected : ARGENTI:JA, AUSTRI
CZECHOSLOVAKIA,
CUBA,
BIA,
COLOM
CHILE,
A,
CANAD
BULGARIA, CAMEROON,
GUI:JEA , INDIA,
,
GHANA
,
FRANCE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY, FINLAND,
NETHERLANDS,
T,
KUWAI
,
JORDAN
JAPAN,
COAST,
IVORY
INDONESIA, IRAN, ITALY,
IA, SPAIN,
SOMAL
A,
RWAND
IA,
NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PERU, PHILIP PINES, ROMAN
TURKEY,
,
TOBAGO
AND
AD
TRINID
ND,
THAILA
,
SUDAN, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND
UNITED
IC,
REPUBL
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED ARAB
OF
STATES
UNITED
D,
IRELAN
ERN
NORTH
AND
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
.
ZAMBIA
and
AY
URUGU
A,
AMERIC
lots the membe rs of
The Genera l Assemb ly then selected by the drawin g of
two years and the
for
serve
to
rs
memhe
the
years,
three
for
serve
to
the Board
membe rs to serve for one year.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.

*

*

*

Board will be compose d of
As a result of the above election, the Industri al Develop ment
BRAZIL,* * BULGAR IA,**.
,*
BELGIUM
,*
AUSTRIA
INA,***
ARGENT
the followin g member s:
FEDERAL

IA,*** CUBA,** CZECHOS LOVAKIA ,*
CAMERO ON,*** CANADA ,*** CHILE,* * COLOMB
GHANA, *** GUINEA ,* INDIA,** INDONES IA,*
,**
FRANCE
,**
FINLAND
Y,***
GERMAN
OF
C
REPUBLI
"'* KUWAIT ,** NETHERL ANDS,** NIGERIA ,*
JORDAN,
*
JAPAN!
*
COAST!*
IRAN.*** ITALY,* IVORY
,* SOMALIA ,* SPAIN,** * SUDAN,* *
RWANDA
A,**
ROMANI
PAKISTA N,*** PERU! PHILIPP INES,***
D AND TOBAGO,* TURKEY ,*** UNION OF SOVIET
SWEDEN ,* SWITZF..RLAND,* THAILA ND!* TRINIDA
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
SOCIALIS T REPUBLI CS,* UNITED ARAB REPUBLI C,**
,** URUGUA Y*** and ZAMBIA .*
AMERICA
OF
STATES
UNITED
NORTHER N IRELAND ,***
* Term of office expires on 31 Decemb er 1967.
** Term of office expires on 31 Decemb er 1968.
*** Term of office expires on 31 Decemb er 1969.

XIV

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

RESOLUTIONS

ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A MAIN COMMITTEE
CONTENTS

R.'/ll,,'w..
No.

Title

the

DfJI.of

11....

tJdop/ion

PtJge

United Nations

2133. (XXI)

Admission of Guyana to membership
(A/L.482)
.

20

20 September 1966

2136 (XXI)

Admission of Botswana to membership in the United Nations
(A/L.484)
.
.

20

17 October 1966

2

2137 (XXI)

Admission of
(A/L.485)

20

17 October 1966

2

2145 (XXI)

Question of South West Africa (A/L.483 and Add.I-3, A/L.488).

65

27 October 1966

2

2146 (XXI)

Petitions concerning South West Africa (AjL.489)

65

27 October 1966

3

2147 (XXI)

Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
(A/L.491)
.

18

1 November 1966

3

2156 (XXI)

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency (A/L.499)

14

22 November 1966

3

2159 (XXI)

Representation of China in the United Nations (A/L.494 and
Add.l)
.

90

29 November 1966

3

2160 (XXI)

Strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force
in international relations, and of the right of peoples to selfdetermination (AIL. 501 and COTr.l)
.
.

92

30 November 1966

4

2161 (XXI)

Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
(A/L.503)
.
.

18

2 December 1966

4

2174 (XXI)

Report of the Committee for the International Co-operation Year
(AjL.S04)
.

24

7 December 1966

4

217S (XXI)

Admission of Barbados to membership in the United Nations
(A/L.50S)
.
.

20

9 December 1966

5

2189 (XXI)

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples (A/L.506 and Add.l and 2,
A/L.507)
.

23

13 December 1966

5

2193 (XXI)

Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity (A/L.508)
.

22

15 December 1966

2201 (XXI)

Report of the Security Council (A/L.509)

11

16 December 1966

6
6

3 (b)

19 December 1966

7

2219 (XXI)

10

Lesotho to membership in the United Nations

. ..
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-first session of the
General Assembly (AI6620)

Other dedlliom
Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the Unit~d Nations
. . . . . .. .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . .
.
.

7

24 September 1966

7

Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization

.

10

20 December 1966

7

Report of the Economic and Social Council (chapters XIII (section IX), XVI
and XVII)
.
.

12

19 December 1966

Report on the United Nations Emergency Force

21 (a)

16 December 1966

7
7

23
25

20 December 1966

7

7 December 1966

7

.

.

Appointment to fill a vacancy in the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
.
Installation of mechanical means of voting

.

Having considered the application for membership
of Guyana,"
Decides to admit Guyana to membership in the
United Nations.
1409th plenary meeting,
20 September 1966.

2133 (XXI). Admission of Guyana to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 21 June 1966 that Guyana should be admitted to membership in the United Nations,'

2 A/6339. For the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-first Year, Supplemmt
for April, May and Iune 1966, document S/7349.

10fficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 20, document A/6353.
I

2

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

2136 (XXI). Admission of Botswana to membership in the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 14 October 1966 that Botswana should be
admitted to membership in the United Nations,"
Having considered the application for membership
of Botswana,'
Decides to admit Botswana to membership in the
United Nations.
1444th plenary meeting,
17 October 1966.

2137 (XXI). Admis8ion of Lesotho to membershtp in the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 14 October 1966 that Lesotho should be
admitted to membership in the United Nations,"
Having considered the application for membership
of Lesotho,"
Decides to admit Lesotho to membership in the
United Nations.
1444th plenary meeting,
17 October 1966.

2145 (XXI). Question of South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of
South West Africa to freedom and independence in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and earlier Assembly resolutions concerning the Mandated Territory of South West Africa,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 11 July 1950,7 accepted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 449 A (V) of
13 December 1950, and the advisory opinions of 7
June 19558 and 1 June 19569 as well as the judgement
of 21 December 1962,10 which have established the
fact that South Africa continues to have obligations
under the Mandate which was entrusted to it on 17
December 1920 and that the United Nations as the
successor to the League of Nations has supervisory
powers in respect of South West Africa,
Gravely concerned at the situation in the Mandated
Territory, which has seriously deteriorated following
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 20, document A/6469.
4 A/6453. For the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-first Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1966, document 5/7518.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 20, document A/6470.
8 A/6454. For the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-first Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1966, document 5/7534.
7 International status of South West Africa, Advisory Opinion: l.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128.
8 South West Africa-Voting procedure, Ad'visory Opinion
of June Yth, 1955: l.C.J. Reports 1955, p. 67.
9 Admissibility of hearings of petitioners by the Committee
on South West Africa, Advisory Opinion of June Ist, 1956:
l.C.J. Reports 1956, p. 23.
10 South West Africa Cases (Ethiopia v. South Africa; Liberia v. South Africa), Preliminary Objections, Judgment of
21 December 1962: l.C.J. Reports 1962, p. 319.

----------- -----

the judgement of the International Court of Justice of
18 July 1966,11
Having studied the reports of the various committees
which had been established to exercise the supervisory
functions of the United Nations over the administration
of the Mandated Territory of South West Africa,
Convinced that the administration of the Mandated
Territory by South Africa has been conducted in a
manner contrary to the Mandate, the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,
Reaffirming its resolution 2074 (XX) of 17 December
1965, in particular paragraph 4 thereof which condemned the policies of apartheid and racial discrimination practised by the Government of South Africa in
South West Africa as constituting a crime against
humanity,
Emphasizing that the problem of South West Africa
is an issue falling within the terms of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV),
Considering that all the efforts of the United Nations
to induce the Government of South Africa to fulfil
its obligations in respect of the administration of the
Mandated Territory and to ensure the well-being and
security of the indigenous inhabitants have been of no
avail,
Mindful of the obligations of the United Nations
towards the people of South West Africa,
Noting with deep concern the explosive situation
which exists in the southern region of Africa,
Affirming its right to take appropriate action in
the matter, including the right to revert to itself the
administration of the Mandated Territory,
1. Reaffirms that the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) are fully applicable to the
people of the Mandated Territory of South West Africa
and that, therefore, the people of South West Africa
have the inalienable right to self-determination, freedom and independence in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms further that South West Africa is a
territory having international status and that it shall
maintain this status until it achieves independence;
3. Declares that South Africa has failed to fulfil
its obligations in respect of the administration of the
Mandated Territory and to ensure the moral and
material well-being and security of the indigenous inhabitants of South West Africa and has, in fact,
disavowed the Mandate;
4. Decides that the Mandate conferred upon His
Britannic Majesty to be exercised on his behalf by
the Government of the Union of South Africa is therefore terminated, that South Africa has no other right
to administer the Territory and that henceforth South
West Africa comes under the direct responsibility of
the United Nations;
5. Resolves that in these circumstances the United
Nations must discharge those responsibilities with
respect to South West Africa;
6. Establishes an Ad Hoc Committee for South
West Africa---composed of fourteen Member States to
be designated by the President of the General Assembly-to recommend practical means by which South
West Africa should be administered, so as to enable
11 South West Africa, Second Phose, Judgment, l.C.J. Reports
1966, p, 6.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the people of the Territory to exercise the right of
self-determination and to achieve independence, and
to report to the General Assembly at a special session
as soon as possible and in any event not later than
April 1967;
7. Calls upon the Government of South Africa forthwith to refrain and desist from any action, constitutional, administrative, political or otherwise, which will
in any manner whatsoever alter or tend to alter the
present international status of South West Africa;
8. Calls the attention of the Security Council to
the present resolution;
9. Requests all States to extend their whole-hearted
co-operation and to render assistance in the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
the assistance necessary to implement the present resolution and to enable the Ad Hoc Committee for South
West Africa to perform its duties.
1454th plenary meeting,
27 October 1966.
*

•

•

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 6 of the above resolution, designated the members
of the Ad Hoc Committee for South West Africa.l 2
The Ad Hoc Committee will be composed of the following
Member States: CANADA, CHILE, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, ETHIOPIA,
FINLAND, ITALY, JAPAN, MEXICO, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, SENEGAL,

3

Countries and Peoples has taken these petitions into
account in its consideration of the question of South
West Africa;
2. Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the report of the Special Committee concerning the
Territory of South West Africa 11l and to the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session on the question of South West Africa, as well
as the reports of the Secretary-General relating to the
Territory.t"
1454th plenary meeting,
27 October 1966.

2147 (XXI). Appointment of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation contained in Security Council resolution 227 (1966) of
28 October 1966, and pending further consideration
of the present item,
Extends the appointment of U Thant as SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations until the end of the
twenty-first regular session of the General Assembly.
1455th plenary meeting,
1 November 1966.
2156 (XXI). Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency

UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED ARAB REpUBLIC

and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

2146 (XXI). Petitions concerning South West
Africa
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the special responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to South West Africa,
Noting that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples has received and examined forty-four petitions concerning South West Africa, in accordance with
paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 1805
(XVII) of 14 December 1962 and paragraph 8 (a) of
Assembly resolution 1899 (XVIII) of 13 November
1963,
Noting further that these petitions relate, inter alia,
to the establishment of military bases in the Territory
of South West Africa, the situation of refugees from
the Territory, political organizations, the shooting,
arrest and deportation of political leaders, the ejection
of Africans from urban areas, the implementation of
the recommendations of the Odendaal Commission.l"
the situation in Ovamboland, labour conditions in the
Territory, the judgement of the International Court
of Justice of 18 July 1966 14 and the future of the
Territory,
1. Notes that the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
12 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfirst Session, Plenary Meetings, 1471st meeting.
13 Commission of Enquiry into South West Africa Affairs,
established in 1962 by the Republic of South Africa under the
chairmanship of Mr. F. H. Odendaal.
14 South West Africa, Second Phase, Judgment, f.C.J. Reports

1966, p. 6.

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1965-1966.11
1474th plenary meeting,
22 November 1966.
2159 (XXI). Representation of China in the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendation contained in its resolution 396 (V) of 14 December 1950 that, whenever more
than one authority claims to be the government entitled
to represent a Member State in the United Nations
and this question becomes the subject of controversy
in the United Nations, the question should be considered in the light of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the circumstances
of each case,
Recalling further its decision in resolution 1668
(XVI) of 15 December 1961, in accordance with
Article 18 of the Charter, that any proposal to change
the representation of China is an important question,
which, in General Assembly resolution 2025 (XX) of
17 November 1965, was affirmed as remaining valid,
Affirms again that this decision remains valid.
1481st plenary meeting,
29 November 1966.
15 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.I),
chapter IV.
16 A/6332 and Add.l.
17 Annual report of the Board of Governors to the General
Conference, 1 hlly 1965-30 June 1966 (Vienna, July 1966), and
supplementary report; transmitted to the Members of the
General Assembly by notes of the Secretary-General (A/6345
and Add.1).

General Assemblv-c--Twentv-firat Session

4

2160 (XXI). Strict observance of the prohibition
of the threat or use of force in international
relations, and of the right of peoples to selfdetermination
The General Assembly,
I
Drawing the attention of States .to the fundamen~al
obligations incumbent upon them In accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or politi~al in~epende~ce
of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations and to develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principle of equal rights and self-determination of
peoples,
Deeply concerned at the existence of dangerous situations in the world constituting a direct threat to
universal peace and security, due to the arbitrary use
of force in international relations,
Reaffirming the right of peoples under colonial rule
to exercise their right to self-determination and independence and the right of every nation, large or small,
to choose freely and without any external interference
its political, social and economic system,
Recognizing that peoples subjecte~ to colonial oppression are entitled to seek and receive all support m
their struggle which is in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter,
Firmly convinced that it is within the power and. in
the vital interest of the nations of the world to estabhsh
genuinely sound relations betwee~ States, based. on
justice, equality, mutual understanding and co-operation,
Recalling the declarations contained in its resolutions
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 2131 (XX)
of 21 December 1%5,
1. Reaffirms that:
(a) States shall strictly observe, in their international relations, the prohibition of the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
Accordingly, armed attack by one State against another
or the use of force in any other form contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations constitutes a violation
of international law giving rise to international responsibility;
(b) Any forcible action, direct or indirect, which
deprives peoples under foreign domination of their
right to self-determination and freedom and independence and of their right to determine freely their
political status and pursue their economic, social and
cultural development constitutes a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations. Accordingly, the use
of force to deprive peoples of their national identity,
as prohibited by the Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and
the Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty
contained in General Assembly resolution 2131 (XX),
constitutes a violation of their inalienable rights and
of the principle of non-intervention;
2. Urgently appeals to States:
(a) To renounce and to refrain from any action
contrary to the above-stated fundamental principles
and to assure that their activities in international rela-

tions are in full harmony with the interests of international peace and security;
(b) To exert every effort and to undertake all
necessarv measures with a view to facilitating the
exercise - of the right of self-determination of peoples
under colonial rule, lessening international tension,
strengthening peace and promoting friendly relations
and co-operation among States;
3. Reminds all Members of their duty to give their
fullest support to the endeavours of the United Nations
to ensure respect for and the observance of the principles
enshrined in the Charter and to assist the Organization
in discharging its responsibilities as assigned to it by
the Charter for the maintenance of international peace
and security;

II
Considering that the above principles, together with
the other five principles of friendly relations and cooperation among States, have been the object of a
study with a view to their progressive development
and codification-s on the basis of General Assembly
resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966
(XVIII) of 16 December 1963 and 2103 (XX) of
20 December 1965,
Requests the Secretary-General to include the present
resolution and the records of the debate on the item
entitled "Strict observance of the prohibition of the
threat or use of force in international relations, and
of the right of peoples to self-determination" in the
documentation to be considered in the further study
of the principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, with a view to
the early adoption of a declaration containing an
enunciation of these principles.
1482nd plenary meeting,
30 November 1966.

2161 (XXI). Appointment of the Secretary.
General of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation contained in Security Council resolution 229 (1966) of
2 December 1966,
Endorsing the statement contained in the abovementioned resolution that, in view of his proven
qualities and high sense of duty, the reappointment of
U Thant would be most conducive to the larger interests
and purposes of the Organization,
Appoints U Thant as Secretary-General of the United
Nations for another term of office, ending on 31 December 1971.
1483rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1966.
2174 (XXI). Report of the Committee for the
International Co-operation Year
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1844 (XVII) of 19 December 1962 and 1907 (XVIII) of 21 November 1963
relating to the designation of 1%5, the twentieth year
18 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 87, document A/6230.

Resolutions adopted without referenee to a Main Committee

of the United Nations, as International Co-operation
Year,
Recognizing the contributions which Member States,
the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the non-governmental organizations
concerned made to the activities undertaken during the
International Co-operation Year,
Considering that the idea of designating a year as
International Co-operation Year represented a valuable
contribution towards increasing the awareness of the
benefits of international co-operation,
Notes with appreciation the final report of the Committee for International Co-operation Year.P

1486th plenary meeting,
7 December 1966.
2175 (XXI). Admission of Barbados to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 7 December 1966 that Barbados should be
admitted to membership in the United Nations.s"
Having considered the application for membership
of Barbados.P
Decides to admit Barbados to membership in the
United Nations.
1487th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.
2189 (XXI). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII) of 17 December 1962, 1956
(XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and 2105 (XX) of 20
December 1965,
Recalling also its resolutions 1805 (XVII) of 14
December 1962 and 1899 (XVIII) of 13 November
1963, by which it assigned to the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples tasks relating to
South West Africa, and its resolution 1970 (XVIII)
of 16 December 1963, by which it entrusted to the
Special Committee additional functions relating to information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee covering its work during 1966,22
Noting with deep regret that six years after the
adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still
under colonial domination, and deploring the negative
attitude of certain colonial Powers, and in particular
the intransigent attitude of the Governments of Portugal
ID Ibid., agenda item 24, documents A/6Z27 and Add.l.

20 Ibid., agenda item 20, document A/6559.
21 A/6545. For the printed text of this document,

see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-first Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1966, document 5/7607.
22 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l).

5

and South Africa, which refuse to recognize the right
of colonial peoples to self-determination and independence,
Concerned at the policy followed by colonial Powers
of circumventing the rights of colonial peoples through
the promotion of the systematic influx of foreign immigrants and the displacement, deportation or transfer
of the indigenous inhabitants,
Bearing in mind that the preservation of colonialism
and its manifestations, including racism and apartheid,
and the attempts of some colonial Powers to suppress
national liberation movements by repressive activities
and the use of armed force against peoples are incompatible with the Charter and the Declaration,
Deploring the attitude of certain States which, despite
the resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Special Committee, continue to co-operate with the
Governments of Portugal and South Africa and with
the illegal racist minority regime of Southern Rhodesia,
which are continuing to repress the African populations,
Having considered the sections of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the activities of foreign
economic and other financial interests operating in
South West Africa, the Territories under Portuguese
domination and Southern Rhodesia, and the conclusions
and recommendations contained therein,
Convinced that further delay in the complete and
universal implementation of the Declaration remains
a source of international conflicts and differences, which
are seriously impeding international co-operation and
endangering world peace and security,
Noting the action taken and envisaged by the Special
Committee with respect to the list of Territories to
which the Declaration applies,
Having adopted resolutions on specific Territories
considered by the Special Committee,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV), 1654
(XVI), 1810 (XVII), 1956 (XVIII) and 2105
(XX) ;
2. N otes with satisfaction the work accomplished by
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and expresses its appreciation to that Committee for
its efforts to secure the implementation of the Declaration;
3. Approves the report of the Special Committee
covering its work during 1966 and again invites the
administering Powers to implement the recommendations contained therein;
4. Approves the action taken and envisaged by the
Special Committee for the year 1967 with respect to
the list of Territories to which the Declaration applies;
5. Approves the programme of work envisaged by the
Special Committee during 1967, including the sending
of visiting missions and the possibility of holding a
series of meetings away from Headquarters, and requests the administering Powers to allow visiting
missions to be sent to the Territories under their administration;
6. Declares that the continuation of colonial rule
threatens international peace and security and that the
practice of apartheid, as also all forms of racial discrimination, constitutes a crime against humanity;
7. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the peoples under colonial rule to exercise

6

General Assembly-Twenty·first Session

their right to self-determination and independence and
urges all States to provide material and moral assistance
to the national liberation movements in colonial Territories;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other international relief organizations
and the specialized agencies concerned to increase their
economic, social and humanitarian assistance to the
refugees from those Territories;
9. Requests all States, directly and through action
in the international institutions of which they are
members, including the specialized agencies, to withhold assistance of any kind to the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa and to the illegal racist minority regime of Southern Rhodesia until they renounce
their policy of racial discrimination and colonial domination;
10. Draws the attention of all States to the grave
consequences of the formation in the southern part
of Africa of an entente between the Governments of
South Africa and Portugal and the illegal racist
minority regime of Southern Rhodesia, and calls upon
all States to withhold any support or assistance to this
entente, whose existence and activities run counter
to the interests of international peace and security;
11. Requests the colonial Powers to dismantle their
military bases and installations in colonial Territories
and to refrain from establishing new ones and from
using those that still exist to interfere with the liberation of the peoples in colonial Territories in the
exercise of their legitimate rights to freedom and independence;
12. Condemns the activities of those foreign financial
and economic interests in colonial Territories, in particular in South West Africa, Southern Rhodesia and
the Territories under Portuguese domination, which
support colonial regimes and thus constitute a serious
obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, and calls upon the Governments concerned
to take the necessary measures to put an end to those
activities;
13. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain administering Powers in the Territories under their
domination, of imposing non-representative regimes
and constitutions, strengthening the position of foreign
financial and economic interests, misleading world public
opinion and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign
immigrants while displacing, deporting and transferring
the indigenous inhabitants to other areas, and calls
upon those Powers to desist from such manceuvres;
14. Requests the Special Committee to apprise the
Security Council of developments in any Territory
examined by the Committee which may threaten international peace and security and to make any concrete
suggestions which may assist the Council in considering appropriate measures under the Charter of the
United Nations;
15. Invites the Special Committee, whenever it
considers it proper and appropriate, to recommend a
deadline for the accession to independence of each Territory in accordance with the wishes of the people and
the provisions of the Declaration;
16. Invites the Special Committee to pay particular
attention to the small Territories and to recommend
to the General Assembly the most appropriate methods
and also the steps to be taken to enable the populations

of those Territories to exercise fully the right to selfdetermination and independence;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to perform its tasks and to seek suitable means for the
immediate and full implementation of the Declaration
in all Territories which have not yet attained independence;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to promote,
through the various organs and agencies of the United
Nations, the continuous and large-scale publicizing of
the Declaration and of the work of the Special Committee, in order that world opinion may be sufficiently
aware of the situation in the colonial Territories and
of the continuing struggle for liberation waged by the
colonial peoples;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Special Committee with all the financing
and facilities necessary for the implementation of its
mandate;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session an item entitled "Activities
of foreign economic and other interests which are
impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, South West Africa and
Territories under Portuguese domination and in all
other Territories under colonial domination".
1492nd plenm'y meeting,
13 December 1966.

2193 (XXI). Co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African
Unity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2011 (XX) of 11 October
1965, by which it invited the Secretary-General to explore the means of promoting co-operation between
the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on this question."
1. Expresses its satisfaction with the progress
achieved in the implementation of the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 2011 (XX);
2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts, particularly with respect to liaison and technical
co-operation between the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, and to report to the General Assembly
as appropriate.
1494th plenary meeting
lS December 1966.
2201 (XXI). Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16
July 1965 to 15 July 1966.24
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
28 Ibid., agenda item 22, document A/64OB.
24 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/6302).

RellOlotions adopted without refereoce to a Main Committee

2219 (XXI). Credentials of representatives to the twenty-fint session of
the General Assembly

The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee.P
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
211lbid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/6620.

•
Other

•

•

decisions

Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations (item 7)
At its 1415th plenary meeting, on 24 September 1966, the General Assembly
took note of the communication dated 20 September 1966 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General Assembly.P
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization (item 10)
At its 1501st plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization."
Report of the Economic and Social Council (chapters XIII (section IX),
XVI and XVll) (item 12)
At its 1498th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of chapters XIII (section IX), XVI and XVII of the report of the
Economic and Social Council."
Report on the United Nations Emergency Force (item 21 (a) )29
At its 1495th plenary meeting, on 16 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency

Force."
Appointment to fill a vacancy in the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (item 23)
The President of the General Assembly nominated FINLAND to fill the
vacancy caused by the withdrawal of DENMARK from the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
At its 1500th plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966, the General Assembly
confirmed that nomination.
As a result, the Special Committee will be composed of the following Member
States: AFGHANISTAN, AUSTRALIA, BULGARIA, CHILE, ETHIOPIA, FINLAND, INDIA,
IRAN, IRAQ, ITALY, IVORY COAST, MADAGASCAR, MALI, POLAND, SIERRA LEONE,
SYRIA, TUNISIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED
STATES OFAMERICA, URUGUAY, VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA.
Installation of mechanical means of voting (item 25)
At its 1486th plenary meeting, on 7 December 1966, the General Assembly
approved the use of the mechanical voting system in the Assembly Hall on a
permanent basis, in accordance with the recommendation made by the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 5 of his report.P!
At the same meeting, the Assembly approved the recommendation in paragraph 6 of the Secretary-General's report'" that a decision on the question of
the possible extension of the system to other committee rooms should be postponed
to the twenty-second session.
26 Ibid., agenda item 7, document A/6423.
27 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement

No. 1 (A/6301 and Corr.1) and Supplement
No. lA (A/6301/Add.I).
»tu«, Supplement N<J.3 (A/6303).
29 See also resolution 2194 (XXI), p. 83.
80 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 21,
document A/6406.
81 Ibid., agenda item 25, document Aj6505.

7

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Title

Item

Date of
adoption

POll'

2149 (XXI)

Renunciation by States of actions hampering the conclusion of an
agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons (A/6496)

97

4 November 1966

9

2153 (XXI)

Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons (A/6509)
Resolution A
.
.
Resolution B

26
26

17 November 1966
17 November 1966

9
10

27
27
27

5 December 1966
5 December 1966
5 December 1966

10
11
11

R.601"ti"..
ND.

2162 (XXI)

.

Question of general and complete disarmament (A/6529)
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
Resolution C

.
.

2163 (XXI)

Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests
(A/6530)
.

28

5 December 1966

11

2164 (XXI)

Question of convening a conference for the purpose of signing a
convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons (A/6532)
. . . . . . .. ... ..

29

5 December 1966

12

2165 (XXI)

Elimination oi foreign military bases in the countries of Asia, Africa
and Latin America (A/6541) ..
.
.

98

5 December 1966

12

2221 (XXI)

United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space (A/6621)

30,89 and
91

19 December 1966

12

19 December 1966

13

2222 (XXI)

2223 (XXI)

2224 (XXI)
2225 (XXI)

Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies (A/6621)
.........
30, 89 and
91
Annex
Report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(A/6621)
. .... . . . . . . ...... 30,89 and
91
31 and 93
The Korean question (A/6618)
Status of the implementation of the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the
Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty (A/6598)

13
19 December 1966

15

19 December 1966

16

19 December 1966

16

19 December 1966

17

Other decisions

27

Question of general and complete disarmament

2149 (XXI). Renunciation by States of actions
hampering the conclusion of an agreement
on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons

(a) To take all the necessary steps to facilitate and
achieve at the earliest possible time the conclusion of
a treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons
in accordance with the principles laid down in General
Assembly resolution 2028 (XX);
(b) To refrain from any actions conducive to the
proliferation of nuclear weapons or which might hamper
the conclusion of an agreement on the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons.
1458th plenary meeting,
4 November 1966.

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 2028 (XX) of 19 November 1965,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons
would endanger the security of all States and hamper
the achievement of general and complete disarmament,
Considering that international negotiations are now
under way with a view to the preparation of a treaty on
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and wishing
to create an atmosphere conducive to the successful conclusion of those negotiations,
Urgently appeals to all States, pending the conclusion
of such a treaty:

2153 (XXI). Non-proliferation
weapons

of nuclear

A

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the report of the Conference of the
9

10

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament on the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons;'
Noting that it has not yet been possible to reach
agreement on an international treaty to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Viewing with apprehension the possibility that such
a situation may lead not only to an increase of nuclear
arsenals and to a spread of nuclear weapons over the
world but also to an increase in the number of nuclearweapon Powers,
Believing that if such a situation persists it may lead
to the aggravation of tensions between States and the
risk of a nuclear war,
Believing further that the remaining differences between all concerned should be resolved quickly so as
to prevent any further delay in the conclusion of an
international treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons,
Convinced, therefore, that it is imperative to make
further efforts to bring to a conclusion a treaty which
reflects the mandate given by the General Assembly
in its resolution 2028 (XX) of 19 November 1965 and
which is acceptable to all concerned and satisfactory
to the international community,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2028 (XX);
2. Urges all States to take all the necessary steps conducive to the earliest conclusion of a treaty on the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons;
3. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon Powers to refrain
from the use, or the threat of use, of nuclear weapons
against States which may conclude treaties of the nature
defined in paragraph 2 (e) of General Assembly resolution 2028 (XX) ;

4. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to consider urgently the
proposal that the nuclear-weapon Powers should give
an assurance that they will not use, or threaten to
use, nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States
without nuclear weapons on their territories, and any
other proposals that have been or may be made for
the solution of this problem;
5. Calls upon all States to adhere strictly to the
principles laid down in its resolution 2028 (XX) for
the negotiation of the above-mentioned treaty;
6. Calls upon the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to give high priority to
the question of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons
in accordance with the mandate contained in General
Assembly resolution 2028 (XX);
7. Transmits the records of the First Committee
relating to the discussion of the item entitled "Nonproliferation of nuclear weapons", together with all
other relevant documents, to the Conference of the
Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament;

8. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to submit to the General
Assembly at an early date a report on the results of
its work on the question of the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons.
1469th plenary meeting,
17 November 1966.
1 Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement for 1966, document DCj228.

B

The General Assembly,
Recalling previous resolutions on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Considering that the further spread of nuclear
weapons 'would endanger the peace and security of all
States,
Convinced that the emergence of additional nuclearweapon Powers would provoke an uncontrollable
nuclear arms race,
Reiterating that the prevention of further pro~ifera­
tion of nuclear weapons is a matter of the highest
priority demanding the unceasing attention of both
nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon Powers,
Believing that a conference of non-nuclear-weapon
Powers would contribute to the conclusion of arrangements designed to safeguard the security of those States,
1. Decides to convene a conference of non-nuclearweapon States to meet not later than July 1968 to
consider the following and other related questions:
"(a) How can the security of the non-nuclear
States best be assured?
"( b) How may non-nuclear Powers co-operate
among themselves in preventing the proliferation of
nuclear weapons?
"( c) How can nuclear devices be used for exclusively peaceful purposes?";
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
immediately to set up a preparatory committee, widely
representative of the non-nuclear-weapon States, to
make appropriate arrangements for convening the conference and to consider the question of the association of
nuclear States with the work of the conference and
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session.
1469th plenary meeting,
17 November 1966.

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 2 of resolution B above, designated the members
of the Prcpcratory Committee for the Conference of NonNuclcar-W capon Statess
The Preparatory Committee will be composed of the following 1.1 ember States: CHILE, DAHOMEY, KENYA, KUWAIT,
MALAYSIA, MALTA, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PERU, SPAIN and
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA.

2162 (XXI). Question of general and complete
disarmament

A

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the main purposes of the
United Nations is to save mankind from the scourge of
war,
Convinced that the armaments race, in particular the
nuclear arms race, constitutes a threat to peace,
Believing that the peoples of the world should be
made fully aware of this threat,
Noting the interest in a report on various aspects of
the problem of nuclear weapons which has been expressed by many Governments, as well as by the Sec2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1500th meeting,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

retary-General in the introduction to his annual report
for 1965-19663 and on other occasions,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a concise report on the effects of the possible use of nuclear
weapons and on the security and economic implications
for States of the acquisition and further development
of these weapons;
2. Recommends that the report should be based on
accessible material and prepared with the assistance of
qualified consultant experts appointed by the SecretaryGeneral ;
3. Requests that the report be published and transmitted to the Governments of Member States in time
to permit its consideration at the twenty-second session
of the General Assembly;
4. Recommends that the Governments of all Member
States should give the report wide distribution in their
respective languages, through various media of communication, so as to acquaint public opinion with its
contents.
1484th plenary meeting,
S December 1966.
B
The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of international law,
Considering that weapons of mass destruction constitute a danger to all mankind and are incompatible
with the accepted norms of civilization,
Affirming that the strict observance of the rules of
international law on the conduct of warfare is in the
interest of maintaining these standards of civilization,
Recalling that the Geneva Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or
Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of
Warfare, of 17 June 1925,4 has been signed and
adopted and is recognized by many States,
Noting that the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament has the task of seeking
an agreement on the cessation of the development and
production of chemical and bacteriological weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction, and on the elimination of all such weapons from national arsenals, as
called for in the draft proposals on general and complete
disarmament now before the Conference,
1. Calls for strict observance by all States of the
principles and objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or
Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, and condemns
all actions contrary to those objectives;
2. Invites all States to accede to the Geneva Protocol
of 17 June 1925.
1484th plenary meeting,
S December 1966.

c
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Conference of the
Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament,"
aIbid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. lA (A/630I/
Add.I), section IT.
4 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, 1929, No.
2138.
li Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement for 1966, document DC/228.

11

Recalling its resolutions 1378 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, 1767
(XVII) of 21 November 1962, 1908 (XVIII) of 27
November 1963 and 2031 (XX) of 3 December 1965,
Conscious of its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations for disarmament and the preservation of peace,
Firmly believing that it is imperative to make further
efforts to achieve early progress towards general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control,
1. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to pursue new efforts
towards achieving substantial progress in reaching
agreement on the question of general and complete
disarmament under effective international control, as
well as on collateral measures, and in particular on an
international treaty to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and on the completion of the test ban
treaty so as to cover underground nuclear weapon
tests;
2. Decides to refer to the Conference of the EighteenNation Committee on Disarmament all documents and
records of the meetings of the First Committee concerning all matters related to the disarmament question;
3. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to resume its work as early
as possible and to report to the General Assembly, as
appropriate, on the progress achieved.
1484th plenary meeting,
S December 1966.
2163 (XXI). Urgent need for suspension of
nuclear and thermonuclear tests

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the cessation of
nuclear and thermonuclear weapon tests and the report
of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on
Disarmament,"
Recalling its resolutions 1762 (XVII) of 6 November 1962, 1910 (XVIII) of 27 November 1%3 and
2032 (XX) of 3 December 1965,
Recalling further the joint memorandum on a comprehensive test ban treaty submitted by Brazil, Burma,
Ethiopia, India, Mexico, Nigeria, Sweden and the
United Arab Republic and annexed to the report of
the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on
Disarmament," and in particular the concrete suggestions contained therein,
Noting with great concern the fact that all States
have not yet adhered to the Treaty banning nuclear
weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and
under water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963,8
Noting also with great concern that nuclear weapon
tests in the atmosphere and underground are continuing,
Taking into account the possibilities of establishing,
through international co-operation, an exchange of
seismic data so as to create a better scientific basis for
national evaluation of seismic events,
Recognizing the importance of seismology in the
verification of the observance of a treaty banning underground nuclear weapon tests,
6 Ibid.

7 Ibid., annex 1, sect. O.
8United Nations, Treaty Series, vo!. 480 (1963), No. 6964.

12

General Assemb ly-Twe nty-firs t Session

Realizing that such a treaty would also constitu te an
effective measur e to preven t the prolife ration of nuclear
weapons,
1. Urges all States which have not done so to adhere
to the Treaty bannin g nuclear weapon tests in the
atmosp here, in outer space and under water;
2. Calls upon all nuclear -weapo n States to suspend
nuclear weapon tests in all environ ments;
3. Expres ses the hope that States will contrib ute to
an effective interna tional exchan ge of seismic data;
4. Requests the Conference of the Eightee n-Natio n
Commi ttee On Disarm ament to elabora te withou t any
further delay a treaty banning underg round nuclear
weapon tests.
1484th plenary meeting,
5 December 1966.
2164 (XXI) . Questi on of conven ing a confer ence
for the purpos e of signin g a conven tion on
the prohib ition of the use of nuclea r and
thermo nuclea r weapo ns
The General Assemb ly,
Recalling the declaration on the prohibi tion of the
use of nuclear and thermo nuclear weapon s contained in
its resoluti on 1653 (XVI) of 24 Novem ber 1%1,
Cognizant of the fact that the consult ations carried
out by the Secreta ry-Gen eral, pursua nt to Genera l
Assembly resoluti ons 1653 (XVI) of 24 Novem ber
1%1 and 1801 (XVII ) of 14 Decem ber 1%2, with
the Govern ments of Membe r States to ascerta in their
views on the possibility of convening a conference for
the purpos e of signing a conven tion on the prohibition
of the use of nuclear and thermo nuclear weapon s have
not been conclusive,
Recalling that, by Genera l Assemb ly resoluti on 1909
(XVII I) of 27 Novem ber 1963, the Confer ence of the
Eightee n-Natio n Commi ttee on Disarm ament was requested to give urgent conside ration to this question,
Believing that the signing of a conven tion on the
prohibi tion of the use of nuclear and thermo nuclear
weapons would greatly facilitate negotia tions on general
and complete disarma ment under effective interna tional
control and give further impetu s to the search for a
solution of the urgent problem of nuclear disarma ment,
Believing further that the widest possible attenda nce
at a conference for the purpose of signing .such a convention is of vital importa nce for the effective and
univers al observa nce of its provisions,
Requests that the forthcoming world disarma ment
confere nce give serious conside ration to the questio n
of signing a convention on the prohibi tion of the use
of nuclear and thermo nuclear weapons.
1484th plenary meeting,
5 December 1966.
2165 (XXI) . Elimin ation of foreign militar y
bases in the countr ies of Asia, Africa and
Latin Ameri ca
The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "Elimin ation of
foreign military bases in the countri es of Asia Africa
'
and Latin Americ a",
Considering that this questio n is of paramo unt importanc e and therefo re necessitates serious discussion
becau.se of its implications for interna tional peace and
security,

Decides to transm it to the Conference of the Eightee nNation Committee on Disarm ament, for further considerati on and report, all the docume nts and records
of th~ meetings of the First Commi ttee and the plenary
this
~eetmgs of the Genera l Assemb ly pertain ing to
Item.
1484th plenary meeting,
5 December 1966.
2221 (XXI) . United Nation s Confer ence on the
Explor ation and Peacef ul Uses of Outer
Space
The General Assembly,
Having received the unanim ous recomm endatio n of
the Comm~ttee on ~he Peacefu l Uses of Outer Space
that a United Nation s conference on the explora tion
and peaceful uses of outer space should be held in
Septem ber 1%7,
Convinced that the explora tion and use of outer
space should be carried on for the betterm ent of mankind and for the benefit of States, irrespec tive of their
degree of economic or scientific development,
Believing that it is in the interest of all countri es,
and of the developing countri es in particu lar, that
knowledge and underst anding of the achievements of
space science and technology should be more widely
dissemi nated and that the practica l applications of space
technology should be actively promot ed,
Recalling its resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it express ed the belief that the
Un!ted Nation s should provide a focal point for internationa l co-oper ation in the peacefu l explora tion and
use of outer space,
Recalling that the Declara tion of the Second Conference of Heads of State or Govern ment of NonAligned Countr ies, held at Cairo in Octobe r 1964
request ed those States which had succeeded in explori ng
outer space to exchan ge and disseminate information
related to the researc h they had carried out in this
~eld, so that scientific progres s in the peaceful utilization of outer space might be of common benefit to all,
a.nd express ed the view that for this purpose an interna riate
t~onal confere nce should be conven ed at an approp
time,
1. Decides that a United Nation s Conference on
the Explor ation and Peacefu l Uses of Outer Space"
should be held at Vienna in Septem ber 1967;
2. Endorses the detailed recomm endatio ns contain ed
in the report of the Commi ttee on the Peacefu l Uses
of Outer Space to the General Assemb ly at its twentyob~rst. session concern ing the terms of referen ce,
jectives , draft agenda and organiz ation of such a
conference, includi ng the composition and terms of
referen ce of the panel of experts ;"
3. Endorses in particular the recomm endatio n of the
that
Comm~t te~ on the Peacefu l Uses of Outer Space
the
e
examin
to
be
shall
nce
Confere
the
of
es
the objectiv
practica l benefits of space program mes on the basis of
scie?~ific a~d technical achievements, and the opporturnties available to non-space Powers for interna tional
co-operation in space activities, with special referen ce
to the needs of the developing countri es;
4. Invites States Membe rs of the United Nation s
States membe rs of the specialized agencies, States
Twenty- first
9 See Official Records of the General Assembl y
Session, Annexes, agenda items 30, 89 and 91, doc~ent A/6431,
paras. 12 and 16.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Parties to the Statute of the International Court of
Justice and States that the General Assembly decides
specially to invite, to participate in the Conference;
5. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions
and intergovernmental space organizations to attend
the Conference as observers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Chairman of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the panel of experts
within its terms of reference, and in co-operation with
the interested specialized agencies, to make, within
the ceiling of expenditure established for the Conference, the necessary organizational and administrative arrangements;
7. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-second session a report on the preparations for,
and the organization and proceedings of, the Conference.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
2222 (XXI). Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space covering its work
during 1966,1° and in particular the work accomplished
by the Legal Sub-Committee during its fifth session,
held at Geneva from 12 July to 4 August and at New
York from 12 September to 16 September,
Noting further the progress achieved through subsequent consultations among States Members of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation in the field of activities in the peaceful exploration
and use of outer space, including the Moon and other
celestial bodies, and the importance of developing the
rule of law in this new area of human endeavour,
1. Commends the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, the text of which is annexed to the present
resolution;
2. Requests the Depositary Governments to open
the Treaty for signature and ratification at the earliest
possible date;
3. Expresses its hope for the widest possible adherence to this Treaty;
4. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space:
(a) To continue its work on the elaboration of an
agreement on liability for damages caused by the launching of objects into outer space and an agreement on
assistance to and return of astronauts and space
vehicles, which are on the agenda of the Committee;
(b) To begin at the same time the study of questions
relative to the definition of outer space and the utilization of outer space and celestial bodies, including the
various implications of space communications;
10 Ibid.,

document A/6431.

13

( c) To report on the progress of its work to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
ANNEX
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States
in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including
the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies

The States Parties to this Treaty,
Inspired by the great prospects opening up before mankind
as a result of man's entry into outer space,
Eecoqnizino the common interest of all mankind in the
progress of the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Believing that the exploration and use of outer space should
be carried on for the benefit of all peoples irrespective of the
deg-ree of their economic or scientific development,
Desiring to contribute to broad international co-operation
in the scientific as well as the legal aspects of the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Believing that such co-operation will contribute to the development of mutual understanding and to the strengthening of
friendly relations between States and peoples,
Recalling resolution 1962 (XVIII), entitled "Declaration of
Legal Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space", which was adopted
unanimously by the United Nations General Assembly on
13 December 1963,
Recalling resolution 1884 (XVIII), calling upon States to
refrain from placing in orbit around the Earth any objects
carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of
mass destruction or from installing such weapons on celestial
bodies, which was adopted unanimously by the United Nations
General Assembly on 17 October 1963,
Taking account of United Nations General Assembly resolution 110 (II) of 3 November 1947, which condemned propaganda designed or likely to provoke or encourage any threat
to the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression, and
considering that the aforementioned resolution is applicable to
outer space,
Convinced that a Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, will further the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
H (We agreed on the following:
Article I

The exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit
and in the interests of all countries, irrespective of their degree
of economic or scientific development, and shall be the province
of all mankind.
Outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
shall be free for exploration and use by all States without
discrimination of any kind, on a basis of equality and in accordance with international law, and there shall be free access to all
areas of celestial bodies.
There shall be freedom of scientific investigation in outer
space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, and States
shall facilitate and encourage international co-operation in such
investigation.
Article Il

Outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
is not subj ect to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty,
by means of use or occupation, or by any other means.
Article III
States Parties to the Treaty shall carry on acuvitres in the
exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and
other celestial bodies, in accordance with international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations, in the interest

General Assemb ly-Twe nty·firs t Session

14

of maintain ing internati onal peace and security and promotin g
internati onal co-opera tion and understa nding.

Article IV
States Parties to the Treaty undertak e not to place in orbit
around the Earth any objects carrying nuclear weapons or any
other kinds of weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons on celestial bodies, or station weapons in outer space
in any other manner.
The Moon and other celestial bodies shall be used by all
States Parties to the Treaty exclusively for peaceful purposes.
The establishment of military bases, installat ions and fortifications, the testing of any type of weapons and the conduct of
military manoeuvres on celestial bodies shall be forbidden. The
use of military personnel for scientific research or for any
other peaceful purposes shall not be prohibited. The use of
any equipme nt or facility necessar y for peaceful explorat ion
be
of the Moon and other celestial bodies shall also not
prohibited.

Article V
States Parties to the Treaty shall regard astronau ts as envoys of mankind in outer space and shall render to them all
possible assistanc e in the event of accident, distress, or emergency landing on the territory of another State Party or on
the high seas. When astronau ts make such a landing, they shall
be safely and promptly returned to the State of registry of
their space vehicle.
In carrying on activities in outer space and on celestial
bodies, the astronau ts of one State Party shall render all
possible assistance to the astronau ts of other States Parties.
States Parties to the Treaty shall immediately inform the
other States Parties to the Treaty or the Secretar y-Gener al
of the United Nations of any phenomena they discover in outer
space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, which
could constitu te a danger to the life or health of astronau ts.

Article VI
States Parties to the Treaty shall bear internati onal responsibility for national activities in outer space, including the
Moon and other celestial bodies, whether such activities are
carried on by governm ental agencies or by non-gov ernment al
entities, and for assuring that national activitie s are carried
out in conform ity with the provisions set forth in the present
Treaty. The activities of non-gov ernment al entities in outer
space, includin g the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall
require authoriz ation and continui ng supervision by the appropriate State Party to the Treaty. When activities are carried
on in outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
by an internati onal organiza tion, responsibility for complian ce
with this Treaty shall be borne both by the internati onal
organiza tion and by the States Parties to the Treaty participating in such organiza tion.

Article VII
Each State Party to the Treaty that launches or procures
the launchin g of an object into outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, and each State Party from whose
territory or facility an object is launched, is internati onally
liable for damage to another State Party to the Treaty or
to its natural or juridical persons by such object or its component parts on the Earth, in air space or in outer space,
including the Moon and other celestial bodies.

Article VIII
A State Party to the Treaty on whose registry an object
launched into outer space is carried shall retain jurisdict ion
and control over such object, and over any personnel thereof,
while in outer space or on a celestial body. Ownersh ip of
objects launched into outer space, includin g objects landed or
construc ted on a celestial body, and of their component parts,
is not affected by their presence in outer space or on a celestial
body or by their return to the Earth. Such objects or component parts found beyond the limits of the State Party to
the Treaty on whose registry they are carried shall be returned
to that State Party, which shall, upon request, furnish identifying data prior to their return.

Article IX
In the explorat ion and use of outer space, including the
Moon and other celestial bodies, States Parties to the Treaty
shall be guided by the principle of co-opera tion and mutual
assistanc e and shall conduct all their activitie s in outer space,
including the Moon and other celestial bodies, with due regard
to the correspo nding interests of all other States Parties to the
Treaty. States Parties to the Treaty shall pursue studies of
outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
and conduct explorat ion of them so as to avoid their harmful
contami nation and also adverse changes in the environm ent of
the Earth resulting from the introduc tion of extrater restrial
matter and, where necessary, shall adopt appropri ate measure s
for this purpose. If a State Party to the Treaty has reason
to believe that an activity or experim ent planned by it or its
national s in outer space, including the Moon and other celestial
bodies, would cause potentially harmful interfere nce with activities of other States Parties in the peaceful explorat ion
and use of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial
bodies, it shall undertak e appropri ate internati onal consultations before proceeding with any such activity or experim ent.
A State Party to the Treaty which has reason to believe that
an activity or experim ent planned by another State Party in
outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
would cause potentia lly harmful interfere nce with activities
in the peaceful explorat ion and use of outer space, including
the Moon and other celestial bodies, may request consulta tion
concerning the activity or experim ent.

Article X
In order to promote internati onal co-opera tion in the exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and
other celestial bodies, in conform ity with the purposes of this
Treaty, the States Parties to the Treaty shall consider on a
basis of equality any requests by other States Parties to the
Treaty to be afforded an opportun ity to observe the flight of
space objects launched by those States.
The nature of such an opportun ity for observat ion and the
conditions under which it could be afforded shall be determin ed
by agreeme nt between the States concerned.
Article XI
In order to promote internati onal co-operation in the peaceful
explorat ion and use of outer space, States Parties to the
Treaty conducti ng activities in outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, agree to inform the Secretar yGeneral of the United Nations as weIl as the public and the
internati onal scientific community, to the greatest extent feasible
and practicable, of the nature, conduct, locations and results of
such activities. On receivin g the said information, the Secretar yGeneral of the United Nations should be prepared to disseminate
it immediately and effectively.

Article XII
All stations, installations, equipment and space vehicles on
the Moon and other celestial bodies shall be open to representatives of other States Parties to the Treaty on a basis
of reciprocity. Such represen tatives shall give reasonable advance notice of a projecte d visit, in order that appropri ate
consulta tions may be held and that maximu m precauti ons may
be taken to assure safety and to avoid interfere nce with normal
operatio ns in the facility to be visited.

Article XIII
The provisions of this Treaty shaIl apply to the activitie s
of States Parties to the Treaty in the explorat ion and use of
outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
whether such activities are carried on by a single State Party
to the Treaty or jointly with other States, including cases
where they are carried on within the framewo rk of international intergov ernment al organiza tions.
Any practica l questions arising in connexion with activities
carried on by internati onal intergov ernment al organiza tions
in the explorat ion and use of outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, shall be resolved by the States
Parties to the Treaty either with the appropri ate internati onal

ResolutioDs adopted OD the reports of the First Committee

organization or with one or more States members of that
international organization, which are Parties to this Treaty.

Article XIV
I. This Treaty shall be open to all States for signature.
Any State which does not sign this Treaty before its entry
into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Treaty shall be subject to ratification by signatory
States. Instruments of ratification and instruments of accession
shall be deposited with the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
which are hereby designated the Depositary Governments.
3. This Treaty shall enter into force upon the deposit of
instruments of ratification by five Governments including the
Governments designated as Depositary Governments under this
TreatY.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this Treaty.
it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of their
instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform all
signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature,
the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification of and
accession to this Treaty, the date of its entry into force and
other notices.
6. This Treaty shall be registered by the Depositary Governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Article XV
Any State Party to the Treaty may propose amendments to
this Treaty. Amendments shall enter into force for each State
Party to the Treaty accepting the amendments upon their
acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Treaty
and thereafter for each remaining State Party to the Treaty on
the date of acceptance by it.
Article XVI
Any State Party to the Treaty may give notice ctf its
withdrawal from the Treaty one year after its entry into force
by written notification to the Depositary Governments. Such
withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of receipt
of this notification.
Article XVII
This Treaty, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian
and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in
the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly certified
copies of this Treaty shall be transmitted by the Depositary
Governments to the Governments of the signatory and acceding
States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have
signed this Treaty.
DONE in ............• at the cities of London, Moscow and
Washington, the .. '
day of
one thousand
11
nine hundred and .. '

2223 (XXI). Report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2130 (XX) of 21 December
1965 entitled "International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space", which was adopted unanimously,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,12
11 The Treaty was signed in London, Moscow and Washington on 27 January 1967.
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Anneses, agenda items 30, 89 and 91, document A/6431.

15

Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in
furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Recalling its resolution 1721B (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it expressed the belief that the
United Nations should provide a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space,
Believing that the benefits of space exploration can
be extended to States at all stages of economic and
scientific development only if Member States conduct
their space programmes in a manner designed to
promote the maximum international co-operation and
engage in the widest possible exchange of information
in this field,
1. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space concerning exchange of information, encouragement of international programmes, international sounding rocket launching facilities, and education and
training;
2. Welcomes the intention of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to increase the usefulness
of its activities in the exchange of information on outer
space matters by preparing expanded reports annually
on a specific date;
3. Notes with appreciation that a number of Member
States have assisted the information programme of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by
providing ample descriptive material on their national
space programmes, and urges all Member States to
provide this information to the greatest extent feasible
and practicable;
4. Welcomes the decision of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to establish a working
group to consider the need, feasibility and implementation of a navigation services satellite system;
5. Reiterates its request, contained in section Ill,
paragraph 1, of resolution 2130 (XX), to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to continue,
in co-operation with the Secretary-General and making
use of the available resources of the Secretariat and
in consultation with the specialized agencies and in
co-operation with the Committee on Space Research,
the preparation and consideration of suggestions for
programmes of education and trainin~ of specialists in
the peaceful uses of outer space to assist the developing
countries;
6. Expresses the desire that these considerations be
reported upon to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session;
7. Endorses the guidelines adopted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to be
applied where international support or sponsorship is
requested for the training of specialists of Member
States in the specialized fields of space science and
technology ;
8. Urges that space activities be carried out in such
a manner that States may share in the adventure and
the practical benefits of space exploration, regardless
of the stage of their economic or scientific development;
9. Commends the co-operative space programmes in
effect between many Member States and recommends
such programmes to the attention of others;
10. Notes with appreciation that certain Member
States have continued to contribute to the objectives of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
as laid down in its reports, by establishing and

16

General Assemb lv-s-Tw entv-fir st Session

- - - - - - - ------------ -----1. ReafJin ns that the objectives of the United
strengt hening educational and training program mes,
Korea are to bring about by peaceful means
---

and urges others to take the same action;
11. Recom mends that those responsible for the development of the Thumb a Equato rial Rocket Launch ing
Station , and in particu lar the Membe r States associated with the constru ction and operati on of the
facility, the United Nation s Develo pment Progra mme
and the specialized agencies concerned, should extend
all the assistance necessary to continue the development
of that station ;
12. Notes also with appreciation that, in accordance
with Genera l Assembly resolution 1721 B (XVI) , the
Secreta ry-Gen eral continues to maintai n a public registry of objects launched into orbit or beyond on the
basis of informa tion being furnished by Membe r States;
13. Sugges ts that the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space examin e means to increase its
usefulness as a centre of informa tion for Membe r States,
particu larly the developing countries and those with
small space program mes;
14. Notes with appreciation the reports submitt ed
s and the
by the World Meteorological Organi zation14
Interna tional Telecommunication Union on their activities in the field of outer space and invites these
organiz ations to make progres s reports to the Committee on the Peacefu l Uses of Outer Space in 1967;
15. Reques ts the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work as set forth in the
present resolution and in previous Genera l Assembly
resolutions and to report to the Assembly at its twentysecond session.
1499th plenary meeting ,
19 Decemb er 1966.
2224 (XXI) . The Korea n questio n

The General Assemb ly,
Having noted the report of the United Nation s Commission for the Unification and Rehabi litation of
Korea,15
Reaffir ming its resolution 2132 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and previous resolutions on the Korean question noted therein ,
Recogn izing that the continu ed division of Korea
does not corresp ond to the wishes of the Korean people
and constitu tes a source of tension which prevent s the
full restora tion of interna tional peace and security in
the area,
Recalling that the United Nation s, under the Charter ,
is fully and rightful ly empowered to take collective
action to mainta in peace and security and to extend its
good offices in seeking a peaceful settlem ent in Korea
in accordance with the purpos es and principles of the
Charter ,
Expres sing the hope that conditions can soon be
created which will facilitate the reunification of Korea
on the basis of the freely expressed will of all the
Korean people,
on the
IS World Meteorological Organization, Fifth report
ion
Advancement of Atmospheric Sciences and their Applicat
in the Light of Developments in Outer Space (Geneva, 1966).
Transmitted under the symbol A/AC.lOS/L.31.
report by
14 Internati onal Telecommunication Union, Fifth
the International Telecommunication Union on Telecommunication and the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (Geneva, 1966).
Transmi tted under the symbol E/4188/ Addl.
first
15 Official Records of the General Assembly, TwentySessio», Supplement No. 12 (A/6312).

Nations in
the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic Korea under a represe ntative form of government,
and the full restora tion of interna tional peace and
security in the area;
2. Expres ses the belief that arrange ments should
be made to achieve these objectives through genuinely
free elections held in accordance with the relevan t
resolutions of the General Assemb ly;
3. Reques ts the United Nation s Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to intensify
its efforts to achieve these objectives and to continu e to
carry out the tasks previously assigned to it by the
General Assemb ly;
4. Notes that the United Nation s forces which were
sent to Korea in accordance with United Nation s
resolutions have in great part already been withdrawn,
that the sole objective of the United Nation s forces at
present in Korea is to preserv e the peace and security
of the area, and that the Govern ments concerned are
prepare d to withdra w their remain ing forces from
Korea whenev er such action is requested by the Republic of Korea or whenev er the conditions for a
lasting settlement formulated by the General Assembly
have been fulfilled.
1499th plenary meeting ,
19 December 1966.
2225 (XXI) . Status of the implem entatio n of the
Declar ation on the Inadm issibili ty of Interventio n in the Domes tic Affairs of States and
the Protec tion of Their Indepe ndence and
Sovere ignty
The General Assemb ly,
Deeply concerned at the evidence of unceasing armed
interve ntion by certain States in the domestic affairs
of other States in differen t parts of the world and at
other forms of direct or indirec t interference committed
against the sovereign personality and political independence of States, resultin g in increased international
tension,
Reaffir ming all the principles and rules embodied in
the Declara tion on the Inadmi ssibility of Interve ntion
in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protect ion of
Their Indepen dence and Sovereignty, contained in its
resolution 2131 (XX) of 21 December 1%5,
Deems it to be its bounde n duty:
(a) To urge the immedi ate cessation of interve ntion, in any form whatever, in the domestic or externa l
affairs of States;
(b) To condem n all forms of interve ntion in the
domestic or externa l affairs of States as a basic source
of danger to the cause of world peace;
(c) To call upon all States to carry out faithfully
their obligations under the Charte r of the United
Nation s and the provisions of the Declaration on the
Inadmi ssibility of Interve ntion in the Domestic Affairs
of States and the Protect ion of Their Indepen dence and
Sovere ignty and to urge them to refrain from armed
interve ntion or the promot ion or organiz ation of subversion, terroris m or other indirec t forms of interve ntion for the purpos e of changin g by violence the existing
system in another State or interfer ing in civil strife in
another State.
1499th plenary meeting ,
19 Decemb er 1966.

Resolutions adopted ou the reports of the First Committee

Other

decisions

Question of general and complete disarmament (item 27)

At its 1498th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of part II of the report of the First Committee on this item.i"
18 Ibid.,

Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 27, document A/6529/ Add.I,

17

General Assembly-Twenty-first SessiOfS

.RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SPECIAL POUTICAL
COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
R"oltlriotl
No.

IIdo,li~

Dill. of

P.,.

32

17 November 1966

19

34
34

20

35

16 December 1966
16 December 1966
17 December 1966

21
21

33

19 December 1966

21

36

19 December 1966

22

Till.

Report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(A/6S06)
.
2202 (XXI) The policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of
South Africa (A/6579)
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
.
2213 (XXI) Effects of atomic radiation (A/6601)
2220 (XXI) Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping
operations in all their aspects (A/6603, A/L.515)
.
2154 (XXI)

O,laer ded,lorg

Peaceful settlement of disputes

their continued faithful efforts to provide essential
services for the Palestine refugees, and to the specialized
agencies and private organizations for their valuable
work in assisting the refugees;
3. Directs attention to the continuing critical financial position of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as
outlined in the Commissioner-General's report;
4. Notes with concern that, despite the commendable
and successful efforts of the Commissioner-General in
collecting additional contributions to help reli~ve. the
serious budget deficit of the past year, contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East continue to fall
short of the funds needed to cover essential budget
requirements;
5. Calls upon all Governments as a matter of urgency to make the most generous efforts possible .to
meet the anticipated needs of the United Nations Rehef
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Nea:
East, particularly in the light of the budgetary deficit
projected in the Commissioner-General's report, and,
therefore, urges non-contributing Governments to contribute and contributing Governments to consider increasing their contributions;
6. Directs the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to continue his efforts in taking
such measures, including rectification of the relief rolls,
as to assure, in co-operation with the Governments
concerned, the most equitable distribution of relief
based on need;
7. Notes 'With regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine has been unable,
because of the unchanged situation in the area, to find
a means to achieve progress on the implementation of
paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (In)

2154 (XXI). Report of the Commissioner-General
of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (Ill) of 11 December
1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 (V) and
394 (V) of 2 and 14 December 1950, 512 (VI) and
513 (VI) of 26 January 1952,614 (VII) of 6 November 1952, 720 (VIII) of 27 November 1953, 818 (IX)
of 4 December 1954, 916 (X) of 3 December 1955,
1018 (XI) of 28 February 1957, 1191 (XII) of
12 December 1957, 1315 (XIII) of 12 December 1958,
1456 (XIV) of 9 December 1959, 1604 (XV) of
21 April 1961, 1725 (XVI) of 20 December 1961,
1856 (XVII) of 20 December 1962, 1912 (XVIII)
of 3 December 1963, 2002 (XIX) of 10 February 1965
and 2052 (XX) of 15 December 1965,
Noting the annual report of the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, covering the period from 1 July 1965 to 30 June 1966,1
1. Notes with deep regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph
11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (Ill) has not
been effected that no substantial progress has been
made in the 'programme endor~ed in J?aragraph 2 of
resolution 513 (VI) for the reintegration of refugees
either by repatriation or resettlement and that, therefore, the situation of the refugees continues to be a
matter of serious concern;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Commissioner-General
and the staff of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for
1 Official RICOf"ds of 'he Ge""'-ol Assembly, Twen'Y-firs'
Selsio,., Supplemen' No. 13 (A/6313).

19

General Assembly-Twenty.first Session

20

and calls upon the Governments concerned to co-operate
so that the Commission may continue its efforts towards
that end;
8. Calls upon the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine to intensify its efforts for the
implementation of paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (Ill)
and to report thereon as appropriate, and not later than
1 October 1967.
1469th plenary meeting,
17 November 1966.
2202 (XXI). The policies of apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South Africa

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on this question, in particular
resolutions 1761 (XVII) of 6 November 1962, 2054
(XX) of 15 December 1965 and 2144 (XXI) of
26 October 1966,
Recalling the provisions of Security Council resolutions 181 (1963) of 7 August 1963, 182 (1963)
of 4 December 1963, 190 (1964) of 9 June 1%4 and
191 (1964) of 18 June 1964,
Taking note of the reports of the Special Committee
on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa'' and endorsing its proposals
for an international campaign against apartheid under
the auspices of the United Nations,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Seminar on Apartheid," held at Brasilia from 23 August
to 4 September 1966,
Gravely concerned at the intensification of the policies
of apartheid in South Africa and the direct support
given by the Government of South Africa to the colonialist and racist regimes on its borders, thus aggravating the situation in southern Africa,
Noting with concern that the policies of the Government of South Africa aim at perpetuating apartheid
in South Africa, that they strengthen the colonialist
and racist regimes on its borders and that they threaten
the integrity and sovereignty of the neighbouring independent States,
1. Condemns the policies of apartheid practised by
the Government of South Africa as a crime against
humanity;
2. Reaffirms that the situation in South Africa and
the resulting explosive situation in southern Africa
continue to pose a grave threat to international peace
and security;
3. Deplores the attitude of the -main trading partners
of South Africa, including three permanent members
of the Security Council, which, by their failure to cooperate in implementing resolutions of the General
Assembly, by their refusal to join the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa and by their increasing
collaboration with the Government of South Africa,
have encouraged the latter to persist in its racial
policies;
4. Draws the attention of the main trading partners
of South Africa to the fact that their increasing collaboration with the Government of South Africa despite
lIbid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 34, documents A/6356 and A/6486.
a ST /TAO/HR/27.

repeated appeals by the General Assembly has aggravated the danger of a violent conflict, and requests
them to take urgent steps towards disengagement from
South Africa and to facilitate effective action, under
the auspices of the United Nations, to secure the elimination of apartheid;
5. Appeals to all States:
(a) To comply fully with the decisions duly taken
by the Security Council which solemnly call on them
to cease forthwith the sale and delivery to South Africa
of arms, ammunition of all types, military vehicles and
equipment and materials intended for their manufacture and maintenance;
(b) To discourage immediately the establishment of
closer economic and financial relations with South
Africa, particularly in investment and trade, and also
to discourage loans by banks in their countries to the
Government of South Africa or South African companies, and to submit reports to the Secretary-General
on steps taken in this respect, such reports to be transmitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly and the Special Committee;
(c) To consider effective political, moral and material assistance to all those combating the policies of
apartheid, in the light of the recommendations of
the Seminar on Apartheid;
(d) To make adequate and generous contributions
to humanitarian programmes designed to assist the
victims of apartheid;
(e) To endeavour to grant asylum and extend travel
facilities and educational and employment opportunities
to refugees from South Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To organize as soon as possible, in consultation
with the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid
of the Government of the Republic of South Africa
and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
an international conference or seminar on the problems of apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism
in southern Africa, and to transmit the report of that
conference or seminar to the General Assembly at its
twenty-second session;
( b) To take steps, in consultation with the Special
Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa, for the
periodic publication of statistics on South Africa's
international trade;
(c) To provide all the necessary assistance to the
Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South Africa in publicizing and reporting on any tightening of economic
and financial relations between other States and South
Africa;
(d) To consult with the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development in order to obtain
its compliance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and
2107 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and with those of
the present resolution, and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-second session;
(e) To provide the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic
of South Africa with all the necessary means, including
appropriate financial means, for the effective accomplishment of its task;

ResolutiolUl adopted ou the repOrlll of the Speeial Politieal Committee

7. Once again draws the attention of the Security
Council to the fact that the situation in South Africa
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
that action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations is essential in order to solve the problem of apartheid and that universally applied mandatory
economic sanctions are the only means of achieving a
peaceful solution;
8. Invites the Special Committee on the Policies of
Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa to continue to take all steps to discharge its
mandate more effectively and, to that end, authorizes it :
(a) To hold sessions away from Headquarters or
to send a sub-committee on a mission to consult
specialized agencies, regional organizations, States and
non-governmental organizations on ways and means to
promote the international campaign against apartheid
and to investigate various aspects of the problem of
apartheid;
(b) To continue and to increase co-operation with
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
with a view to the consideration of the activities of
foreign economic interests in southern Africa which
impede the efforts to eliminate apartheid, racial disc.timination and colonialism in the region;

9. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies to consider appropriate assistance for the
employment in their secretariats and programmes of
qualified South Africans who are victims of apartheid;

10. Invites the specialized agencies, regional organizations, States and non-governmental organizations to
co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Special
Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa in the accomplishment of their tasks under the present resolution.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2054 B (XX) of 15 December 1965 establishing the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,'
to which is annexed the report of the Committee of
Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,
1. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa for their efforts to promote the Fund;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Fund;
3. Renews its appeal to Governments, organizations
and individuals to contribute generously to the Fund.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
• Official R~cords of th~ General Assembly, Twenty-first
Stssion, Anntxts, agenda item 34, document A/6494.

21

2213 (XXI). Eftects of atomic radiation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December
1955, which established the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and
its subsequent resolutions reaffirming the desirability
of the Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects to
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of radiation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling information about atomic radiation and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
1. Notes with appreciation the report adopted by
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation at its sixteenth session P
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for the
valuable contributions it has made since its inception
to the wider knowledge and understanding of the effects
and levels of atomic radiation;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
programme, including its co-ordinating activities, to
increase the knowledge of the levels and effects of
atomic radiation from all sources;
4. Notes the intention of the Scientific Committee
to hold its next session in 1967 and to report further
to the General Assembly;
5. Commends the World Meteorological Organization for its work in carrying forward the scheme for
monitoring and reporting levels of atmospheric radioactivity;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance
rendered to the Scientific Committee by the specialized
agencies of the United Nations, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the non-governmental organizations concerned;
7. Recommends that all the parties concerned should
continue their co-operation with the Scientific Committee ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the dissemination of its findings to the public.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.

2220 (XXI). Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in all
their aspects
The General Assembly
1. Decides to refer the report of the Special Political
Committee on the comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects'
to the General Assembly at its fifth special session, to
be held not later than 30 April 1967;
2. Requests the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations to continue the review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations and to report to the General
Assembly at its fifth special session.
1499th plenMy meeting,
19 December 1966.
Cl Ibid.,

Twenty-first Session, Supplemmt No. 14 (A/6314

and Cord).

6 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annex~s, agenda item 33, document A/6603.

General Auembly-Twenty-first Session

22

Other

decisions

Peaceful settlement of disputes (item 36)

At its 1498th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Special Political Committee."
7 Ibid., agenda

item 36, document A/6617.

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
R.801.. ti""
No.

Tit"

2148 (XXI)
2152 (XXI)

International Tourist Year (A/6499)
.
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (A/6508) ..
Annex
.
.
2155 (XXI) Programme of studies on multilateral food aid (A/6519)
2158 (XXI) Permanent sovereignty over natural resources (A/6518)
.
2169 (XXI) External financing of economic development of developing countries
(A/6550)
.
.
2170 (XXI) Flow of external resources to developing countries (A/6550)
2171 (XXI) Conversion to peaceful needs of the resources released by disarmament (A/6553)
..
2172 (XXI) Ftesources of the sea (A/6533)
.
2173 (XXI) Development of natural resources (A/6533)
.
2177 (XXI) Special session of the Trade and Development Board (A/6567)
2178 (XXI) International Symposium on Industrial Development (A/6551) "
2179 (XXI) Provision of operational personnel under the Technical Assistance
component of the United Nations Development Programme
(A/65b6)
.
2180 (XXI) Reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme (A/6566)
.
2186 (XXI) Establishment of the United Nations Capital Development Fund
(A/6578)
.
2187 (XXI) United Nations Institute for Training and Research (A/6577)
.
2188 (XXI) General review of the programmes and activities in the economic,
social, technical co-operation and related fields of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the United Nations Children's Fund and all other institutions and agencies related to the United Nations system (A/6544)
2192 (XXI) World campaign for universal literacy (A/6592)
.
2206 (XXI) Second session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (A/6567 / Add.1)
.
Zl.07 (XXI) Technical assistance in trade and related fields (A/6567 / Add.I) ..
2208 (XXI) International monetary reform (A/6567/Add.l)
.
2209 (XXI) Implementation of the recommendations made by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development at its first session
(A/6567/Add.1)
.
2210 (XXI) International agreement on cocoa (A/6567/Add.1, AjL.510)
.
2211 (XXI) Population growth and economic development (A/6604)
.
2212 (XXI) Headquarters ot the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (A/6508/Add.1)
..
2218 (XXI) United Nations Development Decade (A/6602)
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.

Other deeino,..
R.eport of the Economic and Social Council (chapters II to IX, X (section II),
XII, XIII (sections II to VII), XIV and XV)
.
Headquarters of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
.
Confirmation of the appointment of the Executive Director of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization
.
Inflation and economic development
.
Decentralization of the economic and social activities of the United Nations
.
Ftevie'w. and reappraisal of the role and functions of the Economic and Social
Council
.

23

It,,"

DtJ,.D/
tJdopliofl

PtJ(/.

53

41 (b)

4 November 1966
17 November 1966

24
24

50

22 November 1966

28

45

25 November 1966

29

40

6 December 1966
6 December 1966

30
30

41 (a)

6 December 1966
6 December 1966
6 December 1966
9 December 1966
9 December 1966

32
32
32
33
33

49

9 December 1966

33

49

9 December 1966

34

38

13 December 1966
13 December 1966

34

47

13 December 1966
15 December 1966

37
38

37
37
37

17 December 1966
17 December 1966
17 December 1966

39
39
39

37
37
46

17 December 1966
17 December 1966
17 December 1966

40

41 (b)

17 December 1966

42

39
39

19 December 1966
19 December 1966

43

12

17 December 1966
17 December 1966

44

43

6 December 1966
6 December 1966
22 November 1966

44
44
44

51

22 November 1966

44

27

40
44
94
94
37

48

52

41 (b)
41 (c)
42

37

41
41

42

43

24

General Assemb ly-Twe nly-firs l Session

2148 (XXI) . Intern ationa l Touris t Year
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1108 (XL) of 7 March 1966, recommending that the
year 1967 be designated as Interna tional Tourist
Year,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1130 (XLI) of 26 July 1966,
Recalling further the resolution of the United Nations Conference on Interna tional Travel and Tourism
entitled "Impor tance of tourism '? which stated, inter
alia, that tourism is a basic and most desirable human
activity deserving the praise and encouragement of all
peoples and all Governments,
Taking into account the recommendations contained
in annex A.IV.2 4 of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develo pment.f which
recognizes that international tourism, as an importa nt
invisible export, can and does make a vital contribution to the economic growth of developing countries,
Bearing in mind the need for international co-operation in promoting tourism in view of its useful role in
the educational, cultural, economic and social fields,
Recognizing the importance of international tourism,
and particularly of the designation of an Interna tional
Touris t Year, in fostering better underst anding among
peoples everywhere, in leading to a greater awareness
of the rich heritag e of various civilizations and in
bringing about a better appreciation of the inheren t
values of different cultures, thereby contributing to
the strengt hening of peace in the world,
Considering that the designation of an Interna tional
Touris t Year will encourage the intensification of national and international co-operative efforts, by both
Governments and interes ted organizations, for the promotion of tourism, in particu lar to developing countries,
Taking note with interest of the report of the International Union of Official Travel Organizations'' on
the prepara tions for the Interna tional Tourist Year
and the proposals contained therein to encourage international tourism, in particu lar to developing countries,
1. Designates 1967 as Interna tional Touris t Year;
2. Invites the States Members of the United Nation s
or members of the specialized agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and the international,
inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations
concerned, to exert all possible efforts for the success
of the Interna tional Touris t Year, with special emphasis on promot ing tourism to developing countri es;
3. Further invites those States and organizations to
take into account, as appropriate, in their plans and programm es for the Interna tional Touris t Year, the proposals contained in the above-mentioned report of the
Interna tional Union of Official Travel Organi zations ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, within
the limits of existin g resources and available funds, the
necessary assistance for the successful organization of
the Interna tional Touris t Year, including the widespread dissemination of inform ation on its objectives;
and Tourism
1 See Recommendations on International Travel
(United Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.1.6), p. 17.
on Trade
2 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference
and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: M.n.B.! I), p. 55.
Forty8 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
first Session, Annexes , agenda item 20, document E/4218.

5. Furthe r request s the Secretary-General to prepare, in co-operation with the Interna tional Union of
Official Travel Organizations, and to submit to the
Economic and Social Council, if possible in 1968, a report embodying:
(a) A description of the program mes and activities
underta ken by Governments and interested organizations during the Interna tional Touris t Year, with specific mention of exceptional temporary measures taken
by individual Govern ments;
( b) An assessment of the results achieved in realizing the aims and objectives set for the International
Touris t Year, particularly in encouraging tourism to
developing countries.
1458th plenary meeting,
4 November 1966.

2152 (XXI) . United Nation s Indust rial Develo pment Organ ization

The General Assemb ly,
Recognizing that the industrialization of developing
countries is essential for their economic and social development and for the expansion and diversification of
their trade,
Conscious of the fact that the acceleration of industrial development, especially in the developing countries, depends largely on the broadest international
co-operation,
Considering the widespread desire for a comprehensive organiz ation capable of intensifying, co-ordinating
and expediting the efforts of the United Nations system
in the field of industrial development,
Bearing in mind the need for special measures designed to give additional impetus to the industrialization of the less advanced of the developing countries,
Recalling its resolution 2089 (XX) of 20 December
1965, by which it established within the United Nations an autonomous organization for the promotion
of industrial development,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the United Nation s Organi zation for Industrial Development,"
I

Decides that the United Nation s Industr ial Development Organi zation (herein after referre d to as the Organizat ion), established as an organ of the General
Assembly, shall function as an autonomous organization within the United Nation s in accordance with the
provisions set forth in section II below;
II
PURPOS E

1. The purpose of the Organization shall be to promote industrial development, in accordance with Article
1, paragra ph 3, and Articles 55 and 56 of the Charte r
of the United Nations, and by encouraging the mobilization of national and international resources to assist in,
promote and accelerate the industrialization of the developing countries, with particu lar emphasis on the
manufacturing sector.
Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
, agenda item 41, document A/6229.
Annexes
Session,
4 Official

Resolutions adopted OD the reports of the Second Committee
FUNCTIONS

2. In the fulfilment of its purpose, the Organization
shall undertake:
(a) Operational activities, including in particular:
(i) Encouragement and promotion of and making
of recommendations for national, regional and
international action to achieve more rapid industrialization of developing countries;
(H) Contribution to the most effective application
in .the developing countries of modern industrial methods of production, programming
and planning, taking into account the experience of States with different social and economic systems;
(iii) Building and strengthening of institutions and
administration in the developing countries in
the matter of industrial technology, production, programming and planning;
(iv) Dissemination of information on technological
innovations originating in various countries
and, for the developing countries, assistance
in the implementation of practical measures for
the application of such information, the adaptation of existing technology and the development of new technology especially suited to
the particular physical, social and economic
conditions of developing countries through the
establishment and improvement, inter alia, of
technological research centres in these countries;
(v) Assistance, at the request of Governments of
developing countries, in the formulation of
industrial development programmes and in
the preparation of specific industrial projects,
including, as necessary, technical and economic feasibility studies;
(vi) Co-operation with the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic
and Social Office in Beirut in assisting the
regional planning of industrial development
of developing countries within the framework
of regional and sub-regional economic groupings among those countries, where such groupings exist;
(vii) Making recommendations, in connexion with
the objectives stated under (vi) above, for
special measures for adapting and co-ordinating
the measures adopted so that, in particular,
the less advanced of the developing countries
will receive a strong impetus to their growth;
(viii) Offering advice and guidance, in close cooperation with the appropriate bodies of the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency, on
problems relating to the exploitation and efficient use of natural resources, industrial raw
materials, by-products and new products of
developing countries, with a view to increasing
their industrial productivity and contributing
to the diversification of their economies;
(ix) Assistance to the developing countries in the
training of technical and other appropriate
categories of personnel needed for their accelerated industrial development, in co-operation with the specialized agencies concerned,
in conformity with the principles of collaboration and co-ordination set forth in paragraphs
33 and 34 below;

25

(x) Proposing, in co-operation with the international bodies or inter-governmental regional
bodies concerned with industrial property,
measures for the improvement of the international system of industrial property, with a
view to accelerating the transfer of technical
know-how to developing countries and to
strengthening the role of patents consistent
with national interests as an incentive to industrial innovations;
(xi) Assistance, at the request of Governments of
developing countries, in obtaining external
financing for specific industrial projects, by
giving guidance in the preparation of requests,
by providing information on the terms. and
conditions of the various financing agencies
and by advising the financing agencies on the
technical and economic soundness of the projects submitted for financing;
( b ) Action-oriented studies and research programmes
designed especially to facilitate the activities outlined
in sub-paragraph (a) above, including in particular the
compilation, analysis, publication and dissemination of
information concerning various aspects of the process
of industrialization, such as industrial technology, investment, financing, production, management techniques, programming and planning.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BOARD

Composition
3. The Industrial Development Board (hereinafter
referred to as the Board), established as the principal
organ of the Organization, shall consist of forty-five
members, elected by the General Assembly from among
States Members of the United Nations and members of
the specialized agencies and of the International Atomic
Energy Agency for a term of three years, provided,
however, that of the members elected at the first election the terms of fifteen members shall expire at the
end of one year and the terms of fifteen other members
at the end of two years.
4. In electing the members of the Board, the General
Assembly shall have due regard to the principle of
equitable geographical representation and shall accord
ingly observe the following distribution of seats:
( a) Eighteen from the States listed in part A of the
annex to the present resolution;
(b) Fifteen from the States listed in part B of the
annex;
(c) Seven from the States listed in part C of the
annex;
(d) Five from the States listed in part D of the
annex.
The lists of States contained in the annex shall be reviewed by the Board in the light of changes in the membership of the United Nations or of the specialized
agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
5. Retiring members shall be eligible for immediate
re-election.
6. Each member of the Board shall have one representative with such alternates and advisers as may be
required.
Functions and powers
7. The principal functions and powers of the Board
shall be:

General Assemb ly-Twe nty-firs t Session

26

(a) To formulate princip les and policies to achieve

the purpose of the Organi zation;
( b) To make proposals for putting- those principles
and policies into effect and to take such other steps
within its competence as may be conducive to this end;
(c) To initiate such other action as may be necessary and approp riate to the fulfilment of the purpose of
the Organi zation;
(d) To consider and approv e the program me of activities of the Organi zation;
(e) To review and facilitate the co-ordination of activities within the United Nations system in the field of
industr ial develop ment;
(f) To exercise control over the effective utilization
of resourc es available to the Organi zation;
(g) To keep the activities of the Organi zation under
review and to request its Execut ive Directo r to prepare
such reports , studies and other documents as it may
deem approp riate;
(h) To report annuall y to the General Assembly
through the Economic and Social Counci l; the Council
may transm it to the Organi zation and to the Genera l
Assembly such comme nts on the report as it may deem
necessary.

Voting
Board shall have one vote.
the
of
r
membe
8. Each
shall be taken by a simBoard
the
of
ns
9. Decisio
ple majorit y of the membe rs present and voting.
Procedures
10. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
11. The Board shall meet as required in accordance
with its rules. It shall normally hold one regular session
a year.
12. The Board shall elect its Preside nt, three VicePreside nts and a Rappor teur to hold office for a period
of one year. In electing its officers, it shall pay due regard to the principle of equitable geographical representation.
13. The Board may invite any State Membe r of the
United Nation s or membe r of a specialized agency or
of the Interna tional Atomic Energy Agency to participate, withou t a vote, in its deliberations on any matter of particu lar concern to that State.
Subsidiary organs
14. The Board may establish such subsidiary organs
on a perman ent or ad hoc basis as may be necessary for
the effective dischar ge of its functions, including, as
require d, expert groups to conside r specific problem s
and to make recommendations.
15. The Board shall determ ine the terms of reference and rules of proced ure of its subsidiary organs.
16. In electing the members of its subsidiary organs,
the Board may include any State Membe r of the United
Nation s or membe r of a specialized agency or of the
Interna tional Atomic Energy Agency, whethe r or not
that State is represe nted on the Board.
SECRET ARIAT

17. The Organi zation shall have an adequate permanent and full-time secreta riat, which will be appointed
in accordance with Article 101 of the Charte r of the
United Nation s, and which will avail itself of the other

approp riate facilities of the Secreta riat of the United
Nation s.
18. The secreta riat shall be headed by the Execut ive
Directo r, who shall be appointed by the Secreta ryGeneral of the United Nations and whose appoint ment
shall be confirmed by the Genera l Assembly. He shall
be appointed for four years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
19. The Execut ive Directo r shall have over-all responsibility for the admini strative and researc h activities of the Organization. He shall also be responsible for
all operational activities of the Organi zation, including
activities execute d by the Organi zation as a particip ating organiz ation of the United Nation s Development
Program me. He shall make arrange ments for meetings
of the Board and shall prepare such reports , studies or
other documents as may be necessary for the functioning of the Board and its subsidiary organs and shall
perform such other functions as may be entrust ed to
him by the Board.
FINANC IAL ARRANG EMENTS

20. The expend iture of the Organi zation shall be
classified under the following categor ies:
(a) Expens es for admini strative and researc h activities ;
( b) Expens es for operational activities.
21. Expens es for admini strative and researc h activities shall be borne by the regular budget of the
United Nation s, which shall include a separat e budgetary provision for such expenses.
22. Expens es for operati onal activities shall be met:
(a) From the volunta ry contributions made to the
Organi zation, in cash or in kind, by Governments of
the States Members of the United Nations , members
of the specialized agencies and of the Interna tional
Atomic Energy Agency ;
( b) Throug h participation in the United Nation s
Development Progra mme on the same basis as other
particip ating organiz ations;
(c) By the utilization of the approp riate resources
of the United Nation s regular program me of technical
assistance.
23. Volunt ary contrib utions to the Organi zation for
its operational activities under paragra ph 22 (a) above
may be made, at the option of the Governments, either:
(a) Throug h announcement at a pledging conference to be convened by the Secreta ry-Gen eral of the
United Nation s on the recomm endatio n of the Board;
or
(b) In accordance with regulat ions 7.2 and 7.3 of
the Financial Regulations of the United Nation s; or
( c) By both of these methods.
24. The volunta ry contrib utions referred to in paragraph 22 (a) above shall be govern ed by the Financ ial
Regulations of the United Nation s, except for such
modifications as may be approv ed by the Genera l Assembly on the recommendation of the Board.
25. Disbur sement of the funds referre d to in paragraph 22 (b) above shall be for purposes consistent
with the policies, aims and functions of the Organi zation, including such policies and program mes as may be
established by the Board, and shall be made by the
Secreta ry-Gen eral of the United Nation s in consultation with the Execut ive Directo r of the Organi zation.

27

Relolntionl adopted on the reports of the SeeoDd Committee

26. All States Members of the United Nations,
members of the specialized agencies and of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and in particular the
industrially advanced countries, when considering contributions for the operational activities of the Organization under paragraph 22 (a) above, are urged to
bear in mind the pressing need for the industrial development of the developing countries.
CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION WITH UNITED
NATIONS BODIES AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS

2:1. The Organization shall play the central role in
and be responsible for reviewing and promoting the coordination of all activities of the United Nations system in the field of industrial development.
28. In its relations with organs and agencies within
the United Nations system, the Board shall act in conformity with the responsibilities of the Economic and
Social Council under the Charter of the United Nations, particularly those of co-ordination, and with the
relationship agreements with the agencies concerned.
29. There shall be a close and continuous working
relationship between the Organization and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
accordance with the general principle that the former
shall be competent to deal with the general and technical
problems of industrialization, including the establishment and expansion of industries in developing countries, and the latter with the foreign trade aspects of
industrialization, including the expansion and diversification of exports of manufactures and semi-manufactures by developing countries.
30. The Organization shall establish a close and
continuous working relationship with the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic
and Social Office in Beirut.
31. The Organization shall be a participating agency
in the United Nations Development Programme and
there shall be close co-operation and co-ordination between the Organization and the United Nations Development Programme. The Executive Director shall
be a member of the Inter-Agency Consultative Board
of the United Nations Development Programme.
32. Adequate arrangements shall be made by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations for close cooperation and co-ordination between the secretariat of
the Organization and the other departments of the
United Nations Secretariat.
33. The Organization shall exercise its functions,
when appropriate, in close co-operation with the specialized agencies concerned and the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
34. The co-ordination between the Organization and
the specialized agencies concerned and the International Atomic Energy Agency shall be carried out at
the inter-governmental level by the Board: Adequate
arrangements shall also be made by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for such co-ordination
at the secretariat level.
35. The Organization may establish appropriate
working relationships with relevant inter-governmental
organizations.
36. The Organization may, when it considers it appropriate, establish a working relationship with international non-governmental organizations concerned with
the promotion of industrial development.

FUTURE INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

37. The General Assembly shall review, in the light
of experience, the effectiveness and further evolution of
these institutional arrangements, with a view to deciding upon such changes and improvements as might be
necessary in order to meet fully the growing needs in
the field of industrial development.
TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

38. The provisions approved by the General Assembly under the appropriate sections of the budget for
the activities of the Centre for Industrial Development shall be transferred to the Organization.
39. The post of Commissioner for Industrial Development shall be abolished.
40. The Secretary-General of the United Nations,
in establishing the secretariat of the Organization
under paragraph 17 above, shall make arrangements,
in consultation with the Executive Director:
(a) To transfer to the secretariat of the Organization such of the existing staff of the Centre for Industrial Development as is appropriate to the functions of
the Organization;
(b) To transfer to the secretariat of the Organization the staff at present servicing the operational activities of the Centre for Industrial Development for
which the Organization will assume full operational responsibility;
(c) To recruit such additional staff as may be required to fill the existing posts in the establishment for
the purpose of industrial development.
41. After the adoption of the present resolution, the
Economic and Social Council is requested to abolish
the Committee for Industrial Development.
42. The Executive Director shall submit to the
Board at its first session a report on the activities so
far carried out by the United Nations system in the
field of industrial development and proposals for a work
programme for the Organization, by sectors and areas
of activities.
1468th plenary meeting,
17 November 1966.
ANNEX
A.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION

Afghanistan
Algeria
Botswana
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Ceylon
Chad
China
Congo (Brazzaville)
Congo (Democratic Republic
of)
Dahomey
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
India
Indonesia
Iran

n, PARAGRAPH 4 (a)

Iraq
Israel
Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kenya
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldive Islands
Mali
Mauritania
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan

28
Philippines
Republic of Korea
Republic of Viet-Nam
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Syria

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab Republic
United Republic of Tanzania
Upper Volta
Western Samoa
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zambia

B. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION Il, PARAGRAPH 4 (b)
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Federal Republic of Germany
Finland
France
Greece
Holy See
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Liechtenstein

Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
San Marino
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland
United States of America

C. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION H, PARAGRAPH 4 (c)
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Guyana

Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

D. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION Il, PARAGRAPH 4 (d)
Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
Hungary

Poland
Romania
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

2155 (XXI). Programme of studfes on multi.
lateral food aid
The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendation contained in annex
A.II.6 of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference, on Trade and Development, relating to the World
Food Programme," and General Assembly resolution
2096 (XX) of 20 December 1965 calling for a study of
the means and policies which would be required for
large-scale international action of a multilateral character, under the auspices of the United Nations system,
for combating hunger effectively,
Gravely concerned both at the growing food shortage
in the developing countries, which is due to a decline in
li See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, vo!. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 64.n.B.l1), p, 32.

their production of food-stuffs accompanied by a high
population growth rate, and at the reduction of surplus
stocks of such food-stuffs in the exporting countries,
Taking note of the fact that, according to the third
world food survey carried out by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the total
food supplies in the developing countries should increase, between 1957-1959 and 1975, by some 80 per
cent to ensure a reasonable rise in nutrition levels,"
Considering that international food aid should be the
subject of concerted and planned measures designed to
make available to the developing countries a more regular flow of food-stuffs supplementing outside financial
resources, with a view to supporting the efforts of those
countries to finance their development, and more particularly to ensure the growth of their agricultural production, to absorb unemployment and, in the short term,
to make good their food shortage,
Having considered the Secretary-General's report on
the arrangements made with a view to the preparation
of the programme of studies called for in General Assembly resolution 2096 (XX) ,7 and drawing attention
particularly to the need for modification of the draft
outline for an inter-agency study on multilateral food
aid to take into account the discussions in the intergovernmental bodies concerned and in the light of further inter-agency consultations,
Having considered further the extract from the report of the Committee on Commodity Problems of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on its fortieth session concerning the international
study of multilateral food aid," containing, inter alia,
suggestions for modifications of the draft outline for the
study prepared in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 2096 (XX),
Considering that although, according to the present
work schedule, the final report called for in General
Assembly resolution 2096 (XX) will not be available
before the beginning of 1968, it is nevertheless necessary
that the first studies prepared should be taken into consideration at the second session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and at other
international meetings dealing with the question of foodstuffs,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and in consultation
with the other organizations and programmes concerned,
and taking advantage of the facilities of the United Nations, including in particular the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development:
(a) To bear in mind the second, third and fourth
preambular paragraphs of the present resolution, the
suggestions contained in the report of the Committee on
Commodity Problems of the Food and Azriculture Organization of the United Nations on its f~rtieth session
concerning the draft outline for the inter-agency study,
and the suggestions formulated by members of the
Economic and Social Council at its forty-first session;
(?) To submit as soon as possible the study called
for In General Assembly resolution 2096 (XX), taking
into account the views of the States Members of the
6 See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Freedom from Hunaer Camf1aign: Basic Study No. 11,
Third World Food Survey (Rome, 1963), p. 9.
7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council FOf"tyfirst S~ssion, Annexes, agenda item 16, document E/4210:
8 I btd., document E/4236.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the work done by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in connexion with the Indicative W orId Plan for Agricultural Development;
2. Welcomes the Secretary-General's statement to
the Economic and Social Council? that the study in
question should constitute a guide for policy-making
consideration;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the Secretary-General's decision to submit, in co-operation with the
Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and in consultation with
other interested international organizations and programmes, a detailed preliminary report on the first
results obtained in the preparation of the above-mentioned study ;10
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit that
report to the Economic and Social Council at its fortythird session and to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session.
1473rd plenary meeting,
22 November 1966.

2158 (XXI). Permanent sovereignty over natural
resources

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 523 (VI) of 12 January
1952,626 (VII) of 21 December 1952 and 1515 (XV)
of 15 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14
December 1962 on permanent sovereignty over natural
resources,
Recognizing that the natural resources of the developing countries constitute a basis of their economic
development in general and of their industrial progress
in particular,
Bearing in mind that natural resources are limited
and in many cases exhaustible and that their proper
exploitation determines the conditions of the economic
development of the developing countries both at present
and in the future,
Considering that, in order to safeguard the exercise
of permanent sovereignty over natural resources, it is
essential that their exploitation and marketing should
be aimed at securing the highest possible rate of growth
of the developing countries,
Considering further that this aim can better be
achieved if the developing countries are in a position
to undertake themselves the exploitation and marketing
of their natural resources so that they may exercise
their freedom of choice in the various fields related to
the utilization of natural resources under the most
favourable conditions,
Taking into account the fact that foreign capital,
whether public or private, forthcoming at the request
of the developing countries, can play an important role
inasmuch as it supplements the efforts undertaken by
them in the exploitation and development of their
natural resources, provided that there is government
11 This statement was made at the 1421st meeting of the Economic and Social Council, the records of which are published
in summary form.
10 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 16, document El
42101 Add.l.

29

supervision over the activity of foreign capital to ensure
that it is used in the interests of national development,

I

1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of all countries to
exercise permanent sovereignty over their natural resources in the interest of their national development, in
conformity with the spirit and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and as recognized in General
Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII);
2. Declares, ther.efore, that the United Nations
should undertake a maximum concerted effort to
channel its activities so as to enable all countries to
exercise that right fully;
3. States that such an effort should help in achieving
the maximum possible development of the natural resources of the developing countries and in strengthening
their ability to undertake this development themselves,
so that they might effectively exercise their choice in
deciding the manner in which the exploitation and
marketing of their natural resources should be carried
out;
4. Confirms that the exploitation of natural resources
in each country shall always be conducted in accordance
with its national laws and regulations;
5. Recognizes the right of all countries, and in particular of the developing countries, to secure and
increase their share in the administration of enterprises
which are fully or partly operated by foreign capital
and to have a greater share in the advantages and
profits derived therefrom on an equitable basis, with
due regard to the development needs and objectives of
the peoples concerned and to mutually acceptable contractual practices. and calls upon the countries from
which such capital originates to refrain from any action
which would hinder the exercise of that right;
6. Considers that, when natural resources of the
developing countries are exploited bv foreign investors,
the latter should undertake proper and accelerated
training of national personnel at all levels and in all
fields connected with such exploitation;
7. Calls upon the developed countries to make available to the developing countries, at their request, assistance, including capital goods and know-how, for
the exploitation and marketing of their natural resources in order to accelerate their economic development, and to refrain from placing on the world market
non-commercial reserves of primary commodities which
may have an adverse effect on the foreign exchange
earnings of the developing countries;
8. Recognizes that national and international organizations set up by the developing countries for the
development and marketing of their natural resources
play a significant role in ensuring the exercise of the
permanent sovereignty of those countries in this field
and should on that account be encouraged;

?

Recommends to the Economic Commission for
ASia and the Far East, the Economic Commission for
Latin America, the Economic Commission for Africa
and the United Nations Economic and Social Office in
Beirnr that, in the ex~cl1tion of their functions, they
should. keep under review the question of permanent
sovereignty over natural resources in the countries of
the regions concerned, and the problem of the economic
utilization of these resources in the national interests
of their peoples;

so
11
Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To co-ordinate the activities of the Secretariat
in the field of natural resources with those of other
United Nations organs and programmes, including the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
regional economic commissions, the United Nations
Economic and Social Office in Beirut, the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
and in particular with those of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization;
(b) To take the necessary steps to facilitate, through
the work of the Centre for Development Planning,
Projections and Policies, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization and the Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development, the inclusion of the exploitation
of the natural resources of the developing countries in
programmes for their accelerated economic growth;
(c) To submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-third session a progress report on the implementation of the present resolution.
1478th plenary meeting,
25 N ouember 1966.
2169 (XXI). External financing of economic
development of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling,its resolution 1938 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963,
Noting with concern that the recent trend towards
an increased outflow of capital from developing countries is depriving them of substantial funds needed for
their economic development;
Deeply concerned at the statements contained in the
annual report of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development for 1965-196611 that the net
flow of official assistance from the industrial countries
to the developing countries and to multilateral institutions had remained rather static, at about $6,600 million
during the five years from 1961 to 1965, and that the
total service payments (interest and amortization) on
public and publicly guaranteed debt of ninety-seven
developing countries rose to $3,500 million in 1965,
and at the fact that, on the basis of the present trends,
the rapid increase in the debt-servicing burden of developing countries would completely offset the inflow in
a little more than fifteen years,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1184 (XLI) of 5 August 1966 on measurement of the
flow of assistance and long-term capital;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report on possible
measures to be taken in order to limit or decrease the
outflow of capital from the developing to the developed
countries, whenever such an outflow becomes harmful to
the development objectives of the developing countries;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session an item entitled:
11 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development;
International Development Association, Annual Report 19651966 (Washington, D.e.) , and supplementary information for
the period from 1 July 1966 to 31 October 1966. Transmitted by
notes of the Secretary-General (E/4272 and Add.l).

"External financing of economic development of the
developing countries:
"(a) Accelerated flow of capital and technical assistance to the developing countries;
" (b) Outflow of capital from the developing countries."
1485th plenary meeling,
6 December 1966.
2170

(XXI). Flow of external resources to
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council at its
forty-first session adopted resolution 1183 (XLI) of
5 August 1966 on the flow of external resources to
developing countries, which reads as follows:
"The Economic and Social Council,
"Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1522 (XV) of 15
December 1960 and 1711 (XVI) of 19 December 1961 and
the relevant recommendations contained in annex A.IV of
the Final Act of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development,12 which, inter alia, defined the objectives
to be reached both as to the volume and as to the terms and
conditions of the flow of long-term capital and official donations to developing countries,
"Recalling its resolutions 1088 (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965
and 1089 (XXXIX) of 31 July 1965 as well as General Assembly resolution 2088 (XX) of 20 December 1965, in
which concern was expressed at the limited results obtained
towards the achievement of those objectives and in which
the international community was urged to take immediate
action with a view to attaining them,
"Having considerl!d the Secretary-General's annual report
entitled International Flow of Long-Term Capital and Of.ficial Donations, 1961-196513 and the World Economic
Survey, 1965, part 1,1' on the financing of economic development,
"Recognizing the need for the developing countries to continue to improve their own efforts to accelerate their economic and social progress,
"Bearing in mind the statement of the Secretary-General to
the Council111 that 'in the first half of the United Nations
Development Decade, despite disappointments and failures,
the developing countries did succeed over a broad front in
increasing their own contribution to their development' and
that 'there is good reason to believe that the developing
countries will succeed in improving still further the mobilization of their internal resources for development during the
second half of the Decade',
"Noting with deep concern the fact that, with a few exceptions, the transfer of external resources to the developing
countries has not only failed to reach the minimum target
of 1 per cent net of the individual national income of the
developed countries but that the trend since 1961 has been
one of continuous decline,
"Noting the fact that the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development has estimated, in its annual report
for 1964-1965,16 that over the next five years the developing
12See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales N().: 64.II.B.lI).
13 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 66.II.D.3.
14 Idem, Sales No.: 66.II.C.l.
III This statement was made at the 1421st meeting of the Economic and Social Council, the records of which are published
in summary form.
16International Bank for Reconstruction and Development;
International Development Association, Annual Report 19641965 (Washington, D.e.) and supplementary information for the
period from 1 July to 31 December 1965. Transmitted by notes
of the Secretary-General (E/4129 and Add.I).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

countries could effectively use between $3,000 million and
$4,000 million a year more external capital than has in fact
been provided in the recent past,
"Considering that external resources concentrated over a
limited period of time can, in some cases, make a substantial
contribution to the rapid economic development of developing
countries,
"Emphasizing that increased external resources should be
provided, to the greatest extent possible, on a continuing and
long-term basis for effective implementation of development
plans and programmes and should be aimed exclusively at
promoting the economic and social progress of developing
countries,
"Believing that both multilateral and bilateral assistance
should be increased and extended to the fullest possible extent
to the largest number of developing countries,
"Noting that, apart from external resources, international
trade could play an important role in promoting the development of developing countries,
"Deeply concerned at the rapid increase in the debtservicing burden of developing countries which in 1965 absorbed more than half of the total net loans and grants received by them and which, according to the President of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, on
present form, would offset the inflow completely in a little
more than fifteen years,
"Recognizing that to prevent debt accumulation, and consequently its servicing, from becoming a disruptive force is
the common concern and is in the interest of both the
lenders and the borrowers,
"Welcoming the recommendation on financial terms and
conditions adopted by the Organization for Economic C0operation and Development on 22-23 July 1965,17
"Noting with concern that while some countries have
recently eased the terms of their aid, some other countries
are providing aid on more stringent conditions,
"Noting further with concern that in some cases tied aid
has had, as practical consequences, the adoption of projects,
sometimes unrelated to, or with a much lower priority in,
national development plans, and the tying of aid to the
procurement of goods from the home markets of developed
countries which has often resulted in an inefficient use of
resources in recipient countries and in the supply of goods
and services at higher than world competitive prices,
"Considering that in many cases the tying of loans, by
countries supplying the capital, has not been accompanied
by the tying of repayments, in full or in part, to purchases
from the recipient countries,
"Recognizing that external resources are an important
factor in contributing to the economic and social development
of the developing countries,
"Noting that the Secretary-General pointed out in his
statement to the Council 11l that 'in an impressive number of
instances the main limitations are not domestic but insufficiency of external resources',
"1. Urges the developing countries to make all possible
efforts to increase the mobilization of their domestic resources
to the fullest extent possible;

"2. Recommends that the developed countries which have
not already done so take urgent appropriate action to meet
the objectives set out in the resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Economic and Social Council as well
as in the recommendations of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development on the financing of economic development referred to above;
"3. Urges the developed countries, in particular:
"(a) To reach and, if possible, to surpass by the end of
the United Nations Development Decade, the objective of
supplying to developing countries external resources equivalent
to 1 per cent of their individual national income, having
17See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cau.cil,
Forty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 8, document E/42241
Add.l.

31

regard, however, to the special position of some countries
which are net importers of capital;
"(b) To make external resources available to developing
countries on easier terms and conditions:
"(i) By providing, to the greatest extent possible, an
increased flow of aid on a long-term and continuing basis, and by simplifying the procedure for
the granting and the effective and expeditious
disbursement of aid;
"(ii) By providing not later than by 1968, at least 80
per cent of their assistance in the form of grants
and loans at interest rates of 3 per cent or less
with a repayment period of twenty-five years or
more with the exception of those countries which
are already providing 70 per cent or more of their
total official assistance in the form of grants or
grant-like contributions;
"(iii) By increasing the proportion of non-project assistance and particularly of assistance for development plans or programmes or for projects related
to them, taking into account the need for the
maintenance and expansion of existing capacity in
recipient countries;
"(iv) By making all possible efforts to move progressively towards the untying of loans with respect to
the source of supply, taking into account the essential need for increasing the over-all volume of
aid;
"(v) Where loans are tied to the supply of goods and
services, by making such goods and services available at competitive world prices;
"(vi) Where loans are tied essentially to particular
sources, by making, to the greatest extent feasible,
part of the loans available for utilization by the
recipient countries for the purchase of goods and
services from other developing countries or from
countries belonging to the same zone as the creditor
country;
"(vii) Taking into account the debt-servicing burden of
the developing countries, by endeavouring to provide
additional foreign exchange resources to them
through appropriate means and, in particular,
through international commercial operations, and
by accepting, where such arrangements exist or are
practicable, without prejudice to annex A.IVA of
the Final Act of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, repayment of loans and
particularly of loans tied to the supply of goods and
services, in the form of mutually determined industrial goods, agricultural surplus products and
services supplied by recipient countries in addition
to their normal exports;
"(viii) By ensuring, as far as possible, that an increasing
part of the repayments of loans shall be reinvested
in the debtor countries in addition to current flows
of external resources;
"(c) To review the problem of debt service in developing
countries, wherever necessary, in accordance with the recommendations contained in annex A.IV.5 of the Final Act of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
"4. Expresses the hope that the targets set for contributions to the United Nations Development Programme and
the World Food Programme will be reached as early as
possible and that contributions to the International Development Association will be further increased;
"5. Requests the Secretary-General:
"(a) To study the feasibility of setting up, within the
United Nations Organization for Industrial Development or
any other appropriate United Nations body, an advisory
servic~ which could provide information to the developing
countries on the sources of supply, the cost and the quality
of equipment needed for their development;
"(b) To undertake, in consultation with the United Nation.
Conference on Trade and Development, the International

32

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

Monetary Fund, the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development and such other organizations as he considers necessary, a study on:
"(i) Economic factors affecting the ability of developed
countries to transfer maximum financial resources to
the developing countries in accordance with the
relevant recommendations contained in the Final Act
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, particularly its annex A.IV.2, taking into
account the increase in the national income of the
developed countries;
"(ii) The progress made by individual developed countries
in the implementation of operative paragraph 3 (b)
(ii) above;
"(c) To report to the Economic and Social Council at its
forty-third session on the implementation of the present
resolution, with particular emphasis on the objectives relating
to the volume and the terms and conditions of the flow of
external resources to developing countries;
"6. Expresses the wish that the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development continue to give special attention,
within the field of its competence, to the problems of
financing economic development in developing countries.",

1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1183 (XLI);
2. Decides to consider at its twenty-second session
the reports to be prepared by the Secretary-General in
response to paragraph 5 of that resolution.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.

2171 (XXI). Conversion to peaceful needs of the
resources released by disarmament

The General Assembly
Takes note with approval of the decision of the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 1154 (XLI)
of 4 August 1966, that reports concerning the economic
and social consequences of disarmament should in future
be submitted to the Council on a biennial basis, unless
developments warrant additional reports.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.
2172 (XXI). Resources of the sea

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the need for a greater knowledge of the
oceans and of the opportunities available for the utilization of their resources, living and mineral,
Realizing that the effective exploitation and development of these resources can raise the economic level
of peoples throughout the world, and in particular of
the developing countries',
Taking into account with appreciation the activities
in the field of resources of the sea at present being
undertaken by the United Nations, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and,
in particular, its Inter-governmental Oceanographic
Commission, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and, in particular, its Committee
on Fisheries, the World Meteorological Organization,
the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science
and Technology to Development, other intergovernmental organizations concerned, various Governments,
universities, scientific and technological institutions and
other interested organizations,
Considering the need to maximize international cooperative efforts for the further development of marine

science and technology and to avoid duplication or
overlapping of efforts in this field,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1112 (XL) of 7 March 1966 requesting the SecretaryGeneral to make a survey of the present state of
knowledge of the resources of the sea beyond the continental shelf, excluding fish, and of the techniques for
exploiting these resources;
2. Requests the Secretary-General-in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and, in particular, its Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and, in particular, its Committee on Fisheries, the
World Meteorological Organization, other intergovernmental organizations concerned, and the Governments
of interested Member States, and utilizing, inter alia,
such voluntary services as may be offered-to undertake, in addition to the survey requested by the Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive survey of
activities in marine science and technology, including
that relating to mineral resources development, undertaken by member's of the United Nations family of
organizations, various Member States and intergovernmental organizations concerned, and by universities,
scientific and technological institutions and other interested organizations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and, in particular, its Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and, in particular, its Committee on Fisheries and in
the light of the above-mentioned comprehensive survey,
to formulate proposals for:
(a) Ensuring the most effective arrangements for an
expanded programme of international co-operation to
assist in a better understanding of the marine environment through science and in the exploitation and development of marine resources, with due regard to the
conservation of fish stocks;
(b) Initiating and strengthening marine education
and training programmes, bearing in mind the close
interrelationship between marine and other sciences;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to set up a small
group of experts to be selected, as far as possible, from
the specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations concerned, to assist him in the preparation of
the comprehensive survey called for in paragraph 2
above and in the formulation of the proposals referred
to in paragraph 3 above;
5. Requests that the survey and proposals prepared
by the Secretary-General be submitted to the Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development for its comments;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit his
survey and proposals, together with the comments of
the Advisory Committee, to the General Assembly at
its twenty-third session, through the Economic and
Social Council.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.

2173 (XXI). Development of natural resources

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1113 (XL) of 7 March 1966 and 1127 (XLI) of

ss

ResolutioDIl adopted on the reportll or the Second Committee

26 July 1966 regarding the development of natural
resources,
Expressing its appreciation of the initiative taken by
the Secretary-General in submitting to the Economic
and Social Council a five-year survey programme for
the development of natural resources, comprising nine
selected natural resources surveys, as outlined in his
report dated 18 January 1966,18
1. Notes with satisfaction the progress made by the
Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development, the group of experts consulted by the Secretary-General and the Economic and
Social Council in the evolution of a long-term survey
programme in the field of natural resources;
2. Endorses the continuing study by the Economic
and Social Council of the means of implementing a fiveyear survey programme for the development of natural resources, intended to strengthen the economic
base and the economic independence of the developing
countries;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to study the technical and financial implications of carrying out surveys
of petroleum and natural gas resources in the developing countries and to submit specific proposals on this
subject to the Economic and Social Council.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.
2177 (XXI). Special session of the Trade and
Development Board
The General Assembly
Invites the Trade and Development Board to hold a
special session to be convened in New York for one
day, on 21 December 1966, in order to review the
calendar of meetings of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development for 1967 which the Board
adopted at its fourth session.P
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.
2178 (XXI). International Symposium on
Industrial Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1940 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1030 C (XXXVII) of 13 August 1964 and
1081 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 on the holding
of international and regional symposia on industrial
development,
Recognizing the importance of the results and recommendations of the regional symposia held at Manila,
Cairo and Santiago and of the Conference on Industrial
Development in the Arab States held in Kuwait,
Noting with approval the recommendations contained
in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1180 (XLI)
of 5 August 1966 and 1185 (XLI) of 15, 16 and 17
November 1966 concerning the preparation and organization of the International Symposium on Industrial
Development,
Considering that the Symposium, as the first worldwide forum on industrialization to be held under United
18 Ibid., Fortieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 7, document
E/4132, chapter V.
1D See Official Records of the Trade and Development Board
FOiIrth Session, 115th meeting.
.

Nations auspices, is likely to play a significant role in
focusing attention on policies and measures aimed at
strengthening international co-operation in the field of
industrial development and accelerating the industrial
development of the developing countries,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to convene the International Symposium on
Industrial Development at Athens in December 1967;

2. Invites the Governments of States Members of
the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies and of the International Atomic Energy
Agency to take an active interest in the preparatory
work for the Symposium and to ensure their effective
participation in it;
3. Calls upon the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to devote all the necessary attention to that preparatory work in order to ensure
the success of the Symposium;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the regional economic commissions, the United Nations Economic and Social
Office in Beirut and the intergovernmental organizations concerned to co-operate actively in the preparatory
work for the Symposium;
5. Expresses the hope that the recommendations of
the Symposium will give an added impetus to international co-operative efforts aimed, in particular, at
achieving the accelerated industrialization of the developing countries;
6. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
study in due course the recommendations of the Symposium and to take appropriate follow-up action.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.
2179 (XXI). Provision of operational personnel
under the Technical Assistance component
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1946 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 authorizing the use of funds from the
Special Account of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance for the provision of operational personnel by all the participating organizations, at the
request of Governments, on an experimental basis for
the years 1964-1966,
Noting the actions taken by the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme at its
second session and by the Economic and Social Council at its forty-first session, in response to the General
Assembly's invitation to review the results of the experimental provision of operational personnel,
Decides to authorize temporarily the continued use
of the funds of the Technical Assistance component of
the United Nations Development Programme for the
provision of operational personnel by all the participating organizations, at the request of Governments,
for the years 1967-1968.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.

General A..embly-T'Wenty.fint Session

2180 (XXI). Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly
Takes note of the reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
first 20 and seconds- sessions.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.
2186 (XXI). Establishment of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1521 (XV) of 15 December
1960, by which it decided in principle to establish a
United Nations capital development fund,
Recalling further its resolutions 1706 (XVI) of
19 December 1961 and 1826 (XVII) of 18 December

1962,
Taking into consideration the recommendation contained in annex A.IV.7 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.P
Recognizing that the developing countries can usefully absorb substantial amounts of capital over and
above those that the existing financial institutions, with
their present resources and institutional set-up, can
provide,
Bearing in mind that the terms on which the developing countries currently obtain financial assistance
tend, in most cases, to offset the advantages derived
therefrom,
Recognizing that external resources should be made
available to the developing countries on terms and conditions which would help to accelerate their economic
and social progress,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on a
United Nations Capital Development Fund on its fifth
session,28
Decides to bring into operation the United Nations
Capital Development Fund (hereinafter referred to as
the Capital Development Fund) as an organ of the
General Assembly which shall function as an autonomous organization within the United Nations in accordance with the provisions set forth below.
ARTICLE I

Purpose
The purpose of the Capital Development Fund shall
be to assist developing countries in the development
of their economies by supplementing existing sources
of capital assistance by means of grants and loans, particularly long-term loans made free of interest or at
low interest rates. Such assistance shall be directed
towards the achievement of the accelerated and selfsustained growth of the economies of those countries
and shall be oriented towards the diversification of their
economies, with due regard to the need for industrial
development as a basis for economic and social progress.
20 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fortyfirst Session, Supplement No. 11 (E/4150).
21 Ibid., Supplement No. llA (E/4219).
22 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.l1), p. 47.
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 38, document A/64l8.

ARTICLE II

Guiding principles
1. The provision of assistance shall be in conformity
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
2. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall not serve as a means for economic and political
interference in the internal affairs of assisted countries
and shall not be influenced by considerations relating
to the nature of their economic and political systems.
3. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be of a kind and in a form consistent with the
wishes of the recipients and shall not involve any
unacceptable conditions for them, whether political,
economic, military or other.

ARTICLE III

General economic provisions
1. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
may be given to the Government of a State Member
of the United Nations or member of a specialized
agency or of the International Atomic Energy Agency
or to a group of Governments of such States or, at the
request of the Government of one of these States, to
an entity having juridical personality within the territory of that State. Assistance provided to Non-SelfGoverning Territories shall be of advantage to the
economy of the recipient territory in accordance with
the provisions of article I above.
2. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be provided in such forms and on such terms as
are compatible with the continued economic development of the assisted countries, taking due account of
their balance-of-payments position and prospects.
3. Assistance from the Capital Development Fund
shall be given in a flexible manner and shall not necessarily be limited to specific projects or groups of
projects and should be given to support general development plans, where such plans exist, or to meet general
development requirements.
4. Every effort shall be made to co-ordinate the
assistance rendered by the Capital Development Fund
with assistance from other sources, so as to achieve the
maximum permanent beneficial effect on the economies
of the developing countries, taking into account the
need to preserve the autonomy and the multilateral
character of the Fund.
ARTICLE IV

Resources
1. The expenditure of the Capital Development
Fund shall be classified in the following categories:
(a) Expenses for administrative activities;
(b) Expenses for operational activities.
2. Expenses for administrative activities shall be
borne by the regular budget of the United Nations,
which shall include a separate budgetary provision for
such expenses. The General Assembly shall fix a ceiling
for such expenses in the light of the voluntary contributions received for operational activities.
3. Expenses for operational activities shall be met
from the voluntary contributions made to the Capital
Development Fund, in cash or in kind, by Governments
of the States Members of the United Nations or mern-

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Second Committee

hers of the specialized agencies or of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. An annual pledging conference,
at which Member States will announce their contributions, will be convened by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, the first such conference to be
convened early in the twenty-second session of the
General Assembly.
4. In determining the size of their contributions
under paragraph 3 above, Member States should take
due account of the following considerations:
(a) The resources of the Capital Development Fund
should be large enough to make a significant contribution to the achievement of the accelerated and selfsustained economic growth of the developing countries;
(b) Contributions to the Capital Development Fund
should ensure the provision of assistance on a long-term
and continuing basis. In this connexion, it is desirable
that contributions should be pledged or indicated as far
as possible for a number of years;
(c) While the resources of the Capital Development
Fund should be derived from contributions by all States
Members of the United Nations or members of the
specialized agencies or of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the bulk of the contributions should
come from the economically more developed countries
in a readily and economically usable form.
5. The Secretary-General may invite voluntary contributions from sources other than Governments. The
Capital Development Fund may accept such contributions subject to the provision contained in paragraph
6 (d) of the present article and on terms and conditions
to be approved by the Executive Board.
6. (a) Contributions shall be made predominantly
in cash. They may be made either in currencies that
are readily and economically usable by the Capital Development Fund or in national currencies. In the latter
case. the contributing States shall extend all possible
facilities for the maximum use of such contributions
towards meeting the needs of the recipient countries;
(b) In consultation with the Managing Director,
contributions may also be made in kind, that is, in the
form of equipment, machinery and other materials which
will be readily usable for the purposes of the Capital
Development Fund, aiming primarily at industrial development. Such contributions shall not be of such a
nature as to affect adversely the economies of the primary commodity producing countries;
(c) The Managing Director shall, consistent with
the criteria set forth respecting the nature and the utilization of contributions, endeavour to make the fullest
possible use of available currencies and of contributions
in kind;
(d) Contributions shall be made without limitation
to a specific recipient country or for a specific project;
(e) To the end that the multilateral character of the
Capital Development Fund shall be strictly respected,
no contributing State shall receive special treatment
with respect to its contribution nor shall negotiations
for the use of contributions take place between contributing and receiving countries.
ARTICLE V

Forms of assistance: operations
1. The Capital Development Fund shall extend both
grants and loans.

35

2. Loans extended by the Capital Development Fund
shall have long periods of amortization, low rates of
interest, or be free of interest and generally be extended
on terms comparing favourably with those of loans extended by other international lending institutions.
3. Assistance shall be extended after the conclusion
of an agreement between the Capital Development Fund
and the recipient Government. In the case of loans, the
agreement shall specify the date of maturity, rate of
interest and currency of repayment of the loan, taking
into consideration the recipient State's economic position, as shown, for example, by its balance of payments.
4. The Capital Development Fund may, when and
to the extent it deems appropriate in the light of all the
circumstances, including the financial and economic
situation and prospects of the recipient State, agree, subject to such conditions as it may determine, to a relaxation or other modification of the terms on which any
loan shall have been provided.
ARTICLE VI

Formulation, submission and consideration of requests
for assistance
1. In requesting assistance from the Capital Development Fund, Governments shall present precise statements concerning the use they intend to make of such
assistance, and appropriate data relating to the technical
nature and economic appraisal of projects or plans of
general economic development for which assistance is
requested.
2. Governments requesting assistance from the Capital Development Fund shall inform the Fund of their
current or intended efforts either with regard to the
specific projects to be assisted by the Capital Development Fund or with regard to related projects or other
economic programmes.
3. Each Government, in requesting assistance from
the Capital Development Fund, shall designate an appropriate authority with which the Capital Development
Fund may communicate with regard to questions which
might arise from the request,
4. In considering requests for assistance, the Capital
Development Fund shall:
(a) Be guided by considerations such as the economic merits of the development plan or project envisaged and its potential contribution to the country's
over-all economic development;
(b) Give importance to the desirability of maintaining a reasonable geographical balance in allocations;
(c) Utilize as much as possible the experience and
services of the United Nations, including the regional
economic commissions, the United Nations Economic
and Social Office in Beirut, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the United Nations Development Programme, and the specialized
agencies, and also those of the regional development
banks.

VII
General responsibilities of recipient Governments
ARTICLE

1. Recipient Governments should ensure the effective
utilization of the assistance furnished by the Capital
Development Fund.
2. Recipient Governments shall maintain the records
required by the Capital Development Fund in connexion
with the administration of its assistance and shall report

General Aseemb ly-Twe nty.firs t Session

36

fully on the utilization of the assistance granted by the
Capital Development Fund either directly to Governments or to any entity having juridical personality.
ARTICL E VIII

Organization and management
1. The immediate intergovernmental control of the
policies and operations of the Capital Development
Fund shall be exercised by an Executive Board. It shall
have final authori ty for the approval of grants and loans
submitted to it by the Managing Director. It shall adopt
its own rules of procedure.
2. The Executive Board shall review all the activities
of the Capital Development Fund and shall report annually to the General Assembly throug h the Economic
and Social Council. The Council may transm it to the
Capital Development Fund and to the General Assembly such comments on the report as it may deem necessary.
3. The General Assembly will review the progress
and the general policies of the Capital Development
Fund as a separate item of its agenda and make any
appropriate recommendations.
4. The Executive Board shall consist of the representatives of twenty-four States Members of the United
Nations or members of the specialized agencies or of
the International Atomic Energy Agency.
5. The members of the Executive Board shall be
elected by the General Assembly. The first election shall
take place at the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly.
6. There shall be equitable representation on the
Executive Board of economically more developed countries, on the one hand, having due regard to their
contributions to the Capital Development Fund, and of
developing countries, on the other hand, taking into
account the need for equitable geographical distribution
among the latter members.
7. The members of the Executive Board shall be
elected for a term of three years, provided, however,
that, of the members elected at the first election the
terms of one third of the members shall expire at the
end of one year and the terms of a further one third of
the members at the end of two years. Retirin g members
shall be eligible for re-election.
8. The Executive Board shall meet at least once a
year and as often as may be necessary for the conduct
of the Fund's work.
9. The Managing Director of the Capital Development Fund shall participate withou t vote in the deliberations of the Executive Board.
ARTICL E IX

Managing Director and staff
1. The chief executive officer of the Capital Development Fund shall be the Managing Director who shall
exercise his functions under the general direction of
t~e E:c:ecu!ive Board. Subjec t to such general and specific dlreCtlyes as. may be grven by the Executive Board,
the Managing Director shall have the over-all responsibility for the operations of the Capital Development
Fund. He shall submit to the Executive Board together with his recommendations, requests for g;ants
and for loans by Governments. He shall report to the
Executive Board on the operations of the Capital De-

velopment Fund, including the status of contributions
and other financial matters.
2. The Managing Director shall be appointed by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. The appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the General
Assembly.
3. The Managing Directo r shall be appointed for a
term of four years, the first term to begin on 1 Januar y

1968.

4. The Managing Director shall be assisted by the
requisite number of staff members. He may also, as
required, engage expert consultants. The selection of
the officials and consultants shall be made in accordance
with Article 101 of the Charte r of the United Nations.
5. The Managing Director shall, to the maximum
extent possible, make effective use of the existing facilities of the United Nations, including those of the regional economic commissions, the United Nations Economic and Social Office in Beirut, the United Nations
Industr ial Development Organization, the United
Nations Development Programme, the regional development banks, the specialized agencies and the Interna tional Atomic Energy Agency.
ARTICL E X

Co-operation and co-ordination with other organs of the
United Nation s and other organizations
1. Withou t prejudice to the independence of its activities, and in accordance with this statute, the Capital
Development Fund shall establish and maintain close
and continuing working relationships with the competent organs and agencies within the United Nations
system.
2. In its relations with such organs and agencies the
Capital Development Fund shall act in conformity with
the responsibilities of the Economic and Social Council
under the Charte r of the United Nations, particularly
those of co-ordination, and with the relationship agreements with the agencies concerned.
3. There shall be a close and continuous working
relationship between the Capital Development Fund and
the regional economic commissions, the United Nations Industr ial Development Organization, the United
Nations Development Progra mme, the specialized agencies concerned with those fields of activity in which the
Capital Development Fund will operate and the International Atomic Energy Agency and also with the
regional development banks.
4. Appropriate methods shall be devised to achieve
the purpose set forth in paragra ph 2 of this article.
Provision shall be made for the participation in the
meetings of the Executive Board of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Industr ial Development Organi zation, the Admin istrator of the United Nations Development Progra mme or their representatives, and of
rep:esentatives. of the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the regional developmen! banks,. a~d, when appropriate, the regional economic commissions.
ARTICL E XI

Fitnancial administration
The financial regulations for the Capital Development
FU1!-d shall .be d~afted by th~ Secretary-General of the
United Nations, m consultation with the Managing Di-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeoad Committee

rector, for approval by the General Assembly on the
recommendation of the Executive Board. In the preparation of these regulations, account shall be taken of
the special requirements of the Capital Development
Fund's operations.
ARTICLE XII
Future instituticnal arrangements
The General Assembly shall review, in the light of
experience, the effectiveness and further evolution of
these institutional arrangements with a view to deciding
upon such changes and improvements as might be necessary in order to meet fully the growing needs for development finance.
1492nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1966.
2187 (XXI). United Nations Institute for Training
and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1827 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1934 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and
2044 (XX) of 8 December 1965, and Economic and
Social Council resolutions 985 (XXXVI) of 2 August
1963, 1037 (XXXVII) of 15 August 1964, 1072
(XXXIX) of 26 July 1965 and 1138 (XLI) of 29
July 1966, relating to the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research,
Taking note of the Statute of the Institute, promulgated by the Secretary-General."
Recognizing the importance of the role that the Institute can play in assisting the members of the United
Nations family of organizations through its various
programmes and activities, in particular those related
to the needs of developing countries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to the General Assembly i'"
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1138 (XLI);
3. Welcomes the progress made by the Institute in
its various programmes and activities;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
private institutions and individuals that have already
made or pledged financial contributions to the Institute.
1492nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1966.
2188 (XXI). General review of the programmes
and activities in the economic, social, teehnlcal co-operation and related fields of the
United Nations, the specialized agencies, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations ChUdren's Fund and all other
institutions and agencies related to the
United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the vital importance of the work of
the United Nations family of organizations in the field
of economic and social development,
141bid., agenda item 48, document A/6500. annex

»tu«, document A/6500.

r.

37

Conscious of its responsibilities under Chapter IX of
the Charter of the United Nations, and in particular
under Articles 58 and 60 thereof,
Reaffirming the central role assigned to the Economic
and Social Council in the economic, social and human
rights fields under Chapter X of the Charter,
Noting the agreements concluded between the United
Nations and the specialized agencies, under Articles 57
and 63 of the Charter, and the International Atomic
Energy Agency,
Bearing in mind the fact that the resources being made
available to carry out the work of the United Nations
family of organizations in the field of economic and
social development are limited, especially in relation to
the growing needs of the developing countries,
Considering that this work, which has expanded
rapidly, grown more complex and changed its nature,
has evolved over a period of more than twenty years
on the basis of unrelated proposals rather than in accordance with a co-ordinated plan,
Considering further that this situation, among other
factors, has impaired not only the ability of the Economic and Social Council to co-ordinate the work of
the United Nations family of organizations in these
fields but also the ability of Member States to benefit
from that work,
Welcoming the enlargement of the Economic and
Social Council and the steps recently taken to enable
it to perform more purposefully its co-ordinating role
through its resolutions 1147 (XLI), 1151 (XLI) and
1154 (XLI) of 4 August 1966, and 1156 (XLI), 1171
(XLI), 1172 (XLI), 1173 (XLI), 1174 (XLI), 1175
(XLI), 1176 (XLI), 1177 )XLI) and 1181 (XLI) of
5 August 1966,
Welcoming further' the steps at present envisaged,
under General Assembly resolution 2150 (XXI) of 4
November 1966, to implement the recommendations of
the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the
Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies,
Recognizing nevertheless that, in order to avoid the
duplication of programmes in the future and in order
to derive the maximum benefit at reasonable cost from
the operational and research activities of the United
Nations family of organizations in the field of economic
and social development, a full review of those activities,
without prejudice to the continuing work of the Economic and Social Council, is urgently required by Member States,
Recalling its resolution 2098 (XX) of 20 December
1965,
Convinced that such a review would bring about a
better organization of the international effort to attain
the objectives of the United Nations Development
Decade,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
resumed forty-first session, for the purpose of undertaking t.he tasks enumerated in paragraph 2 below, to
enlarge its Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
by five ~dditional Member States, to be designated by
the President of the General Assembly for a period not
exceeding three years and with due regard to equitable
geographical distribution; the enlarged Committee shall
be responsibl~ to the Assembly and, under its authority,
to the Council :
2. Requests the enlarged Committee to undertake,
as a matter of priority and in the light of the continuing

38

General Assemb ly-Twe nty-firs t Session

are not financed by the United Nations Development
work of other United Nations bodies in the field of
Progra mme;
co-ordination, planning and evaluation, a review which
6. Author ises the enlarged Committee, in the light
:
provide
would
the information presented, to take whatever further
of
(a) A clear and comprehensive picture of the existsteps it deems necessary to enable it to fulfil its task;
ing operational and research activities of the United
7. Reques ts the enlarged Committee to submit to
Nation s family of organizations in the field of ecoent
General Assembly at its twenty-second session,
assessm
an
the
and
nomic and social development
through the Economic and Social Council at its fortythereof;
third session, a preliminary report on the task entrust ed
(b) On the basis of the data specified in sub-parato it under paragra ph 2 (a) above;
graph (a) above, recommendations on modificat.ions in
8. Invites the Governments of Member States, the
existing activities, procedures and administrative arin
le
ry-General of the United Nations, the executive
desirab
Secreta
and
ry
rangements which might be necessa
heads of the specialized agencies and the International
order to ensure:
Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Develop(i) The maximum concentration of resources, at
ment Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund,
present and increasing levels, on programmes
World Food Progra mme and all other autonomous
the
of direct relevance to Member States;
organizations and research institutions within the
(ii) A flexible, prompt and effective response to the
United Nations family to extend to the enlarged
specific needs of individual countries and reCommittee their full co-operation and assistance.
gions, as determined by them, within the
1492nd plenary meeting,
limits of available resources;
13 December 1966.
(iii) The minimum burden on the administrative
resources of Member States and of members
of the United Nations family of organizations;
The Presiden t of the General Assembl y, in pursuance of
h 1 of the above resolution, designated the following
longof
paragrap
system
ted
integra
an
of
n
evolutio
(iv) The
member s of the Committee for Program me and
as
States
basis;
term planning on a programme
CZECHOS LOVAKIA , JORDAN, MALTA, TRINIDA D
ation:
Co-ordin
(v) The institution of systematic procedures for
UNITED ARAB REPUBLI C. 2 6
and
TOBAGO
AND
evaluating the effectiveness of operational and
As a result of that designation, the Committee will be com.research activities;
posed of the following Member States: ALGERIA , BRAZIL, CAMGHANA.
EROON, CANADA , CZECHOS LOVAKIA , ECUADOR , FRANCE,
3. Requests the additional members of the enlarged
to
MALTA, PAKISTA N, PHILIPPI NES, ROMANI A,
tion,
JORDAN,
designa
their
INDIA,
of
month
one
within
Committee,
T REPUBLI CS,
TRINIDA D AND TOBAGO, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIS
appoint such experts as they may deem best qualified,
GREAT BRITAIN
OF
KINGDOM
UNITED
C,
REpUBLI
ARAB
UNITED
on the basis of their familiarity with the work of the
OF TANZAN IA,
AND NORTHE RN IRELAND , UNITED REPUBLI C
United Nations system in the field of development, to
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and VENEZUE LA.
undertake the work entrust ed to the enlarged Committee;
(XXI) . World campa ign for univer 8al
2192
4. Reques ts the Secretary-General to utilize, as apliterac y
propriate, voluntary services that may be offered to
The General Assemb ly,
assist in the work of the enlarged Committee;
Recalling its resolution 2043 (XX) of 8 December
5. Furthe r requests the Secretary-General, in confams
Nation
United
the
of
rs
membe
1%5, Economic and Social Council resolution 1128
sultation with all
(XLI) of 26 July 1966 and resolutions 1.441 and
ily of organizations, to present to the enlarged Com1.442 adopted on 29 November 1966 by the General
mittee:
con,
ntation
docume
le
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scienavailab
the
on
(a) A report
onal
operati
tific and Cultural Organization at its fourteenth session,
taining basic information on the existing
aorganiz
the
of
s
project
and
mes
Noting that literacy has a direct bearing on economic
and research program
and social progress,
tions in the field of economic and social development at
the country, regional and headquarters level;
Noting with satisfaction the progress which has been
funds
achieved in the campaign against illiteracy,
(b) A report on the nature and amount of the
1967,
in
,
possible
as
far
as
and,
Welcoming the priority accorded already by many
available in 1965, 1966
developing countries in their development programmes
to the United Nations family of organizations conto the eradication of mass illiteracy,
cerned with economic and social development;
ok
Welcoming further the initiative taken by Ecuador,
(c) An outline for the prepara tion of a handbo
ing
Mali, Morocco and Tunisia, which have donated
request
for
Iran,
res
procedu
all
of
containing an account
family
s
sums deducted from their defence budgets to the fund
assistance from members of the United Nation
criteria
hed by the United Nations Educational, Scienal
establis
technic
and
l
financia
the
of organizations and
tific and Cultural Organization for the world campaign
according to which such assistance is provide d;
for universal literacy,
(d) A complete inventory of regional, sub-regional,
Noting with concern that the total of illiterates, exthe
all
of
area, field and/or country representation
pressed as an absolute figure, is increasing, thus enmembers of the United Nations family of organizations;
dangering the economic and social progress of many
(e) A report on the steps taken or contemplated by
developing countries,
all members of the United Nations family of organizaConsidering that, while the fight against mass illitions to keep the Governing Council of the United N ais primarily the responsibility of each country,
teracy
tions Development Progra mme and the Resident Repres, 1498th
26 Ibid., Twenty- first Session, Plenary Meeting
sentatives fully informed about the-technical assistance
which
them
meeting.
by
ken
underta
projects and programmes

•

• •

Rellolutionll adopted on the reportll of the Second Committee

the magnitude of the problem makes it far beyond the
means at present available to most of the countries
concerned and requires the mobilization of considerable
human, financial and technical resources, and concerted
international action,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1128 (XLI) on the world campaign for universal literacy, adopted unanimously on 26 July 1966;
2. Invites, in the name of human solidarity, Member
States, international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, foundations, institutions and private enterprises to provide continuing and effective financial,
material and technical support for the world campaign
for universal literacy;
3. Expresses the hope that additional resources will
be made available to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the world
campaign for universal literacy in the manner which
each State may deem appropriate;
4. Makes an urgent appeal to the conscience of the
world to support world-wide efforts to eliminate mass
illiteracy by providing the necessary and indispensable
means to this end.
1494th plenary meeting,
15 December 1966.
2206 (XXI). Second session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Considering that the second session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development will
provide a forum for the further examination of major
issues of trade and development, including the consideration of further action for the implementation of
the recommendations adopted at the first session of
the Conference,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference, at its
second session, to concentrate in particular on a limited
number of fundamental and specific subjects with a
view to achieving practical and concrete results by
means of negotiation aimed at securing the greatest
measure of agreement,
Stressing the need for adequate preparatory work to
ensure the success of the second session of the Conference,
Expressing the hope that the preparation for the
second session of the Conference will result in new and
determined efforts on the part of all States members of
the Conference to achieve substantial progress both in
the implementation and in the further elaboration of
international policy on development,
Noting with interest the recommendation of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its third session,
held at Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966, that
a meeting of the developing countries should be held
at the ministerial level to prepare for their participation
in the second session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development,
1. Decides to convene the second session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at New Delhi from 1 February to 25 March 1968;
2. Calls upon the Trade and Development Board and
its subsidiary bodies to take into account the objectives
outlined in the first three paragraphs of the preamble
of the present resolution in their preparations for the

39

second session of the Conference, and to attempt to
identify the issues on which preparatory work will have
progressed sufficiently to enable specific programmes
of action to be drawn up at the second session of the
Conference by means of negotiation aimed at securing
the greatest possible measure of agreement;
3. Urges the Governments of the States members
of the Conference to ensure effective participation in
the second session of the Conference and to make the
maximum efforts, both in their preparations for the
second session and during the deliberations of the
Conference, to ensure its success, bearing in mind the
objectives referred to above;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic and Social
Office in Beirut to pay special attention, in their programmes, to preparations for the second session of the
Conference, and to take such steps as may be feasible
to extend their full co-operation in ensuring its success;
5. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference
to begin forthwith the preparatory work for the second
session in the light of the guidance given by the Trade
and Development Board and its subsidiary bodies,
which will meet in the interim, in co-operation wherever
possible with the regional economic commissions, the
United Nations Economic and Social Office in Beirut
and the appropriate international organizations.
1497tl1 plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2207 (XXI). Technical assistance in trade and
related fields

The General Assembly,
Having considered Trade and Development Board
resolution 31 (IV) of 23 September 1966 on technical
assistance in tr.ade and related fields,
Taking note of the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development on this subject at the fourth session
of the Board.s"
1. Endorses the recommendations contained in Trade
and Development Board resolution 31 (IV);
2. Decides to amend paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 2029 (XX) of 22 November 1965
so as to include the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development as a
member of the Inter-Agency Consultative Board of the
United Nations Development Programme.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2208 (XXI). International monetary reform

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report entitled International
Monetary Issues and the Developing Countries,28 prepared by the Expert Group on International Monetary
Issues of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, and of the comments made thereon by
the members of the Conference, including the memo27 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/6315/
Rev.!), part two, para. 177.
28 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 66.H.D.Z.

General AlIIembly-Twenty-fint Seelion

randum on international liquidity2D presented by the
developing countries to the Committee on Invisibles
and Financing related to Trade at its special session in
January and February 1966,
Bearing in mind the annual report of the International Monetary Fund for 1966,30
Recognizing the need for a reform of the international
monetary system that would make it more responsive
to the requirements of the economic growth of both
developed and developing countries,
Noting the initiatives taken in promoting the informal
meetings now being held between the executive directors of the International Monetary Fund and the
deputies of the Governments participating in the General Arrangements to Borrow,
1. Endorses the need for those developed and developing countries which so desire to be fully represented in the discussions and decisions leading to any
new international monetary reform arrangements, including those relating to the problems of international
liquidity, and to participate fully in the operation of
such arrangements as may be made;
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
consult with the Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund on the progress of activity relating to
international monetary reform and to report to the
Trade and Development Board at its fifth session
through the Committee on Invisibles and Financing
related to Trade.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2209 (XXI). Implementation of the recommendations made by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its first session

The General A ssem-bly,
Recalling its resolution 2085 (XX) of 20 December
1965 regarding the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development,
H tWing considered the annual report of the Trade and
Development Board for the period from 31 October
1965 to 24 September 1966,31
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1188
(XLI) of 17 November 1966 on the report of the
Board,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
of the Conference entitled "Review of International
Trade and Development 1966"32 and the discussions
thereon at the fourth session of the Board,
Expressing serious concern at the lack of progress
in solving, in the light of the Final Act adopted by the
Conference at its first session.s" the substantive problems of international trade and development with which
the Conference was faced,
29 See Official Records of the Trade and Development Board,
Third Session, Supplement No. 14 (TD/B/57), annex I.
80 International Monetary Fund, Annual Report of the Executive Directors for the Fiscal Year ended April 30, 1966
(Washington, n.c.). Transmitted by a note of the SecretaryGeneral {E/4282).
810fficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/6315/Rev.l).
82 Official Records of the Trade and Develapment Board,
Fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, documents TD/B/82
and Add.1-4.
83 See Proceedings af the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, vo!. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.H.B.H).

Emphasizing that, while the developing countries
themselves are primarily responsible for their own economic development, the international environment in
which the effort to develop their economies is made and,
particularly, the policies of the developed countries
relating to. trade and development are of crucial importance to their economic growth,
Recognizing that the advancement of international
co-operation for development and the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference, in the light
of the Final Act, call for greater political will on the
part of the States members of the Conference to take
action, jointly or separately, as may be feasible,
Noting a growing awareness in the world of the
problems of the economic development of the developing countries and of the need to take urgent measures
to solve them,
1. Takes note of the annual report of the Trade and
Development Board for the period from 31 October
1965 to 24 September 1966;
2. Reiterates its call to the Governments of the
States members of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development to continue to examine their
policies and to take action, jointly or separately, as
may be feasible, in the light of the Final Act of the
Conference, with a view to implementing the recommendations of the Conference in the various fields of
their national and international programmes;
3. Urges the Governments of the developed and
developing States members of the Conference, each in
their particular spheres of responsibility, to do their
utmost to achieve the greatest possible progress in the
implementation of the recommendations of the Conference at its first session, in the light of the Final Act,
relating to matters in which progress can be expected
before the second session of the Conference, such as :
(a) The conclusion of international commodity arrangements, particularly on cocoa, and the removal of
obstacles and expansion of trade ;34
(b) The adoption of tariff and non-tariff policies in
respect of manufactures and semi-manufactures from
developing countries." including the possibility of special tariff treatment for them ;86
(c) Measures for the expansion, diversification and
promotion of the exports of developing countries;
(d) Expansion of trade among the developing
countries;
( e) Measures to inorease the flow of financial resources to developing countries and to improve the
terms and conditions thereof, including a possible
scheme of supplementary financing;
(t) Further mobilization by the developing countries
of their domestic resources for development purposes;
(g) Consideration of problems of trade between
countries having different economic and social systems,
including problems of "East-West" trade, attention
being paid, in particular, to the trade interests of
developing countries;
(h) Steps to be taken to achieve complete agreement on principles governing international trade relations and trade policies conducive to development.F
1497th plenary meeting,
17 Decem-ber 1966.

ius;

34
annex A.H.1, p. 26.
35 Ibid., annex A.III.4, p. 37.
86 Ibid.; annex A.III.5, p. 39.
3T

tu«, annexes A.Ll, A.L2 and A.L3, pp. 18, 25 and 26.

Resolutiollll adopted OD the reports of the Second Committee

2210 (XXI). International agreement on cocoa
The General Assembly,
Recalling annex A.H.1 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development." in
which the objectives, principles and scope of commodity
arrangements are set out,
Recalling further its resolution 2085 (XX) of 20 !?ecember 1965, and particularly paragraph 7 thereof, 10viting the Trade and Development Board to accord
particular attention in the execution of its work programme to the problems of trade in. primary commodities which require most urgent action,
Recognizing that commodity arrangements serve.to
secure over-all stabilization in primary commodity
markets,
Stressing the special role which these arrangements
play in stimulating the economic development of the
developing countries,
Noting that negotiations for an international price
stabilization scheme for cocoa have been in progress
for the past ten years, culminating in the pnited
Nations Cocoa Conference held under the auspices of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development from 23 May to 23 June 1966,
Having studied the report of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on the results of the Cocoa Conference'" and
the statement he made in the Second Committee on
9 December 196640 on the results of the multilateral
consultations on cocoa which took place in New York
from 29 November to 7 December 1966,
Noting the joint declaration submitted by the developing countries members of the Trade and Development
Board at its fourth session,"
Convmced that the conclusion of an international
agreement on cocoa will clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development in finding practical solutions to the
problems of trade and development of the developing
countries,
Conscious of the desire of the international community to see a fair and equitable solution of the problems prevailing in the international cocoa market,
Recognizing that the present stage of negotiations
calls for a greater demonstration of political will by
all concerned,
1. Expresses deep disappointment at the failure of
the 1966 United Nations Cocoa Conference to conclude
a cocoa agreement;
2. Deplores the breakdown of the multilateral consultations on cocoa held in New York from 29 November to 7 December 1966;
3. Affirms the need for reaching an international
cocoa agreement at an early date and in any case not
later than the beginning of the 1967-1968 cocoa season;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
approach the Governments concerned with a view to
88 Ibid; annex A.ILl, p. 26.
89 Official Records ut the

Trade and Development Board,
Fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 9, document TD/B/8l.
40 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 37, document A/6567/Add.l,
annex.
41 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/6315/
Rev.l) , part two, annex B.

41

resuming the multilateral consultations on cocoa at an
early date;
5. Calls upon all concerned in the consultations,
particularly the major consumer countries, to do their
utmost to arrive at an agreement on all outstanding
matters;
6. Urges Governments to ensure that representatives
to these consultations have sufficient political mandate
to facilitate agreement on the various matters at issue;
7. Urges further that these consultations should be
completed as soon, as possible so that there may be
an early resumption of the Cocoa Conference WIth a
view to concluding an agreement which will answer
the needs of the developing countries.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.

2211 (XXI). Population growth and economic
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1838 (XVII) of 18 December
1962 on population growth and economic development
and Economic and Social Council resolutions 933 C
(XXXV) of 5 April 1963 on the intensification of
demographic studies, research and training, 1048
(XXXVII) of 15 August 1964 on population growth
and economic and social development and 1084
(XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 on work programmes and
priorities in the field of population,
RecaUing World Health Assembly resolutions WHA
18.49 of 21 May 1965 and WHA 19.43 of 20 May
1966 on the health aspects of world population,
Taking note of resolution 3.252 adopted on 29 November 1966 by the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its fourteenth session, and of paragraphs 842844 of the programme for 1967-1968 of that organizatiorr'" on the subject of education and information
related to population growth,
Recalling the inquiry conducted by the SecretaryGeneral among Governments on problems resulting
from the interaction of economic growth and population
change, and his report thereon,4S which reflected a wide
variety of population problems,
Commending the Economic and Social Council and
the Secretary-General for convening the World Population Conference, held at Belgrade from 30 August to
10 September 1965, in which a large number of specialists in demography and related fields from developing countries were able to participate,
Taking note of the summary of the highlights of the
World Population Conference.r'
Noting the steps taken by the organizations of the
United Nations system concerned with these questions
to co-ordinate their work in the field of population,
Concerned at the growing food shortage in the developing countries, which is due in many cases to a
decline in the production of food-stuffs relative to
population growth,
42 See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, Draft Programme and Budget for 1967-1968
(Paris, 1966).
48 Official Records of the Economic and Social COWfcil.
Thirty-seventh Session. Annexes. agenda item 21, document
E/389S/Rev.l; E/3895/Rev.l/Add.I-3.
44 World Population: Challenge to Development (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 66.XIII.4).

General Assemb ly-Twe nty.firs t Session

2212 (XXI) . Headq uarters of the United Nation s
Recognizing the need for further study of the imIndust eial Develo pment Organ ization
plications of the growth , structu re and geographical
distribu tion of population for economic and social deThe General Assemb ly
velopment, including nationa l health, nutritio n, educato locate the headqu arters of the United
Decides
tion and social welfare program mes carried out at all
ial Development Organi zation at
Industr
s
Nation
levels of govern ment activity,
Vienna.
1497th plenary meeting,
Believing that demographic problems require the
17 December 1966.
conside ration of economic, social, cultura l, psychological
tive,
perspec
proper
their
in
and health factors
2218 (XXI) . United Nation s Develo pment Decad e
Recognizing the sovereignty of nations in formulating
due
with
,.
policies
ion
populat
and promot ing their own
A
regard to' the principle that the size of the family should
The General Assembly,
be the free choice of each individual family,
the
,
Reaffirming the solemn underta king embodied in the
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council
coI?ic
r of the United Nation s to promot e economic
e~onom
l
Charte
regiona
Popula tion Commission, the
and social progres s and better standar ds of life in larger
missions the United Nation s Economic and Social
ed
concern
s
agencie
zed
freedom,
Office id Beirut and the speciali
tion
Popula
World
1965
the
of
ings
proceed
the
study
Recalling the high hopes raised by the proclamation,
to
Conference when pursuin g their activities in the field
at its sixteen th session, of the United Nation s Development Decade, the first world-wide effort to give
of popula tion;
e form to that solemn underta king,
World
concret
the
of
decision
the
2. Notes with satisfaction
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
Health Organi zation to include in its program me of
rehuman
of
1152 (XLI) of 4 August 1966, in which the Council,
activities the study of the health aspects
upon
s,
service
y
advisor
that progres s during the United Nation s Deveof
on
noting
provisi
the
and
production
Health
World
lopment Decade had been disappointingly slow, recomrequest, within its responsibilities under
of
decision
the
and
19.43,
mended a survey of the prepara tions require d in order
WHA
ion
resolut
Assembly
Culand
ic
to further and facilitate planning for concerted interna the United Nation s Educat ional, Scientif
ce
assistan
provide
and
te
stimula
tional action for the period following the Decade, having
to
zation
tural Organi
bes
relation
regard to the experience gained,
toward s scientific studies concerning the
tion;
popula
and
on
educati
of
ment
Considering that further development efforts will protween the develop
satisfactory results only if, withou t delay, the necduce
3. Requests the Secreta ry-Gen eral:
essary action, both national and international, is sys(a) To pursue, within the limits of available retematically prepare d and oriente d toward s longer- term
sources, the implementation of the work program me
and increased efforts by Membe r States in the field of
covering training , research, information and advisor y
economic and social development and in particu lar
services in the field of population in the light of the
development assistance,
recommendations of the Popula tion Commission conNoting that the United Nation s family of organiz aentained in the report on its thirteen th session ." as
tions has already made encoura ging progres s in prodorsed by the Economic and Social Council in its resomulgat ing various principles, directives and guidelines
set
lution 1084 (XXX IX), and of the considerations
for action in the field of development,
forth in the preamb le of the present resolut ion;
Bearing in mind the fact that at its second session the
(b) To continu e his consult ations with the specialUnited Nation s Conference on Trade and Development
ized agencies concerned, in order to ensure that the
will have to consider taking steps to achieve a great
activities of the United Nation s system of organizations
measur e of agreem ent on principles governing interna in the field of population are effectively co-ordi nated;
tional trade relations and trade policies conducive to
development,
its
(c) To present to the Popula tion Commission at
Bearing in mind also its resolution 1942 (XVII I)
Social
and
ic
Econom
in
ed
fourtee nth session, as envisag
of 11 December 1963 concerning the necessity of draftCouncil resolution 1084 (XXX IX), proposals with
ing a declaration on international economic co-operation,
two
of
periods
over
regard to the prioriti es of work
Recognizing that the formulation of a consolidated
and five years, within the framew ork of the long-ra nge
tion;
stateme nt of the rights and duties of peoples and nations
program me of work in the field of popula
might sustain and enhance international development
4. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council, the
efforts and co-operation and could help to enlist wider
Popula tion Commission, the regional economic compublic suppor t for the strengt hening of development
missions, the United Nation s Economic and Social
policies,
Office in Beirut and the specialized agencies concerned
Considering that the possibility and advisability of
and
ing
develop
to assist, when requested, in further
proclaiming a charter of development underlying interstrengt hening nationa l and regional facilities for trainnationa l co-operation in the interest of economic, social
the
in
s
service
ing, research, information and advisory
and cultura l development deserve further consideration,
field of population, bearing in mind the differen t characregion
and
1. Reques ts the Secretary-General, in consult ation
ter of population problems in each country
rn.
therefro
arising
with the executive heads of the specialized agencies and
and the needs
the Interna tional Atomic Energy Agency, the Secreta ry1497th plenary meeting,
General of the United Nation s Conference on Trade
17 December 1966.
and Development, the Execut ive Directo r of the United
Nation s Industr ial Development Organi zation, the
Council,
45 Official Records of the Economic and Social
l economic commissions, the United Nation s
regiona
).
(£/4019
9
No.
inth Session, Supplement
Thirty-n

Resolutions adopted on the reportIJ of the Second Committee

Economic and Social Office in Beirut and the executive
heads of the intergovernmental organizations related
to the United Nations, as appropriate, to prepare a
concise and systematic survey of the various principles,
directives and guidelines for action in the field of development, as contained in the resolutions, declarations
and similar texts of the United Nations and related
agencies and in other relevant sources;
2. Emphasizes that the preparation of this survey
in no way prejudices the call addressed by it, in its
resolution 2085 (XX) of 20 December 1965, to the
Governments of States members of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to make the
maximum efforts through the Conference, which attached great importance to principles governing international trade relations and trade policies conducive to
development.t" with a view to reaching, at the earliest
possible moment, the broadest possible measure of
agreement on principles and policies;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General, taking
into account the discussions on the subject at the
twenty-first session, to submit to the General Assembly
at its twenty-second session, through the Economic
and Social Council, a progress report on the preparatory
work undertaken by him in accordance with paragraph
1 above.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

United Nations Development Decade has been the
absence of a framework of international development
strategy,
Considering that it is necessary to look ahead to
the next decade so that concerted international action
will be taken for the accelerated social and economic
development of the developing countries in the light of
the experience gained during the present decade,
Recognizing the need for the further mobilization by
the developing countries of their domestic resources
for development purposes,
Recognizing the need to delineate guidelines and
general objectives for the next decade and to define in
more precise quantitative terms the goals and targets
for the development of human and natural resources,
Recognizing further that greater substance can be
given to these goals and targets by defining the requirements that have to be met for their realization,
with due regard to the principle that the choice of
appropriate policies is a matter for decision by national
Governments,
Recognizing also that the formulation of specific and
realistic goals and targets can provide a world perspective within which individual countries can plan their
development and enable appropriate international action
to be taken in support of the efforts made at the national
and regional levels,
Bearing in mind the important role that international
trade should play in furthering the economic development of the developing countries during the next decade,
1. Takes note of the interim report prepared by the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Development
Decade ;47
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1152 (XLI);
3. Calls upon all concerned to make the utmost effort
possible towards the realization of the modest targets
of the present United-Nations Development Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in responding to
Economic and Social Council resolution 1152 (XLI),
to elaborate and submit to the General Assembly at
its twenty-third session, through the Council at its
forty-third and forty-fifth sessions, a preliminary
framework of international development strategy for the
1970's within which initial efforts could be concentrated
on the elaboration of specific goals and targets for
individual sectors and components.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1710 (XVI) of 19 December 1961 and 2084 (XX) of 20 December 1965, and
Economic and Social Council resolutions 1089
(XXXIX) of 20 July 1965 and 1152 (XLI) of 4
August 1966 on the United Nations Development
Decade,
Recognizing the positive influence of the United
Nations Development Decade as an organizing principle not only for the developmental activities of the
United Nations family of organizations but also for
national Governments for their separate and independent actions,
Noting with concern that the progress made so far
does not offer sufficient assurance that the modest
targets of the United Nations Development Decade
will be attained by the end of the Decade,
Realizing that one of the reasons for the slow
progress in achieving the modest targets set for the
• 6 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, vo!. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.ll), annexes A.I.l,
A.I.2 and A.I.3, pp. 18, 2S and 26.

*
Other

n Official Records of the Economic and S ocial Council,
Forty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item S, documents E/4196
and Add.3.

•

*

decisions

Report of the Economic and Social Council (chapters IT to IX, X (section
11), XII, XIII (sections 11 to VII), XIV and XV) (item 12)
At its 1497th plenary meeting, on 17 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Second Committee."
.8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 12,
document A/6613.

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

Headquarters of the United Nation8 Industrfal Development Organization 49
(item 41 (b»
At its 1497th plenary meeting, on 17 December 1966, the General Assernbl?;;
took note of the decision of the Second Committee in paragraph 15 of its report. 0

Confirmation of the appointment of the Executive Director of the United
Nation8 Industrlal Development Organization (item 41 (c)
The Secretary-General, in pursuance of section H, paragraph 18, of General
Assembly resolution 2152 (XXI) of 18 November 1966, appointed Mr. Ibrahim
Helmi ABDEL-RAHMAN as Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization for a term of four years beginning on 1 January 1967.111
At its 1485th plenary meeting, on 6 December 1966, the General Assembly
confirmed that appointment.

Inflation and economic development (item 42)
At its 1485th plenary meeting, on 6 December 1966, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Second Committee.P took note of the report of "the
Secretary-General on inflation and economic developmenfll and decided that the
subject of inflation and economic development should not, in future, appear as a
separate item on its agenda, since it would be most effectively handled in the
context of part 11 of the World Economic Survey.

Decentralization of the eeonomic and social activities of the United Nations
(item 43)
At its 1473rd plenary meeting, on 22 November 1966, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Second Committee.f took note of the report of
the Secretary-General on the decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and the strengthening of the regional economic commissions
and the United Nations Economic and Social Office in Beirut."

Review and reappraleal of the role and function8 of the Economic
and Social Council (item 51)
At its 1473rd plenary meeting, on 22 November 1966, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Second Committee.s" welcomed the progress recorded
by the Economic and Social Council in its review and reappraisal of its role and
functions and the improvements in its working methods and procedures, and
indicated that it would follow with interest the implementation of the various
decisions taken by the Council to improve its functioning and working methods, as
well as the implementation of relevant recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee
of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies.
49 See also resolution 2212 (XXI), p.42.
liO Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 41,
document A/6508/Add.l.
III See A/6539.
112 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 42,
document Aj6552, para. 4.
li8 OffiCIal Records of the Economic and Social Council, Forty-first Session, Annexes,
agenda item 2, document E/4152.
114 Official Records of the General Assembly, TwentY-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 43,
document A/6517, para. 4.
1111 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-ninth Session, Annex,s,
agenda item 13, document E/4075.
118 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 51,
document A/6520, para. 4.

General Assembly-Twenty-first SessW1s

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
R.Jol"to_
No.

2142 (XXI)
2143 (XXI)
2144 (XXI)

2197 (XXI)
2198 (XXI)
2199 (XXI)
2200 (XXI)

Item

adopti...

PIIfI.·

Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination (A/6484)
Manifestations of racial prejudice and national and religious
intolerance (A/6467)
.
Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including policies of racial discrimination and segregation
and of apartheid, III all countries, with particular reference to
colonial and other dependent countries and territories (A/6483)
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
... ,...
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(A/6586)
.

57

26 October 1966

45

58

26 October 1966

46

95
95

26 October 1966
26 October 1966

46
47

SS

16 December 1966
16 December 1966

48

55
56

16 December 1966

48

62

16 December 1966

62
62
12
54

16 December 1966
16 December 1966

49
49
60
60
60

Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees (A/6586)
Draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (A/6555)
.
,
.
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (A/6546)
Resolution A ...
Annex
.
.
Resolution B
Resolution C
.

2214 (XXI)
2215 (XXI)
2216 (XXI)
2217 (XXI)

United Nations Children's Fund (A/6606)
World social situation (A/6614)
Freedom of information (A/6616)
International Year for Human Rights (Aj6619)
Resolution A
Annex
Resolution B
Resolution C
. . . .. . . .. .. .. . ..
.
Resolution D
Other deei.iom
Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance

..

.

.
.

2142 (XXI). Elimination of all form8 of racial
di8crimination
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1905 (XVIII) of 20 November 1963 and 2017 (XX) of 1 November 1965 on
measures to implement the United Nations Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Recalling also its resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21
December 1965, in which it adopted and opened for
signature the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Noting the information in the report of the SecretaryGeneral.' furnished in accordance with Economic and
and Add.l, Add.2 and Corr.l, and Add.3-9.

48

.
.

60

19 December 1966
19 December 1966
19 December 1966

.

63

19 December 1966

61
62

.

63
63
63

19 December 1966
19 December 1966
19 December 1966

63
64
64

59
61

19 December 1966
19 December 1966

65

.

Creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights

1 Ej4174

D(Jt.ot

Title

60
61

65

Social Council resolution 1076 (XXXIX) of 28 July
1965 and General Assembly resolution 2017 (XX) on
the action taken by Member States, the United Nations, the specialized agencies and regional inter-governmental organizations and directed towards the implementation of the Declaration,

Noting also that a seminar on the elimination of all
forms of racial discrimination is to be held, under the
programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights, in 1968,
Noting further that the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities is
undertaking a special study of racial discrimination in
the political, economic, social and cultural fields, and

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

has already appointed a Special Rapporteur for that
purpose,
Reaffirming that racial discrimination and apartheid
are denials of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and of justice and are offences against human dignity,
Recognizing that racial discrimination and apartheid,
wherever they are practised, constitute a serious impediment to economic and social development and are
obstacles to international co-operation and peace,
Deeply concerned that racial discrimination and
apartheid, despite the decisive condemnation of them
by the United Nations, continue to exist in some countries and territories,
Convinced of the urgent necessity of further measures to attain the goal of the complete elimination of
all forms of racial discrimination and apartheid,
1. Condemns, wherever they exist, all policies and
practices of apartheid, racial discrimination and segregation, including the practices of discrimination inherent
in colonialism;
2. Reiterates that such policies and practices on the
part of any Member State are incompatible with the
oblig-ations assumed by it under the Charter of the
United Nations;
3. Calls again upon all States in which racial discrimination or apartheid is practised to comply speedily
and faithfully with the United Nations Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
with the above-mentioned resolutions and all other
pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly, and to
take all necessary steps, including legislative measures,
for this purpose;
4. Calls upon all elig-ible States without delay to sign
and ratify or to accede to the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
5. Calls upon Member States which have not already
done so to initiate appropriate programmes of action
to eliminate racial discrimination and apartheid, including in particular the promotion of equal opportunities for educational and vocational training, and guarantees for the enjoyment, without distinction on grounds
of race, colour or ethnic origin, of basic human rights
such as the rights to vote, to equality in the administration of justice, to equal economic opportunities and
to equal access to social services;
6. Appeals to Member States that, in combating
discriminatory practices, education and culture should
be directed, and mass media and literary creation should
be encouraged, towards removing- the prejudices and
erroneous beliefs, such as the belief in the superiority
of one race over another, which incite such practices;
7. Requests the Member States which have not yet
replied to the Secretary-General's inquiry as to the
measures they have taken to implement the Declaration
to do so without delay;
8. Proclaims 21 March as International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session a report
on the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,

and on the implementation of the provisions of the
present resolution;
10. Decides to place this item on the provisional
agenda of, its twenty-second session.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
2143 (XXI). Manifestations of racial prejudice
and national and religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recallin.q its resolutions 1779 (XVII) of 7 December
1962 and 2019 (XX) of 1 November 1965 concerning
manifestations of racial prejudice and national and religious intolerance,
Bearing in mind the continuing efforts of the United
Nations in this field,
Recognizing that the United Nations continues to
receive information relevant to this subject in other
contexts,
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-Generalcontaining- information received from certain Governments concerning action taken in compliance with General Assembly resolutions 1779 (XVII) and 2019
(XX).
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
2144 (XXI). Question of the violation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, includ·
ing policies of racial discrimination and
segregation and of apartheid, in all countries, with particular reference to colonial
and other dependent countries and terri.
tories
A

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1164
(XLI) of 5 August 1966,
Confirming that the United Nations has a fundamental interest in combating- policies of apartheid and that,
as a matter of urgency, ways and means must be devised for their elimination,
Bearing in mind the obligation of all Member States
under Article 56 of the Charter of the United Nations
to take joint and separate action in co-operation with
the Organization for the achievement of the purposes
set forth in Article SS, which include the promotion of
universal respect for, and observance of, human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, languag-e or relig-ion,
Convinced that gross violations of the rig-hts and
fundamental freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights continue to occur in certain
countries, especially in colonies and dependent territories, involving- discrimination on grounds of race,
colour, sex, languag-e and religion, and the suppression
of freedom of expression and opinion, the right to life,
liberty and security of person and the right to protection
by independent and impartial judicial organs, and that
these violations are desig-ned to stifle the legitimate
struggle of the people for independence and human dignity,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
2 A/6347 and

Add.1-3.

Resolutions adopted on the report8 of the Third Committee

United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Deeply concerned by the evidence of persistent practices of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa and
South West Africa and the racial discrimination practiced in the colonies of Southern Rhodesia, Angola,
Mozambique, Portuguese Guinea, Cabinda, Sao Tome
and Principe, brought to its attention by the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South Africa, such practices constituting,according to General Assembly resolutions 2022 (XX) of 5 November 1965 and 2074
(XX) of 17 December 1%5, crimes against humanity,
Taking note of the conclusions and recommendations
of the Seminar on Apartheid.f organized under
the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights and held at Brasilia in 1966,
1. Reaffirms its strong condemnation of the violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
wherever they occur, especially in all colonial and dependent territories, including the policies of apartheid
in the Republic of South Africa and the Territory of
South West Africa and racial discrimination in the
colonies of Southern Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique,
Portuguese Guinea, Cabinda, Sao Tome and Principe;
2. Regrets the policy pursued by colonial Powers
in order to circumvent the rights of peoples under their
rule through the promotion of the systematic influx
of foreign immigrants, and the dislocation, dispossession, deportation and eviction of the indigenous inhabitants;
3. Further regrets the actions of those States which,
through political, trading, economic and military collaboration with the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal and the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia,
are encouraging them to persist in their racial policies;
4. Urges all States which have not yet done so to
comply with the relevant General Assembly resolutions
recommending the application of economic and diplomatic measures against South Africa and with the relevant Security Council resolutions calling upon all States
to impose an arms embargo against South Africa;
5. Calls upon all States to strengthen their efforts to
promote the full observance of human rights and the
right to self-determination in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, and to attain the standards established by the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;
6. Urges all States to take effective measures, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, the General Assembly resolutions pertaining to human rights,
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, for the
suppression of the policies of apartheid and segregation
and for the elimination of racial discrimination, wherever it occurs, especially in colonial and other dependent countries and territories;
7. Appeals to all States, governmental and nongovernmental organizations, and individuals:
(a) To support the United Nations Trust Fund for
South Africa and voluntary organizations engaged in
providing relief and assistance to victims of colonialism
and apartheid;
8 STjTAOjHRj27, para. 138.

47

(b) To encourage judicial associations and other appropriate organizations, and the public in general, to
provide such relief and assistance;
8. Urges Member States to take all necessary measures, in accordance with their domestic laws, against
the operations of propaganda organizations of the Government of South Africa and of private organizations
which advocate apartheid and policies of racial discrimination and domination;
9. Invites States to become parties as soon as possible to all conventions which aim at protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including in particular the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
10. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, the Special Committee on the Policies of
Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa and the Commission on Human Rights to take
appropriate measures for the implementation of the
present resolution as it affects the responsibilities of
these organs;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-second session;
12. Invites the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Human Rights to give urgent consideration to ways and means of improving the capacity of
the United Nations to put a stop to violations of human
rights wherever they may occur;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a
unit within the Secretariat of the United Nations to
deal exclusively with policies of apartheid, in consultation with the Special Committee on the Policies of
Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa, in order that maximum publicity may be given
to the evils of those policies;
14. Further decides to place this item on the provisional agenda of its twenty-second session.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

B
The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1164 (XLI) of 5 August 1966,
Having adopted resolution A above,
Bearing in mind the various recommendations embodied in the report of the Seminar on Apartheid.t
organized under the programme of advisory services
in the field of human rights,
Noting that all the General Assembly recommendations on apartheid have so far been ignored by the
Government of South Africa and the authorities in
Southern Rhodesia,
Convinced more than ever that apartheid in South
Africa constitutes a menace to international peace and
security,
1. Appeals to the Security Council urgently to take
effective measures with a view to eradicating apartheid
in South Africa and other adjacent territories;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Security Council with all the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly on the question of apartheid, at

General A88embly-Twenty-fir8t Seuion

the present session and at previous sessions, together
with all the reports available on this item.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

2197 (XXI). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees- and having heard
his statement.P
Taking note of the progress achieved in all the countries of the world where the Office of the High Commissioner is carrying out its activities, in the field of
the international protection of refugees and in the
search for permanent solutions to their problems
through voluntary repatriation, voluntary integration
in countries of asylum or resettlement in other countries,
Considering the increasing number and scope of refugee problems in Africa and in other regions of the
world, and the additional responsibilities incumbent
upon the High Commissioner as a result of the extension of his activities to new countries, most of which are
in a developing stage,
Recalling its resolution 2040 (XX) of 7 December
1965, in which particular attention is given to the question of the assistance of refugees in Africa,
]voting with concern the serious financial crisis at
present affecting the assistance programme of the High
Commissioner,
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide international protection to refugees who are his concern, within the limits
of his competence, and to promote permanent solutions
to their problems:
(a) By facilitating their voluntary repatriation
through any steps he may consider appropriate and in
conformity with the humanitarian character of his mandate;
(b) By facilitating the voluntary and rapid settlement of these refugees in the countries of asylum and
by making available to these countries, especially developing countries, a maximum of aid, taking into account the specific requirements existing in each country
of asylum;
( c) By assuring that in developing countries the
plans for the economic and social integration of refugees, pending their possible inclusion in the economic
and social programmes carried out by the competent
organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations,
are properly co-ordinated with those programmes, and
also with such other programmes as might be carried
out by regional organizations;
2. Requests the competent organs and specialized
agencies of the United Nations, when considering development plans, to take into account, at the request
of the Governments concerned, the needs of the refugees;
3. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to give their
full support to the High Commissioner in the accorn• Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Sessiow, Supplement No. 11 (A/6311/Rev.1) and Supplement
No. llA (A/6311/Rev.1jAdd.l).
6 Ibld., Twenty-first Session, Third
Committee, 1447th
meeting, paras. 1-22.

plishment of his humanitarian task and to place at his
disposal the financial means necessary for the completion of his assistance programme.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2198 (XXI). Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, signed at Geneva on 28 July 1951,'
covers only those persons who have become refugees
as a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951,
Considering that new refugee situations have arisen
since the Convention was adopted and that the refugees concerned may therefore not fall within the scope
of the Convention,
Considering that it is desirable that equal status
should be enjoyed by all refugees covered by the definition in the Convention, irrespective of the date-line of
1 January 1951,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees" that the draft Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees should be submitted to the General Assembly after consideration by
the Economic and Social Council, in order that the
Secretary-General might be authorized to open the
Protocol for accession by Governments within the shortest possible time,
Considering that the Economic and Social Council
in its resolution 1186 (XLI) of 18 November 1966'
took note with approval of the draft Protocol" con~
tained in the addendum to the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and concerning measures to extend the personal scope of the
Convention, and transmitted the addendum to the General Assembly,
1. Takes note of the Protocol relating to the Status
of Refugees, the text of which'' is contained in the addendum to the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the Protocol to the States mentioned
in article V thereof, with a view to enabling them to
accede to the Protocol.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2199 (XXI). Draft Declaration on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1921 (XVIII) of 5 December 1%3, in which it requested the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission on the Status of
Women to prepare a draft declaration on the elimination of discrimination against women,
Noting with interest the text of the draft Declaration
adopted unanimously by the Commission on the Status
of Women on 8 March 1%6 and transmitted to the
General Assembly by the Economic and Social Council
in its resolution 1131 (XLI) of 26 July 1966,
6 Unit~ Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
T OffiCIal Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first

Session, Supplement No. 11A
two • para. 38.
8 Ibid., part one, para. 2.

(A/6311/Rev.1jAdd.1), part

49

Reeolutiens adopted OD the reports of the Third Committee

Considering that the large number of amendments
submitted to the draft Declaration at the forty-first
session of the Economic and Social Council and the
twenty-first session of the General Assembly and the
increased membership of the Commission on the Status
of Women justify a re-examination of the text of the
draft Declaration by the Commission,
Having been unable at the twenty-first session to give
adequate consideration to the draft Declaration and the
proposed amendments thereto,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on the Status of Women to review the text of the draft Declaration On the Elimination of Discrimination against Women at its twentieth
session in 1967, bearing in mind the amendments which
have been submitted? and taking into account the observations of Governments and also the discussions at
the nineteenth session of the Commission on the Status
of Women, at the forty-first session of the Economic
and Social Council and at the twenty-first session of
the General Assembly;
2. Decides that the draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women should be given
high priority at its twenty-second session.
149Sth plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2200 (XXI). International Covenant on ECGnOIDlC, Social and Cultural Rights, International Covenant on Civil and Political
Right8 and Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights
A

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter,
is to promote universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Considering that in Article 56 of the Charter all
Members of the United Nations have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action in co-operation
with the Organization for the achievement of that purpose,
Recalling the proclamation by the General Assembly on 10 December 1948 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations,
Having considered since its ninth session the draft
International Covenants on Human Rights prepared
by the Commission on Human Rights and transmitted
to it by Economic and Social Council resolution 545 B
(XVIII) of 29 July 1954, and having completed the
elaboration of the Covenants at its twenty-first session,
1. Adopts and opens for signature, ratification and
accession the following international instruments, the
texts of which are annexed to the present resolution:
(a) The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
(b) The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
11 A/6349, annex rr, A/C.3/L.1341/Rev.1, A/C.3L.1383/Rev.1,
A/C.3/L.1384-1386, A/C.3/L.1400 and Corr.l, A/C.3/L.1401,
A/C.3/L.1403, and A/C.3/L.1406.

(c) The Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
2. Expresses the hope that the Covenants and the
Optional Protocol will be signed and ratified or acceded to without delay and come into force at an early
date;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its future sessions reports concerning the state of ratifications of the Covenants and
of the Optional Protocol which the Assembly will consider as a separate agenda item.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
ANNEX
International COIlenant on Economic, Sodal and Cultural
Right.
PREAMBLE

The States Parties to the present Covenant,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed
in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent
dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members
of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world,
RecogniBing that these rights derive from the inherent
dignity of the human person,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying
freedom from fear and want can only be achieved if conditions
are created whereby everyone may enjoy his economic, social
and cultural rights, as well as his civil and political rights,
Considering the obligation of States under the Charter of
the United Nations to promote universal respect for, and
observance of, human rights and freedoms,
Realizing that the individual, having duties to other individuals and to the community to which he belongs, is under
a responsibility to strive for the promotion and observance of
the rights recognized in the present Covenant,
Agree upon the following articles:
PART

I

Article 1
1. All peoples have the right of self-determination. By
virtue of that right they freely determine ,'their political status
and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development
2. All peoples may, for their own ends, freely dispose of
their natural wealth and resources without prejudice to any
obligations arising out of international economic co-operation.
based upon the principle of mutual benefit, and international
law. In no case may a people be deprived of its own means
of subsistence.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant, including
those having responsibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing and Trust Territories, shall promote the
realization of the right of self-determination, and shall respect
that right, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations.
PART

11

Article 2
1. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes
to take steps, individually and through international assistance
and co-operation, especially economic and technical, to the
maximum of its available resources, with a view to achieving
progressively the full realization of the rights recognized in
the present Covenant by all appropriate means, including
particularly the adoption of legislative measures.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake
to guarantee that the rights enunciated in the present Covenant

50

General Assembly-Twenty.first Session

will be exercised without discrimination of any kind as to
race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
3. Developing countries, with due regard to human rights
and their national economy, may determine to what extent they
would guarantee the economic rights recognized in the present
Covenant to non-nationals.

Article 3
The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of
all economic, social and cultural rights set forth in the present
Covenant.
Article 4
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that,
in the enjoyment- of those rights provided by the State in
conformity with the present Covenant, the State may subject
such rights only to such limitations as are determined by law
only in so far as this may be compatible with the nature of
these rights and solely for the purpose of promoting the
general welfare in a democratic society.
Article 5
1. Nothing in the present Covenant may be interpreted as
implying for any State, group or person any right to engage
in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction
of any of the rights or freedoms recognized herein, or at
their limitation to a greater extent than is provided for in
the present Covenant.
2. No restriction upon or derogation from any of the
fundamental human rights recognized or existing in any country
in virtue of law, conventions, regulations or custom shall
be admitted on the pretext that the present Covenant does
not recognize such rights or that it recognizes them to a
lesser extent.
PART

III

Article 6
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the right to work, which includes the right of everyone to
the opportunity to gain his living by work which he freely
chooses or accepts, and will take appropriate steps to safeguard
this right.
2. The steps to be taken by a State Party to the present
Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall
include technical and vocational guidance and training programmes, policies and techniques to achieve steady economic,
social and cultural development and full and productive employment under conditions safeguarding fundamental political
and economic freedoms to the individual.

Article 7
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the
right of everyone to the enjoyment of just and favourable
conditions of work which ensure, in particular:
(a) Remuneration which provides all workers, as a minimum,

with:
(i) Fair wages and equal renumeration for work of equal
value without distinction of any kind, in particular
women being guaranteed conditions of work not inferior
to those enjoyed by men, with equal pay for equal work;
(ii) A decent living for themselves and their families in

accordance with the provisions of the present Covenant;
(b) Safe and healthy working conditions;

(c) Equal opportunity for everyone to be promoted in his
employment to an appropriate higher level, subject to no considerations other than those of seniority and competence;
(d) Rest, leisure and reasonable limitation of working hours
and periodic holidays with pay, as well as remuneration for
public holidays.

Article 8
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to

ensure:
(a) The right of everyone to form trade unions and join
the trade union of his choice, subject only to the rules of the
organization concerned, for the promotion and protection of
his economic' and social interests. No restrictions may be
placed on the exercise of this right other than those prescribed
by law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the
interests of national security or public order or for the
protection of the rights and freedoms of others;
(b) The right of trade unions to establish national federations or confederations and the right of the latter to form
or join international trade-union organizations;
(c) The right of trade unions to function freely subject
to no limitations other than those prescribed by law and
which are necessary in a democratic society in the interests
of national security or public order or for the protection of
the rights and freedoms of others;
(d) The right to strike, provided that it is exercised in
conformity with the laws of the particular country.
2. This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful
restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members of the
armed forces or of the police or of the administration of the
State.
3. Nothing in this article shall authorize States Parties to
the International Labour Organisation Convention of 1948 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right
to Organize to take legislative measures which would prejudice,
D:" apply the law in such a manner as would prejudice, the
guarantees provided for in that Convention.

Article 9
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the
right of everyone to social security, including social insurance.
Article 10
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that:
1. The widest possible protection and assistance should be
accorded to the family, which is the natural and fundamental
group unit of society, particularly for its establishment and
while it is responsible for the care and education of dependent
children. Marriage must be entered into with the free consent
of the intending spouses.
2. Special protection should be accorded to mothers during
a reasonable period before and after childbirth. During such
period working mothers should be accorded paid leave or leave
with adequate social security benefits.
3. Special measures of protection and assistance should be
taken on behalf of all children and young persons without
any discrimination for reasons of parentage or other conditions.
Children and young persons should be protected from economic
and social exploitation. Their employment in work harmful
to their morals or health or dangerous to life or likely to
hamper their normal development should be punishable by
law. States should also set age limits below which the paid
employment of child labour should be prohibited and punishable
by law.

Article 11
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the right of everyone to an adequate standard of living for
himself and his family, including adequate food, clothing and
housing, and to the continuous improvement of living conditions. The States Parties will take appropriate steps to ensure
the realization of this right, recognizing to this effect the
essential importance of international co-operation based on
free consent.

2. The States Parties to the present Covenant, recognizing
the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger,
shall take, individually and through international co-operation,
the measures, including specific programmes, which are needed:
(a) To improve methods of production, conservation and
distribution of food by making full use of technical and

SI

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

scientific knowledge, by disseminating knowledge of the
principles of nutrition and by developing or reforming agrarian
systems in such a way as to achieve the most efficient development and utilization of natural resources;
(b) Taking into account the problems of both food-importing
and food-exporting countries, to ensure an equitable distribution of world food supplies in relation to need.

Article 12
I. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health.

2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present
Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall
include those necessary for:
(a) The provision for the reduction of the stillbirth-rate
and of infant mortality and for the healthy development of
the child;
(b) The improvement of all aspects of environmental and
industrial hygiene;
(c) The prevention, treatment and control of epidemic,
endemic, occupational and other diseases;
(d) The creation of conditions which would assure to all
medical service and medical attention in the event of sickness.

Article 13·
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the
right of everyone to education. They agree that education
shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and the sense of its dignity, and shall strengthen the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. They
further agree that education shall enable all persons to
participate effectively in a free society, promote understanding,
tolerance and friendship among all nations and all racial, ethnic
or religious groups, and further the activities of the United
Nations for the maintenance of peace.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
that, with a view to achieving the full realization of this right:
(a) Primary education shall be compulsory and available
free to all;
(b) Secondary education in its different forms, including
technical and vocational secondary education, shall be made
generally available and accessible to all by every appropriate
means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of
free education;
(c) Higher education shall be made equally accessible to
all, on the basis of capacity, by every appropriate means, and
in particular by the progressive introduction of free education;
(d) Fundamental education shall be encouraged or intensified as far as possible for those persons who have not
received or completed the whole period of their primary
education;
(e) The development of a system of schools at all levels
shall be actively pursued, an adequate fellowship system shall
be established, and the material conditions of teaching staff
shall be continuously improved.

Article 14
Each State Party to the present Covenant which, at the
time of becoming a Party, has not been able to secure in its
metropolitan territory or other territories under its jurisdiction compulsory primary education, free of charge, undertakes,
within two years, to work out and adopt a detailed plan of
action for the progressive implementation, within a reasonable
number of years, to be fixed in the plan, of the principle of
compulsory education free of charge for all.
Article 15
I. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the right of everyone:
(a) To take part in cultural life;
(b) To enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its
applications;
(c) To benefit from the protection of the moral and material
interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic
production of which he is the author.
2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the
present Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right
shall include those necessary for the conservation, the development and the diffusion of science and culture.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake
to respect the freedom indispensable for scientific research
and creative activity.
4. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the benefits to be derived from the encouragement and development of international contacts and co-operation in the scientific
and cultural fields.
PART

IV

Article 16
I. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
submit in conformity with this part of the Covenant reports on
the measures which they have adopted and the progress made in
achieving the observance of the rights recognized herein.
2. (a) All reports shall be submitted to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who shall transmit copies
to the Economic and Social Council for consideration in accordance with the provisions of the present Covenant;
(b) The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall also
transmit to the specialized agencies copies of the reports, or
any relevant parts therefrom, from States Parties to the present
Covenant which are also members of these specialized agencies
in so far as these reports, or parts therefrom, relate to any
matters which fall within the responsibilities of the said
agencies in accordance with their constitutional instruments.
Article 17
I. The States Parties to the present Covenant shall furnish
their reports in stages, in accordance with a programme to be
established by the Economic and Social Council within one
year of the entry into force of the present Covenant after
consultation with the States Parties and the specialized
agencies concerned,
2. Reports may indicate factors and difficulties affecting
the degree of fulfilment of obligations under the present
Covenant.

3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
have respect for the liberty of parents and, when applicable, legal
guardians to choose for their children schools, other than those
established by the public authorities, which conform to such
minimum educational standards as may be laid down or approved by the State and to ensure the religious and moral
education of their children in conformity with their own
convictions.

3. Where relevant information has previously been furnished
to the United Nations or to any specialized agency by any
State Party to the present Covenant, it will not be necessary
to reproduce that information, but a precise reference to the
information so furnished will suffice.

4. No part of this article shall be construed so as to interfere with the liberty of individuals and bodies to establish
and direct educational institutions, subject always to the observance of the principles set forth in paragraph 1 of this
article and to the requirement that the education given in
such institutions shall conform to such minimum standards as
may be laid down by the State.

Pursuant to its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations in the field of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, the Economic and Social Council may make arrangements with the specialized agencies in respect of their reporting to it on the progress made in achieving the observance
of the provisions of the present Covenant falling within the
scope of their activities. These reports may include particulars

Article 18

52

General Allembly-Twenty-fint Seasion

of decisions and recommendations on such implementation
adopted by their competent organs.

Article 19
The Economic and Social Council may transmit to the
Commission on Human Rights for study and general recommendation or, as appropriate, for information the reports
concerning human rights submitted by States in accordance
with articles 16 and 17, and those concerning human rights
submitted by the specialized agencies in accordance with
article 18.
Article 20
The States Parties to the present Covenant and the
specialized agencies concerned may submit comments to the
Economic and Social Council on any general recommendation
under article 19 or reference to such general recommendation
in any report of the Commission on Human Rights or any
documentation referred to therein.
Article 21
The Economic and Social Council may submit from time
to time to the General Assembly reports with recommendations of a general nature and a summary of the information
received from the States Parties to the present Covenant and
the specialized agencies on the measures taken and the progress
made in achieving general observance of the rights recognized
in the present Covenant.
Article 22
The Economic and Social Council may bring to the attention of other organs of the United Nations, their subsidiary
organs and specialized agencies concerned with furnishing
technical assistance any matters arising out of the reports
referred to in this part of the present Covenant which may
assist such bodies in deciding, each within its field of competence, on the advisability of international measures likely
to contribute to the effective progressive implementation of the
present Covenant.
Article 23
The States Parties to the present Covenant agree that international action for the achievement of the rights recognized
in the present Covenant includes such methods as the conclusion
of conventions, the adoption of recommendations, the furnishing
of technical assistance and the holding of regional meetings and
technical meetings for the purpose of consultation and study
organized in conjunction with the Governments concerned.
Article 24
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and of the constitutions of the specialized agencies which
define the respective responsibilities of the various organs
of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies in
regard to the matters dealt with in the present Covenant.
Article 25
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the inherent right of all peoples to enjoy and utilize
fully and freely their natural wealth and resources.
PART

V

Article 26
1. The present Covenant is open for signature by any
State Member of the United Nations or member of any of
its specialized agencies, by any State Party to the Statute of
the International Court of Justice, and by any other State
which has been invited by the General Assembly of the United
Nations to become a party to the present Covenant.

2. The present Covenant is subject to ratification. Instruments
of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.

3. The present Covenant shall be open to accession by any
State referred to in paragraph I of this article.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument
of accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States which have signed the present Covenant or acceded
to it of the deposit of each instrument of ratification or
accession.

Article 27
1. The present Covenant shall enter into force three months
after the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations of the thirty-fifth instrument of ratification
or instrument of accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Covenant or acceding to it after the deposit of the thirty-fifth instrument of
ratification or instrument of accession, the present Covenant
shall enter into force three months after the date of the deposit
of its own instrument of ratification or instrument of accession.

Article 28
The provisions of the present Covenant shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
Article 29
1. Any State Party to the present Covenant may propose
an amendment and file it with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The Secretary-General shall thereupon communicate any proposed amendments to the States Parties to
the present Covenant with a request that they notify him
whether they favour a conference of States Parties for the
purpose of considering and voting upon the proposals. In
the event that at least one third of the States Parties favours
such a conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the
conference under the auspices of the United Nations. Any
amendment adopted by a majority of the States Parties present
and voting at the conference shall be submitted to the General
Assembly of the United Nations for approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force when they have been
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and
accepted by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to
the present Covenant in accordance with their respective
constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force they shall be binding
on those States Parties which have accepted them, other
States Parties still being bound by the provisions of the
present Covenant and any earlier amendment which they
have accepted.

Article 30
Irrespective of the notifications made under article 26,
paragraph 5, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall inform all States referred to in paragraph I of the same
article of the following particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions under article 26;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Covenant
under article 27 and the date of the entry into force of any
amendments under article ~.
Article 31
1. The present Covenant, of which the Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of the present Covenant to all States
referred to in article 26.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Right.
PREAMBLE

The States Parties to the present Covenant,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed
in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the
inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all

53

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

members of the human family is the foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world,
Recognizing that these rights derive from the inherent
dignity of the human person,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying
civil and political freedom and freedom from fear and want
can only be achieved if conditions are created whereby
everyone may enjoy his civil and political rights, as well as
his economic, social and cultural rights,
Considering the obligation of States under the Charter
of the United Nations to promote universal respect for,
and observance of, human rights and freedoms,
Realizing that the individual, having duties to other individuals and to the community to which he belongs, is under
a responsibility to strive for the promotion and observance of
the rights recognized in the present Covenant,

Agree upon the following articles:
PART

2. No derogation from articles 6, 7, 8 (paragraphs 1 and
2), 11, 15, 16 and 18 may be made under this provision.
3. Any State Party to the present Covenant availing itself
of the right of derogation shall immediately inform the other
States Parties to the present Covenant, through the intermediary of the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
of the provisions from which it has derogated and of the
reasons by which it was actuated. A further communication
shall be made, through the same intermediary, on the date on
which it terminates such derogation.

I

Article 1
1. All peoples have the right of self-determination. By virtue
of that right they freely determine their political status and
freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development.
2. All peoples may, for their own ends, freely dispose of
their natural wealth and resources without prejudice to any
obligations arising out of international economic co-operation,
based upon the principle of mutual benefit, and international
law. In no case may a people be deprived of its own means
of subsistence.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant, including
those having responsibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing and Trust Territories, shall promote the realization of the right of self-determination, and shall respect that
right, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations.
PART

Article 4
1. In time of public emergency which threatens the life
of the nation and the existence of which is officially proclaimed,
the States Parties to the present Covenant may take measures
derogating from their obligations under the present Covenant
to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with their
other obligations under international law and do not involve
discrimination solely on the ground of race, colour, sex,
language, religion or social origin.

II

Article 2
1. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to
respect and to ensure to all individuals within its territory
and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in the
present Covenant, without distinction of any kind, such as
race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
2. Where not already provided for by existing legislative or
other measures, each State Party to the present Covenant
undertakes to take the necessary steps, in accordance with
its constitutional processes and with the provisions of the
present Covenant, to adopt such legislative or other measures
as may be necessary to give effect to the rights recognized
in the present Covenant.

Article 5
1. Nothing in the present Covenant may be interpreted as
implying for any State, group or person any right to engage
in any activity or perform any act aimed at the destruction
of any of the rights and freedoms recognized herein or at
their limitation to a greater extent than is provided for in
the present Covenant.
2. There shall be no restriction upon or derogation from
any of the fundamental human rights recognized or existing
in any State Party to the present Covenant pursuant to law,
conventions, regulations or custom on the pretext that the
present Covenant does not recognize such rights or that it
recognizes them to a lesser extent.
PART

III

Article 6
1. Every human being has the inherent right to life. This
right shall be protected by law. No one shall be arbitrarily
deprived of his life.

2. In countries which have not abolished the death penalty,
sentence of death may be imposed only for the most serious
crimes in accordance with the law in force at the time of the
commission of the crime and not contrary to the provisions
of the present Covenant and to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. This penalty
can only be carried out pursuant to a final judgement rendered
by a competent court.

3. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes:

3. When deprivation of life constitutes the crime of genocide,
it is understood that nothing in this article shall authorize
any State Party to the present Covenant to derogate in any
way from any obligation assumed under the provisions of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide.

(a) To ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms as
herein recognized are violated shall have an effective remedy,
notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by
persons acting in an official capacity;

4. Anyone sentenced to death shall have the right to seek
pardon or commutation of the sentence. Amnesty, pardon or
commutation of the sentence of death may be granted in all
cases.

(b) To ensure that any person claiming such a remedy
shall have his right thereto determined by competent judicial,
administrative or legislative authorities, or by any other competent authority provided for by the legal system of the State,
and to develop the possibilities of judicial remedy;

5. Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age and shall not
be carried out on pregnant women.

such remedies when granted.

6. Nothing in this article shall be invoked to delay or to
prevent the abolition of capital punishment by any State
Party to the present Covenant.

Article 3
The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment
of all civil and political rights set forth in the present
Covenant.

No one shall be subj ected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment. In particular, no one
shall be subjected without his free consent to medical or
scientific experimentation.

(c) To ensure that the competent authorities shall enforce

Article 7

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

54

Article 8
1. No one shall be held in slavery; slavery and the slavetrade in all their forms shall be prohibited.
2. No one shall be held in servitude.
3. (0) No one shall be required to perform forced or
compulsory labour;
(b) Paragraph 3 (a) shall not be held to preclude, in countries where imprisonment with hard labour may be imposed
as a punishment for a crime, the performance of hard labour
in pursuance of a sentence to such punishment by a competent
court;
(c) For the purpose of this paragraph the term "forced
or compulsory labour" shall not include:
(i) Any work Or service, not referred to in sub-paragraph
(b), normally required of a person who is under
detention in consequence of a lawful order of a court,
or of a person during conditional release from such
detention;
(ii) Any service of a military character and, in countries
where conscientious objection is recognized, any national
service required by law of conscientious objectors;
(iii) Any service exacted in cases of emergency or calamity
threatening the life or well-being of the community;
(iv) Any work or service which forms part of normal civil
obligations.
Article 9
I. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention.
No one shall be deprived of his liberty except on such grounds
and in accordance with such procedure as are established by law.
2. Anyone who is arrested shall be informed, at the time of
arrest, of the reasons for his arrest and shall be promptly
informed of any charges against him.
3. Anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge shall
be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorized
by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial
within a reasonable time or to release. It shall not be the
general rule that persons awaiting trial shall be detained in
custody, but release may be subject to guarantees to appear
for trial, at any other stage of the judicial proceedings, and,
should occasion arise, for execution of the judgement.
4. Anyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or
detention shall be entitled to take proceedings before a court,
in order that that court may decide without delay on the
lawfulness of his detention and order his release if the
detention is not lawful.
5. Anyone who has been the victim of unlawful arrest or
detention shall have an enforceable right to compensation.
Article 10

I. All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated
with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of
the human person.
2. (a) Accused persons shall, save in exceptional circumstances, be segregated from convicted persons and shaII be
subject to separate treatment appropriate to their status as
unconvicted persons;
(b) Accused juvenile persons shall be separated from adults
and brought as speedily as possible for adjudication.
3. The penitentiary system shall comprise treatment of
prisoners the essential aim of which shaII be their reformation and social rehabilitation. Juvenile offenders shall be
segregated from adults and be accorded treatment appropriate
to their age and legal status.

Article 11
No one shall be imprisoned merely on the ground of inability
to fulfil a contractual obligation.

Article 12
I. Everyone lawfully within the territory of a State shall,
within that territory, have the right to liberty of movement
and freedom to choose his residence.

2. Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including
his own.
3. The above-mentioned rights shall not be subject to any
restrictions except those which are provided by law, are
necessary to protect national security, public order (ordr«
public), public health or morals or the rights and freedoms of
others, and are consistent with the other rights recognized in
the present Covenant.
4. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of the right to enter
his own ~ountry.

Article 13
An alien lawfulIy in the territory of a State Party to the
present Covenant may be expelled therefrom only in pursuance
of a decision reached in accordance with law and shalI, except
where compelling reasons of national security otherwise require,
be allowed to submit the reasons against his expulsion and to
have his case reviewed by, and be represented for the purpose
before, the competent authority or a person or persons
especially designated by the competent authority.
Article 14
1. All persons shall be equal before the courts and tribunals.
In the determination of any criminal charge against him, or
of his rights and obligations in a suit at law, everyone shall
be entitled to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law. The
Press and the public may be excluded from all or part of a
trial for reasons of morals, public order (ordre public) or
national security in a democratic society, or when the interest
of the private lives of the parties so requires, or to the extent
strictly necessary in the opinion of the court in special circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of justice;
but any judgement rendered in a criminal case or in a suit
at law shall be made public except where the interest of juvenile
persons otherwise requires or the proceedings concern matrimonial disputes or the guardianship of children.
2. Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall have the
right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according
to law.
3. In the determination of any criminal charge against him,
everyone shall be entitled to the following minimum guarantees,
in full equality :
(a) To be informed promptly and in detail in a language
which he understands of the nature and cause of the charge
against him;
(b) To have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence and to communicate with counsel of his
own choosing;
(c) To be tried without undue delay;
(d) To be tried in his presence, and to defend himself in
person or through legal assistance of his own choosing; to
be informed, if he does not have legal assistance, of this
right; and to have legal assistance assigned to him, in any
case where the interests of justice so require, and without
payment by him in any such case if he does not have sufficient
means to pay for it;
(e) To examine, or have examined, the witnesses against
him and to obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses
on his behalf under the same conditions as witnesses against him;
(f) To have the free assistance of an interpreter if he
cannot understand or speak the language used in court;
(g) Not to be compelled to testify against himself or to
confess guilt.
4. In the case of juvenile persons, the procedure shall be
such as will take account of their age and the desirability of
promoting their rehabilitation.
5. Everyone convicted of a crime shall have the right to his
conviction and sentence being reviewed by a higher tribunal
according to law.
6. When a person has by a final decision been convicted of
a criminal offence and when subsequently his conviction has
been reversed or he has been pardoned on the ground that a
new or newly discovered fact shows conclusively that there

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

has been a miscarriage of justice, the person who has suffered
punishment as a result of such conviction shall be compensated
according to law, unless it is proved that the non-disclosure. of
the unknown fact in time is wholly ar partly attributable to him.
7. No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for
an offence for which he has already been finally convicted or
acquitted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of
each country.

Article 15
1. No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on
account of any act or omission which did not constitute a
criminal offence, under national or international law, at the
time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be
imposed than the one that was applicable at the time when
the criminal offence was committed. If, subsequent to the
commission of the offence, provision is made by law for the
imposition of a lighter penalty, the offender shall benefit
thereby.
2. Nothing in this article shall prejudice the trial and
punishment of any person for any act or omission which, at
the time when it was committed, was criminal according to
the general principles of law recognized by the community
of nations.

Article 16
Everyone shall have the right to recognition everywhere
as a persor, before the law.

Article 17
1. No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence,
nor to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation.
2. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law
against such interference or attacks.

Article 18
1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom
to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice, and
freedom, either individually or in community with others and in
public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship,
observance, practice and teaching.
2. No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair
his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his
choice.
3. Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs may be
subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law
and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health, or
morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.
4. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake
to have respect for the liberty of parents and, when applicable,
legal guardians to ensure the religious and moral education
of their children in conformity with their own convictions.

Article 19
1. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without
interference.
2. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression;
this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart
information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers.
either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or
through any other media of his choice.
3. The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of
this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities.
It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these
shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:

55

Article 20
1. Any propaganda for war shall be prohibited by law.
2. Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
shall be prohibited by law.

Article 21
The right of peaceful assembly shall be recognized. No
restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other
than those imposed in conformity with. the law and which
are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
national security or public safety, public order (ordre public).
the protection of public health or morals or the protection of
the rights and freedoms of others.

Article 22
1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of association
with others, including the right to form and join trade unions
for the protection of his interests.
2. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this
right other than those which are prescribed by law and which
are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, public order (ordre public),
the protection of public health or morals or the protection of
the rights and freedoms of others, This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on members of the
armed forces and of the police in their exercise of this right.
3. Nothing in this article shall authorize States Parties to
the International Labour Organisation Convention of 1948 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right
to Organize to take legislative measures which would prejudice, 01' to apply the law in such a manner as to prejudice,
the guarantees provided for in that Convention.

Article 23
1. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of
society and is entitled to protection by society and the State.
2. The right of men and women of marriageable age to
marry and to found a family shall be recognized.
3. No marriage shall be entered into without the free and
full consent of the intending spouses.
4. States Parties to the present Covenant shall take appropriate steps to ensure equality of rights and responsibilities of
spouses as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
In the case of dissolution, provision shall be made for the
necessary protection of any children.

Article 24
1. Every child shall have, without any discrimination as to
race, colour, sex. language, religion, national or social origin,
property or birth, the right to such measures of protection as
are required by his status as a minor, on the part of his family,
society and the State.
2. Every child shall be registered immediately after birth
and shall have a name.
3. Every child has the right to acquire a nationality,

Article 25
Every citizen shall have the right and the opportunity, without any of the distinctions mentioned in article 2 and without
unreasonable restrictions:
(a) To take part in the conduct of ,public affairs, directly or
through freely chosen representatives;
(b) To vote and to be elected at genuine periodic elections
which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held
by secret ballot, guaranteeing the free expression of the will
of the electors;
(c) To have access, on general terms of equality, to public
service in his country.

(a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others;

Article 26

(b) For the protection of national security or of public order
(ordre public), or of public health or morals.

All persons are equal before the law and are entitled without
any discrimination to the equal protection of the law. In this

Ceneral Assembly-Twenly-finl Session

56

respect, the law shall prohibit any discrimination and guarantee
to all persons equal and effective protection against discrimination on any ground such as race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status.
Article 27
In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic
minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not
be denied the right, in community with the other members of
their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practice their own religion, or to use their own language.
PART

IV

Article 28
1. There shall be established a Human Rights Committee
(hereafter referred to in the present Covenant as the Com-

mittee). It shall consist of eighteen members and shall carry
out the functions hereinafter provided.
2. The Committee shall be composed of nationals of the
States Parties to the present Covenant who shall be persons of
high moral character and recognized competence in the field of
human rights, consideration being given to the usefulness of
the participation of some persons having legal experience.
3. The members of the Committee shall be elected and shall
serve in their personal capacity.
Artic(.e 29
1. The members of the Committee shall be elected by secret

ballot from a list of persons possessing the qualifications prescribed in article 28 and nominated for the purpose by the
State Parties to the present Covenant.
2. Each State Party to the present Covenant may nominate
not more than two persons. These persons shall be nationals
of the nominating State.
3. A person shall be eligible for renomination.

.

Article 30

renominated. However, the terms of nine of the members
elected at the first election shall expire at the end of two
years; immediately after the first election, the names of these
nine members shall be chosen by lot by the Chairman of the
meeting referred to in article 30, paragraph 4.
2. Elections at the expiry of office shall be held in accordance with the preceding articles of this part of the present
Covenant.
Article 33
1. If, in the unanimous opinion of the other members, a

member of the Committee has ceased to carry out his functions
for any cause other than absence of a temporary character,
the Chairman of the Committee shall notify the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who shall then declare the
seat of that member to be vacant.
2. In the event of the death or the resignation of a member
of the Committee, the Chairman shall immediately notify the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall declare the
seat vacant from the date of death or the date on which the
resignation takes effect.
Article 34
1. When a vacancy is declared in accordance with article 33
and if the term of office of the member to be replaced does not
expire within six months of the declaration of the vacancy, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify each (If
the States Parties to the present Covenant, which may within
two months submit nominations in accordance with article 29
for the purpose of filling the vacancy.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall prepare a list in alphabetical order of the persons thus nominated
and shall submit it to the States Parties to the present Covenant. The election to fill the vacancy shall then take place
in accordance with the relevant provisions of this part of the
present Covenant.
3. A member of the Committee elected to fill a vacancy declared in accordance with article 33 shall hold office for the
remainder of the term of the member who vacated the seat on
the Committee under the provisions of that article.

1. The initial election shall be held no later than six months

after the date of the entry into force of the present Covenant.
2. At least four months before the date of each election to
the Committee, other than an election to fill a vacancy declared
in accordance with article 34, the Secretary-General of the
United Nations shall address a written invitation to the States
Parties to the present Covenant to submit their nominations tor
membership of the Committee within three months.
3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall prepare a list in alphabetical order of all the persons thus nominated, with an indication of the States Parties which have
nominated them, and shall submit it to the States Parties to
the present Covenant no later than one month before the date
of each election.
4. Elections of the members of the Committee shall be held
at a meeting of the States Parties to the present Covenant
convened by the Secretary-General of the United Nations at
the Headquarters of the United Nations. At that meeting, for
which two thirds of the States Parties to the present Covenant
shall constitute a quorum, the persons elected to the Committee
shall be those nominees who obtain the largest number of votes
and an absolute majority of the votes of the representatives of
States Parties present and voting.
Article 31
1. The Committee may not include more than one national
of the same State.
2. In the election of the Committee, consideration shall be
given to equitable geographical distribution of membership
and to the representation of the different forms of civilization
and of the principal legal systems.
Article 32
1. The members of the Committee shall be elected for a
term of four years. They shall be eligible for re-election if

firticle 35
The members of the Committee shall, with the approval of
the General Assembly of the United Nations, receive emoluments from United Nations resources on such terms and COIlditions as the General Assembly may decide, having regard to
the importance of the Committee's responsibilities.
Article 36
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall provide
the necessary staff and facilities for the effective performance
of the functions of the Committee under the present Covenant.
Article 37
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall convene the initial meeting of the Committee at the Headquarters
of the United Nations.
2. After its initial meeting, the Committee shall meet at
such times as shall be provided in its rules of procedure.
3. The Committee shall normally meet at the Headquarters
of the United Nations or at the United Nations Office at
Geneva.
Article 38
Every member of the Committee shall, before taking up his
duties, make a solemn declaration in open committee that he will
perform his functions impartially and conscientiously.
Article 39
1. The Committee shall elect its officers for a term of two
years. They may be re-elected.
2. The Committee shall establish its own rules of procedure,
but these rules shall provide, inter alia, that:

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
(a) Twelve members shall constitute a quorum:
(b) Decisions of the Committee shall be made by a majority

vote of the members present.

Article 40
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
submit reports on the measures they have adopted which give
effect to the rights recognized herein and on the progress
made in the enjoyment of those rights:
(a) Within one year of the entry into force of the present
Covenant for the States Parties concerned;
(b) Thereafter whenever the Committee so requests.
2. All reports shall be submitted to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, who shall transmit them to the Committee for consideration. Reports shall indicate the factors and
difficulties, if any, affecting the implementation of the present
Covenant.
3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations may, after
consultation with the Committee, transmit to the specialized
agencies concerned copies of such parts of the reports as may
fall within their field of competence.

4. The Committee shall study the reports submitted by
the States Parties to the present Covenant. It shall transmit
its reports, and such general comments as it may consider
appropriate, to the States Parties. The Committee may also
transmit to the Economic and Social Council these comments
along' with the copies of the reports it has received from
States Parties to the present Covenant.
S. The States Parties to the present Covenant may submit to
the Committee observations on any comments that may be made
in accordance with paragraph 4 of this article.

57

(f) In any matter referred to it, the Committee may call
upon the States Parties concerned, referred to in sub-paragraph
(b), to supply any relevant information.
(g) The States Parties concerned, referred to in sub-paragraph (b), shall have the right to be represented when the
matter is being considered in the Committee and to make submissions orally and/or in writing,
(h) The Committee shall, within twelve months after the
date of receipt of notice under sub-paragraph (b), submit a
report;
(i) If a solution within the terms of sub-paragraph (e) is
reached, the Committee shall confine its .report to a
brief statement of the facts and of the solution reached;
(ii) If a solution within the terms of sub-paragraph (e) is
not reached, the Committee shall confine its report to
a brief statement of the facts: the written submissions
and record of the oral submisions made by the States
Parties concerned shall be attached to the report.
In every matter, the report shall be communicated to the
States Parties concerned.
2. The provisions of this article shall come into force when
ten States Parties to the present Covenant have made declarations under paragraph 1 of this article. Such declarations shall
be deposited by the States Parties with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, who shall transmit copies thereof to the
other States Parties. A declaration may be withdrawn at any
time by notification to the Secretary-General. Such a withdrawal shall not prejudice the consideration of any matter
which is the subject of a communication already transmitted
under this article; no further communication by any State
Party shall be received after the notification of withdrawal of
the declaration has been received by the Secretary-General, unless the State Party concerned has made a new declaration.

Article 41
1. A State Party to the present Covenant may at any time
declare under this article that it recognizes the competence of
the Committee to receive and consider communications to the
effect that a State Party claims that another State Party is
not fulfilling its obligations under the present Covenant. Communications under this article may be received and considered
only if submitted by a State Party which has made a declaration recognizing in regard to itself the competence of the
Committee. No communication shall be received by the Committee if it concerns a State Party which has not made such
a declaration. Communications received under this article shall
be dealt with in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) If a State Party to the present Covenant considers that
another State Party is not giving effect to the provisions of
the present Covenant, it may, by written communication, bring
the matter to the attention of that State Party. Within three
months after the receipt of the conununication, the receiving
State shall afford the State which sent the communication an
explanation or any other statement in writing clarifying the matter, which should include, to the extent possible and pertinent,
reference to domestic ~rocedures and remedies taken, pending, or available in the matter.

(b) If the matter is not adjusted to the satisfaction of both
States Parties concerned within six tnonths after the receipt by
the receiving State of the initial communication, either State
shall have the right to refer the matter to the Committee, by
notice given to the Committee and to the other State.
(c) The Committee shall deal with a matter referred to it
only after it has ascertained that all available domestic remedies
have been invoked and exhausted in the matter, in conformity
with the generally recognized principles of international law.
This shall not be the rule where the application of the remedies
is unreasonably prolonged.

Article 42
1. (a) If a matter referred to the Committee in accordance
with article 41 is not resolved to the satisfaction of the States
Partes concerned, the Committee may, with the prior consent
of the States Parties concerned, appoint an ad hoc Conciliation
Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission). The
good offices of the Commission shall be made available to the
States Parties concerned with a view to an amicable solution
of the matter 00 the basis of respect for the present Covenant;
(b) The Commission shall consist of five persons acceptable
to the States Parties concerned. If the States Parties concerned
fail to reach agreement within three months on all or part of
the composition of the Commission, the members of the Commission concerning whom no agreement has been reached shall
be elected by secret ballot by a two-thirds majority vote of the
Committee from among its members.
2. The members of the Commission shall serve in their
personal capacity. They shall not be nationals of the States
Parties concerned, or of a State not party to the present Covenant, or of a State Party which has not made a declaration
under article 41.
3. The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and
adopt its own rules of procedure.
4. The meetings of the Commission shall normally be held
at the Headquarters of the United Nations or at the United
Nations Office at Geneva. However, they may be held at such
other convenient places as the Commission may determine in
consultation with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the States Parties concerned.
5. The secretariat provided in accordance with article 36
shall also service the commissions appointed under this article.

(11) The Committee shall hold closed meetings when examining communications under this article.

6. The information received and collated by the Committee
shall be made available to the Commission and the Commission
may call upon the States Parties concerned to supply any other
relevant information.

(e) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (c), the
Committee shall make available its good offices to the States
Parties concerned with a view to a friendly solution of the
matter on the basis of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as recognized in the present Covenant.

7. When the Commission has fully considered the matter,
but in any event not later than twelve months after having
been seized of the matter, it shall submit to the Chairman of
the Committee a report for communication to the States Parties concerned:

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

58

(a) If the Commission is unable to complete its consideration of the matter within twelve months, it shall confine its
report to a brief statement of the status of its consideration
of the matter;
(b) If an amicable solution to the matter on the basis of respect for human rights as recognized in the present Covenant
is reached, the Commission shall confine its report to a brief
statement of the facts and of the solution reached;
(c) If a solution within the terms of sub-paragraph (b)
is not reached, the Commission's report shal! embody its findings on all questions of fact re~evan: to the Issues b~t'Y:~n the
States Parties concerned, and Its views on the possibilities of
an amicable solution of the matter. This report shall also contain the written submissions and a record of the oral submissions
made by the States Parties concerned;
(d) If the Commission's report is submitted u.nd:r subparagraph (c), the States Parties concern~d shall, wlt~m three
months of the receipt of the report, notify the Chairman of
the Committee whether or not they accept the contents of the
report of the Commission.
8. The provisions of this article are without prejudice to the
responsibilities of the Committee under article 41.
9. The States Parties concerned shall share equally all the
expenses of the members of the Commission in accordance with
estimates to be provided by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
10. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be
empowered to pay the expenses of the members of the Commission, if necessary, before reimbursement by the Stat~s
Parties concerned, in accordance with paragraph 9 of this
article.
Article 43
The members of the Committee, and of the ad hoc conciliation commissions which may be appointed under article 42,
shall be entitled to the facilities, privileges and immunities of
experts on mission for the United Nations as laid down in
the relevant sections of the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations.

Article 44
The provisions for the implementation of the present Covenant shall apply without prejudice to the procedures prescribed
in the field of human rights by or under the constituent instruments and the conventions of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies and shall not prevent the States Parties
to the present Covenant from having recourse to other procedures for settling a dispute in accordance with general or
special international agreements in force between them.
Article 45
The Committee shall submit to the General Assembly of the
United Nations, through the Economic and Social Council, an
annual report on its activities.
PART V

Article 46
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as impairing the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and of the constitutions of the specialized agencies which define the respective responsibilities of the various organs of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies in regard to
the matters dealt within the present Covenant.
Article 47
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the inherent right of all peoples to enjoy and utilize
fully and freely their natural wealth and resources.

cialized agencies, by any State Party to the Statute of the
International Court of Justice, and by any other State which
has been invited by the General Assembly of the United Nations to become a party to the present Covenant.
2. The present Covenant is subject to ratification. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
3. The present Covenant shall be open to accession by any
State referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States which have signed this Covenant or acceded to it
of the deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession.

Article 49
1. The present Covenant shall enter into force three months
after the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations of the thirty-fifth instrument of ratification
or instrument of accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Covenant or acceding
to it after the deposit of the thirty-fi fth instrument of ratification or instrument of accession, the present Covenant shall
enter into force three months after the date of the deposit of
its own instrument of ratification or instrument of accession.
Article 50
The provisions of the present Covenant shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
Article 51
1. Any State Party to the present Covenant may propose
an amendment and file it with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall thereupon communicate any proposed amendments to the
States Parties to the present Covenant with a request that they
notify him whether they favour a conference of States Parties
for the purpose of considering and voting upon the proposals.
In the event that at least one third of the States Parties
favours such a conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
Any amendment adopted by a majority of the States Parties
present and voting at the conference shall be submitted to the
General Assembly of the United Nations for approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force when they have been
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and
accepted by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to the
present Covenant in accordance with their respective constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force, they shall be binding
on those States Parties which have accepted them, other States
Parties still being bound by the provisions of the present
Covenant and any earlier amendment which they have accepted.

Article 52
Irrespective of the notifications made under article 48, paragraph 5, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
inform all States referred to in paragraph 1 of the same
article of the following particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions under article 48;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Covenant
under article 49 and the date of the entry into force of any
amendments under article 51.
Article 53
1. The present Covenant, of which the Chinese, English,

PART

VI

Article 48
1. The present Covenant is open for signature by any State
Member of the United Nations or member of any of its spe-

French, RUSSIan and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of the present Covenant to all States
referred to in article 48.

Resolutlone adopted OD the reports of the Third Committee
Optional Protocol to the International COIIenant on Ci"il
and Politieal Rights

The States Parties to the present Protocol,
Considering that in order further to achieve the purposes of
the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (hereinafter referred to as the Covenant) and the implementation of its
provisions it would be appropriate to enable the Human
Rights Committee set up in part IV of the Covenant (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to receive and consider,
as provided in the present Protocol, communications from
individuals claiming to be victims of violations of any of the
rights set forth in the Covenant,
Have agreed as follows:

Article 1
A State Party to the Covenant that becomes a party to the
present Protocol recognizes the competence of the Committee
to receive and consider communications from individuals subject to its jurisdiction who claim to be victims of a violation
by that State Party of any of the rights set forth in the
Covenant. No communication shall be received by the Committee if it concerns a State Party to the Covenant which is
not a party to the present Protocol.

Article 2
Subject to the provisions of article 1, individuals who claim
that any of their rights enumerated in the Covenant have been
violated and who have exhausted all available domestic remedies
may submit a written communication to the Committee for
consideration.

Article 3
The Committee shall consider inadmissible any communication under the present Protocol which is anonymous, or which
it considers to be an abuse of the right of submission of such
communications or to be incompatible with the ,provisions of
the Covenant.

Article 4
1. Subject to the provisions of article 3, the Committee
shall bring any communications submitted to it under the
present Protocol to the attention of the State Party to the
present Protocol alleged to be violating any provision of
the Covenant.
2. Within six months, the recervmg State shall submit to
the Committee written explanations or statements clarifying
the matter and the remedy, if any, that may have been taken
by that State.
Article 5
1. The Committee shalI consider communications received
under the present Protocol in the light of all written information made available to it by the individual and by the State
Party concerned.
2. The Committee shall not consider any communication
from an individual unless it has ascertained that:
(a) The same matter is not being examined under another
procedure of international investigation or settlement;
(b) The individual has exhausted all available domestic
eemedies.
This shalI not be the rule where the application of the remedies
is unreasonably prolonged.
3. The Committee shalI hold closed meetings when examining
communications under the present Protocol.
4. The Committee shalI forward its views to the State
Party concerned and to the individual.
Article 6
The Committee shall include in its annual report under
article 45 of the Covenant a summary of its activities under
the present Protocol.

Article 7
Pending the achievement of the objectives of resolution
1514 (XV) adopted by the General Assembly of the United

59

Nations on 14 December 1960 concerning the Declaration OD
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the provisions of the present Protocol shall in no way
limit the right of petition granted to these peoples by the
Charter of the United Nations and other international conventions and instruments under the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.

Article 8
1. The present Protocol is open for signature by any State
which has signed the Covenant.
2. The present Protocol is subject to ratification by any
State which has ratified or acceded to the Covenant. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
3. The present Protocol shall be open to accession by any
State which has ratified or acceded to the Covenant.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States which have signed the present Protocol or acceded
to it of the deposit of each instrument of ratification or
accession.
Article 9
1. Subject to the entry into force of the Covenant, the
present Protocol shall enter into force three months after the
date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations of the tenth instrument of ratification or instrument
of accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Protocol or acceding
to it after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification
or instrument of accession, the ,present Protocol shall enter
into force three months after the date of the deposit of its
own instrument of ratification or instrument of accession.

Article 10
The provisions of the present Protocol shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.

Article 11
1. Any State Party to the present Protocol may propose
an amendment and file it with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The Secretary-General shall thereupon communicate any proposed amendments to the States Parties to
the present Protocol with a request that they notify him
whether they favour a conference of States Parties for the
purpose of considering and voting upon the proposal. In the
event that at least one third of the States Parties favours such
a conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the conference under the auspices of the United Nations. Any amendment adopted by a majority of the States Parties present and
voting at the conference shall be submitted to the General
Assembly of the United Nations for approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force when they have been
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and
accepted by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to
the present Protocol in accordance with their respective
constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force, they shall be binding
on those States Parties which have accepted them, other State.
Parties still being bound by the provisions of the present
Protocol and any earlier amendment which they have accepted.
Article 12
1. Any State Party may denounce the present Protocol at
any time by written notification addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. Denunciation shall take effect
three months after the date of receipt of the notification by
the Secretary-General.
2. Denunciation shall be without prejudice to the continued
application of the provisions of the present Protocol to any
communication submitted under article 2 before the effective
date of denunciation.

General A.IIemhly-Twenty-firat Se•• ion

60

Article 13
Irrespective of the notifications made under article 8, paragraph S, of the present Protocol, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations shall inform all States referred to in
article 48, paragraph 1, of the Covenant of the following
particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions under article 8;
(b) The date 0 f the entry into force of the present Protocol
under article 9 and the date of the entry into force of any
amendments under article 11;
(c) Denunciations under article 12.
Article 14
1. The present Protocol, of which the Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of the present Protoool to all States
referred to in article 48 of the Covenant.

B

The General Assembly,
Considering that the text of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the text
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the text of the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
should be made known throughout the world,
1. Requests the Governments of States and nongovernmental organizations to publicize the text of
these instruments as widely as possible, using every
means at their disposal, including all the appropriate
media of information;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the immediate and wide circulation of these instruments and,
to that end, to publish and distribute the text thereof.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

c
The General Assembly,
Considering the advisability of the proposals for the
establishment of national commissions on human rights
or the designation of other appropriate institutions to
perform certain functions pertaining to the observance
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to examine
the question in all its aspects and to report, through
the Council, to the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States to submit their comments on the question, in
order that the Commission on Human Rights may
take these comments into account when considering
the proposals.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2214 (XXI). United Nations Cblldren's Fund
The General Assembly,
Taking the opportunity of the twentieth anniversary
of the United Nations Children's Fund to congratulate
Governments, organizations and individuals on their

support of and partnership with the Fund in its two
decades of significant contribution to the well-being of
children throughout the world and to international
solidarity,
Recognizing the value of aid from the United Nations
Children's Fund in helping developing countries accelerate and improve the operation of services benefiting children,
Noting with approval that the United Nations Children's Fund is helping Governments, as part of their
national development plans and programmes, not only
to protect their children and young people, but to ensure
that they receive a suitable preparation for making their
contribution to the economic and social progress of their
countries,
Welcoming the fact that the training of national personnel in services benefiting children is now one of
the major features of aid from the United Nations
Children's Fund,
Commending the continued close co-operation between
the United Nations Children's Fund and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United
Nations Secretariat and the relevant technical and other
agencies in the United Nations family,
Deeply concerned, however, at the magnitude of the
unmet needs of children and youth in the developing
countries and the ever-increasing demands on the resources of the United Nations Children's Fund,
Noting with approval the support in the Economic
and Social Council and the Executive Board of the
United Nations Children's Fund for an income goal
of $50 million to be reached by the end of 1969, at
the close of the United Nations Development Decade,
1. Endorses the activities and objectives of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Urges Governments to increase their contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund and calls
upon supporting organizations, groups and individuals
to intensify their efforts so that the new income goal
may be reached;
3. Recommends that Governments should include
projects to meet the needs of children and youth in
their over-all development plans.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2215 (XXI). World social situation
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the solemn undertaking embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations to promote economic
and social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom,
Recalling its resolutions 1916 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963 and 2035 (XX) of 7 December 1965,
Noting again with deep concern that, despite past
efforts, the world social situation is far from satisfactory,
Noting that progress in the achievement of the goals
and objectives set for the United Nations Development
Decade has been disappointingly slow,
Recognizing the importance of concerted practical
action in the social field for attaining the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade,

61

Resolution. adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind the resolution on the United Nations
Development Decade.!" in which reference is made to
the possibility and advisability of preparing a development charter which would serve as a guide for international co-operation to further economic, social and
cultural development,
Convinced that the concerted practical action of the
United Nations in the social field should be concentrated, above all, on the solution of the basic social
problems, and should be aimed at creating better
standards of living for man and at guaranteeing respect
for his dignity,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1139 (XLl) of 29 July 1966 concerning the reappraisal
of the role of the Social Comrnission rl!
2. Affirms the main objectives and principles of the
social programme of the United Nations and of the
Commission for Social Development and the methods
and means to be used by the United Nations, Member
States and specialized agencies in pursuit of these objectives, which are set forth in section I of Economic
and Social Council resolution 1139 (XLI);
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission for Social Development to
prepare~ on the basis of the purposes and principles of
the U mted Nations and the specialized agencies and
also on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
and taking into account the documentation submitted
to the Third Committee'< and the discussions in that
Committee at the twenty-first session of the Assembly,
~ draft declaration on social development which would,
m general terms, define the objectives of social development and .th.e methods and means of achieving them,
and to SUbmit It to the General Assembly for consideration at its twenty-third session at the latest;
4. Calls further upon the Economic and Social Council to arrange for the specialized agencies to be consulted at appropriate stages in the preparation of the
draft declaration;
S. Re.quests t~e Secretary-General, the Economic
and. Social Council and through it the Commission for
SOCla~ Development, in co-operation with the specialized
agencres, to ensure that the periodic reports on the
world social situation reflect the over-all social situation
and social trends in different regions of the world and
in countries with differing economic and social systems, taking into account the close interrelation between
economic and social factors, and to submit these reports,
together with practical conclusions and recomendations
for the substantial improvement of the programmes
related to the social situation, to the General Assembly
for consideration every three years;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare
a report on the implementation of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1139 (XLI) and of the present resolution and to submit to the Council, and to the General
A~sembly for consideration at its twenty-second session,
this report, together with the revised programmes of
the Commission for Social Development and any recom10 General Assembly resolution 2218 A (XXI) of 19 December 1966, p. 42.
11 By this resolution, the Economic and Social Council
inter alia, decided that the Social Commission should be re~
designated the Commission for Social Development
12 Official Records of the General Assembly T~entY-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, documents Aj6409, A/6434
and A/C.3/L.1419.

mendations made, in consultation with the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, for strengthening
the co-ordination of the programmes of the United
Nations with those of the specialized agencies in the
interests of greater concentration of efforts on priority
targets;
7. Decides to accord high priority to the consideration of the world social situation at its twenty-second
session.

1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2216 (XXI). Freedom of information

The General Assembly,
Considering that because of the elaboration of the
International Covenants on Human Rights the Third
Committee was unable to consider the draft Convention
on Freedom of Information and the draft Declaration
on Freedom of Information at the twenty-first session,
Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms to the promotion of which the United Nations
is dedicated,
Decides to take up at its twenty-second session the
consideration of the item on freedom of information.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
2217 (XXI). International Year for Human Righ18

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 and 2081 (XX) of 20 December 1965 on
the International Year for Human Rights,
1. Approves the further programme of measures and
activities envisaged for Member States, the United
.Nations, the specialized agencies and national and other
mternational organizations, which has been recommended by the Commission on Human Rights and is
set out in the annex to the present resolution;
~. Im'i.tes Member States, the specialized agencies,
r~glOnal mtergovernmental organizations and the national and international organizations concerned to
devote the year 1968 to intensified efforts and undertakings in the field of human rights, including the
measures set out in the above-mentioned programme,
and to keep the Secretary-General informed of their
plans and preparations;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to make any necessary arrangements to facilitate the co-operation of cornpete?t regional intergovernmental organizations in observmg. 196~ as International Year for Human Rights,
as provided m General Assembly resolution 2081 (XX) ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to co-ordinate the
measur~s and a~tivities undertaken by Member States,
the U:mtt;d Nations, the specialized agencies, regional
or~amzat1ons and the national and international organizatl?nS concerned, and in particular to collect and dissernmate at regular intervals information on activities
contemplated or undertaken by them in connexion with
the International Year for Human Rights;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to ~he C?eneral Assembly at its twenty-second session
an mtenm report on the plans, preparations, arrange-

62

General Assembly-Twenty.first Session

ments, measures and activities referred to in paragraphs
2, 3 and 4 above.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
ANNEX
International Year for Human Rights: further programme
of measures and activities recommended by the Commission on Human Rights
RECOMMENDATION

A

It is recommended that in December 1967 the President of
the General Assembly should issue a special message on the
International Year for Human Rights, to be released on 1
January 1968. It is further recommended that the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, the executive heads of the
specialized agencies, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund and the executive secretaries of the
regional economic commissions should issue similar messages
during 1968 at the time they deem most appropriate, and that
such messages should be widely circulated by all communications media.

(b) Number of prizes to be awarded. It is recommended
that no more than five prizes should be awarded at a time.
If one prize only is to be awarded, it should be for outstanding
achievements in the field of human rights. If two prizes are to
be awarded, one should be for outstanding achievements in the
promotion and protection of civil and political rights, and the
other for outstanding achievements in the promotion and protection of economic, social and cultural rights. If more than
one prize is awarded, all prizes should be equal in every way.
(c) Nature of the prizes. It is recommended that a metal
plaque bearing the United Nations seal and an artistic design,
and engraved with an appropriate citation, should be presented
to each winner of a prize as a concrete and lasting token of
the award.
(d) Procedure to be followed in selecting winners. It is
recommended that a special committee, composed of the President of the General Assembly, the President of the Economic
and Social Council, the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights, the Chairman of the Commission on the Status of
Women and the Chairman of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, should be
entrusted with selecting the winners of the human rights prize.
The committee would establish its own procedure for receiving
nominations, it being understood that nominations might be
sought from Member States, specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations in consultative status and from other
appropriate sources. The assistance of the Secretary-General
would be available to the special committee at every stage in
the process of selection.

RECOMMENDATION B
1. It is recommended that the Secretary-General should:
(a) Make arrangements for the issuing of human rights
postage stamps and first-day covers on 1 January 1968, and for
special cancellations during 1968;
(b) Promote, specifically for the I~tern3:tiona! Ye~r ~or
Human Rights, the widest and most intensive dissemination
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
(c) Prepare and publish a special pamphlet on the Declaration, specifically for the International Year for Human Rights;
(d) Prepare for general distribution a radio documentary
script on the Declaration and encourage and assist broadcasting and television organizations to produce documentary or
dramatic programmes relating to human rights;
(e) Make available to States Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency a special design symbolizing the
concept of human rights and freedoms, so that posters may
be reproduced and distributed nationally during the International Year for Human Rights;
(f) Direct United Nations officers at Headquarters and in
information centres and regional offices to give lectures and
write articles on the Declaration and to co-operate with information media and educational authorities in various countries in organizing the celebration of the International Year
for Human Rights;
(g) Request the distributors of United Nations publications
to prepare a special display of relevant United Nations documents for exhibition during the months of November and
December 1968.
2. For Human Rights Day, 1968, it is recommended that
the United Nations should:
(a) Organize at Headquarters a special meeting of the
General Assembly on 10 December 1968, in commemoration of
the twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Governments should be invited to include in their
delegations to the special meeting, whenever possible, persons
who participated in the drafting of the Declaration;
(b) Organize a concert at United Nations Headquarters on
that day to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration, and obtain the widest possible radio and television coverage for the concert.

In consideration of the fact that a wide variety of measures
should not be added by Member States to their existing programmes, it is recommended instead that the General Assembly
should be asked to invite all Member States to make a special
effort during the period, within the framework of national
legislation and policy and according to available means, in
two particular spheres:

C
(a) When a prize or prizes in the field of human rights
should be awarded. It is recommended that a prize or prizes
should be awarded, for the first time, on 10 December 1968, on
the occasion of the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Thereafter, prizes
should not be awarded more often than at five-year intervals.

In the sphere of education, towards a fuller realization
of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
It is agreed that the intensification of efforts on the national
level does not exclude an intensification of efforts by Member
States on an international scale, for example, within the United
Nations and its agencies.

RECOMl\Il.ENDATION

(e) Criteria to be aPplied in the selection of winners. It is
recommended that on the occasion of the celebration of the
twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 1968, a maximum of five prizes should be awarded
to persons who have made outstanding contributions to the
promotion and protection of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms embodied in the Declaration and in other instruments of the United Nations relating to human rights since
the proclamation of the Declaration on 10 December 1948.
Thereafter, the prize or prizes would be awarded at five-year
intervals and would be given to individuals who had made
outstanding contributions to the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
RECOMMENDATION

D

It is noted that in paragraph 4 of resolution 1961 (XVIII)
of 12 December 1963 the General Assembly invited all Member States to intensify their domestic efforts in the field of
human rights, with the assistance of their appropriate organizations, in order that a fuller and more effective realization
of these rights and freedoms might be achieved and might be
reported at the proposed international review of such achievement in 1968 and thereafter. This proposed intensification of
national domestic effort has been considered, bearing in mind
the fact that an intensive programme of activity in this field,
in which the United Nations, the specialized agencies, national
Governments and non-govenmental organizations are already
involved, is now in progress. It can be assumed that each
Member State, within the framework of its national legislation
and policy, and according to available means, will wish to
respond in its own way to the invitation expressed in paragraph 4 of the above-mentioned resolution.

(a) In the sphere of their national legislation;
(b)

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
RECOMMENDATION E
It is recommended that Governments should be invited to

eensider adopting the following programme, under which they
would:
(a) Formally proclaim 1968 to be the International Year for
Human Rights and observe it as such;
(b) Issue, during the International Year for Human Rights,
in the name of Heads of State or Government, special messages
reaffirming their faith in the dignity and worth of the human
person and their dedication to the implementation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
(c) Either appoint an ad hoc committee to co-ordinate the
national celebrations for the International Year for Human
Rights within their countries, or entrust the organization of
the celebrations to an existing institution;
(d) Seize the opportunity of the International Year for
Human Rights to redouble their efforts to bring about the
signature and ratification, or the acceptance in another form,
of all the existing international conventions or treaties designed to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms in
particular spheres;
(e) Consider the possibility of commemorating the International Year for Human Rights by the establishment of public
service or socially useful institutions, such as schools, hospitals
community centres, creches and recreational parks, or by the
designation of existing institutions to commemorate the Year;
(f) Consider the possibility of establishing one or more national awards to honour their nationals who have made distinguished contributions to the promotion of human rights, and
make these awards during the International Year for Human
Rights;
(g) Maintain contact with the specialized agencies and
participate in any regional conferences and seminars which the
latter may wish to organize;
(h) Issue human rights postage stamps and first-day covers
on 1 January 1968, and arrange for special cancellations during
1968;
(i) Promote the widest and most intensive possible dissemination of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in
as many languages and dialects as possible, by means of printed
posters, leaflets and pamphlets issued during 1968;
(j) . Exam!ne the possibi.lity of holding a special meeting
of their Parhament or National Assembly, in order to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, preferably on 10 December 1968.
RECOMMENDATION

F

It is recommended that the specialized agencies whose work
is connected with the promotion of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms should be invited:
(a) To proceed with the planning of their individual programmes of celebrations;
(b) To communicate directly with the Governments of
Member States and with private, national and international
organi~tions, so as .to co-operate''with them in the organization
of national and regional programmes of celebrations for 1968;

(c) To inform the Secretary-General as soon as possible of
the programmes they have formulated.
RECOMMENDATION

G

It is recommended that other organizations having an interest
in the promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council nongovernmental organizations in contact with the United Nations
Office of Public Information, United Nations associations
research institutions, universities and other institutions of
higher learning, and other appropriate organizations should
be invited to participate fully in the celebration of the Tntemational Year for Human Rights and to organize special activities
?f their o~n during 1968. The. invitation to the organizations
m consultative status and to those in contact with the Office of
Public Information would be issued by the Secretary-General,

63

while the invitation to national organizations would be issued
by the Governments of the countries concerned.
Within the framework of their respective programmes, in
order to develop further and to guarantee political, civil, economic, social and cultural rights and to end all discrimination
and denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms on
grounds of race, colour, sex, language or religion, and in
particular to permit the elimination of apartheid, the various
organizations mentioned above are invited to consider, for
the year 1968:
(a) Adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
or articles thereof, as appropriate, as the theme of their annual
conference for 1968 or of special conferences held during
that year;
(b) Organizing commemorative ceremonies on the Declarati-on during the International Year for Human Rights, and
particularly on Human Rights Day, 10 December 1968;
(c) Printing and distributing the text of the Declaration,
and preparing public pamphlets, leaflets and posters on the
Declaration;
(d) Organizing community projects, such as panel discussions on local human rights problems, children's parades, and
the display of the United Nations flag on school buildings and
business premises;
(e) Encouraging local communities to establish a list of
questions with a view to investigating and sounding out public
opinion as to the community's effectiveness in promoting the
principles of the Declaration;
(f) Publishing, during the International Year for Human
Rights, historic declarations, famous bills, and great orations
and speeches on human rights, with appropriate commentaries
or annotations;
(g) Encouraging radio and television networks to carry
special programmes, encouraging newspaper editors to publish
editorials on the Declaration which could be printed or reprinted
in whole or in part, and encouraging book-publishing firms
to issue special publications, including books and booklets, on
human rights problems designed to publicize the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights; and encouraging other media
of information to organize public debates on great issues
concerning freedom;
(h) Inviting appropriate bodies in Member States to hold
special services and observances of a cultural and traditional
nature, in celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

H
It is recommended that the programme of measures and
activities should include activities by the United Nations, the
specialized agencies, Member States, and international· and
national organizations. For an effective year of observances,
some degree of co-ordination of these separate activities will
be required. Some of the recommended activities are set out
precisely and in reasonably full detail; for others, no more than
the broad outlines of the proposal can be given at this stage,
and the details remain to be worked out. When these details
have been settled, it will be desirable that information about
them be communicated to a central organization or office. It
is likely that individual Member States will have new ideas
in regard too activities they may wish to undertake in connexion with the International Year for Human Rights, and
that they will wish to communicate some of these ideas to
other Member States. It is agreed that all these activities should
be co-ordinated and it is recommended that the co-ordinating
and clearing-house function should be discharged by the
Secretary-General. It is important that the Secretary-General's
efficiency in discharging his present responsibilities in the field
of human rights should not be impaired by this additional
task which it is proposed to entrust to him.
RECOMMENDATION

B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965 concerning the observance of the International

General Assembly-Twenty-fint Session

Year for Human Rights and the convening of an International Conference on Human Rights in 1968,
Emphasizing the great importance of putting into
practice the principles relating to the protection of
fundamental human rights which are laid down in the
Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination,
Convinced that the continuing violation of fundamental human rights in certain countries, particularly
in the colonial and dependent countries, may endanger
friendly relations between States and universal peace
and security,
Emphasizing the importance of the achievement by
the International Conference on Human Rights of the
purposes specified in General Assembly resolution
2081 (XX),
Calls upon the Governments of all countries and the
peoples of the world to intensify the struggle to safeguard fundamental freedoms and human rights and to
ensure the complete and immediate elimination of such
violations of human rights as racial discrimination and
the policy of apartheid.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

to include among their representatives eminent persons
whose qualifications in the field of human rights would
enable them to make valuable contributions to the work
of the Conference;
4. Invites the competent specialized agencies to send
observers to the Conference;
5. Requests the Preparatory Committee to continue
its work in accordance with paragraph 14 of resolution
2081 (XX), taking into account such observations as
it may receive from the Commission on Human Rights
and the Commission on the Status of Women and
bearing in mind the discussions at the twenty-first
session of the General Assembly, the decisions taken
in the present resolution and the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, and to report
further on the progress of the preparation of the Conference to the General Assembly at its twenty-second
session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the staffing and other facilities which will be required
for the Conference;
7. Expresses the hope that the Conference will be
an important step forward in the further promotion
and development of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and consequently a contribution to
the strengthening of peace throughout the world and
to the promotion of friendship among peoples.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

c

D

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 designating the year 1968 as International
Year for Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December 1965 on the International Year for Human
Rights, in which it decided, inter alia, that an International Conference on Human Rights should be convened
during 1968, defined the purposes of the Conference,
established a Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Human Rights to complete the
preparation for the Conference, and requested the
Secretary-General to appoint an Executive Secretary
for the Conference,
Having considered the first progress report of the
Preparatory Committee.P
Accepting with appreciation the invitation extended
by the Government of Iran for the International Conference on Human Rights to be held at Teheran.l"
1. Takes note of the first progress report of the
Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Human Rights and expresses its appreciation
to the Committee for the work it has accomplished;
2. Decides that the International Conference on
Human Rights shall be held at Teheran, preferably
during the spring of 1968, on a date to be determined
by the Secretary-General in consultation with the
Preparatory Committee and the Iranian Government;
3. Invites States Members of the United Nations,
States members of the specialized agencies, States
Parties to the Statute of the International Court of
Justice and States that the General Assembly decides
specially to invite, to participate in the Conference and

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965, by which it requested the President of the General Assembly to appoint the members of the Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on
Human Rights,
Recognizing the significance of the proposed Conference and the importance of the preparatory work
to the success of the Conference,
1. Decides to enlarge the membership of the Preparatory Committee for the International Conference
on Human Rights from seventeen to twenty-three;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly.
to appoint six additional members of the Preparatory
Committee-two from African countries, two from
Asian countries and two from Latin American countries.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

18 A/6354.
14 A/C.3/602.

'"

'"

'"

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 2 of resolution D above, appointed the following
Member States: COLOMBIA, KENYA, LEBANON, MAURITANIA,
PAKISTAN and PANAMA.15
As a result, the Preparatory Committee for the International
Conference on Human Rights will be composed of the following
Member States: CANADA, CoLOMBIA, FRANCE, INDIA, IRAN,
ITALY, JAMAICA, KENYA, LEBANON, MAURITANIA, NEW ZEALAND, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PHILIPPINES, POLAND,
SOMALIA, TUNISIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, URUGUAY and YUGOSLAVIA.

III See Official Records of the General Assembly, TwentY-firs'
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1498th meeting.

Reeolutiona adopted OD the reports of the Third Committee

Other

decisions

Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance (item 59)
Creation of the post of United Nations High Commiuioner for Human
Rights (item 61)
At its 1498th plenary meeting, on 19 December 1966, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Third Committee-s that the consideration of
items 59 and 61 should be postponed to the twenty-second session.
18Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Atmexes, agenda items 59 and 61, document A/661S, para. 3.

6S

General Assembly--Twenty-first Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
R'$ol,d;DfI

No.

Titl,

1'_

2134 (XXI)
2138 (XXI)
2151 (XXI)
2183 (XXI)
2184 (XXI)
2185 (XXI)

Question of Easutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland (A/6448) ..
Question of Southern Rhodesia (A/6482)
Question of Southern Rhodesia (A/6482/Add.l)
Question of Aden (A/6557)
Question of Territories under Portuguese administration (A/65S4)
Question of Fiji (A/6572)

23.
23
23
23
67
69

2226 (XXI)
2227 (XXI)
2228 (XXI)
2229 (XXI)
2230 (XXI)
2231 (XXI)
2232 (XXI)

Question of the Trust Territory of Nauru (A/6624)
13
Question of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea (A/6624)
13
Question of French Somaliland (A/6583)
23
Question of Ifni and Spanish Sahara (A/6623)
23
Question of Equatorial Guinea (A/6623)
..
23
Question of Gibraltar (A/6628)
23
Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St. KittsNevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon
Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands and the
United States Virgin Islands (A/6628)
23
2233 (XXI) Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (A/6626)
64
2234 (XXI) Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for
71
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories (A/6626)
2235 (XXI) Question of the consolidation and integration of the special educational and training programmes for South West Africa, the
special training programme for Territories under Portuguese
administration and the educational and training programme for
South Afncans (A/6625)
66 and 68
2236 (XXI) Special educational and training programmes for South West Africa
(A/6625)
66
2237 (XXI) Special training programme for Territories under Portuguese
administration (A/6625)
.
68
70
..
..
2238 (XXI) Question of Oman (A/6622)

Dot',,!

od",t;o..
29 September 1966
22 October 1966
17 November 1966
12 December 1966
12 December 1966
12 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966

Pag,

20 December 1966

74

20 December 1966

75

20 December 1966

75

20 December 1966

76

20 December 1966

76

20 December 1966
20 December 1966

77

20 December 1966
26 October 1966and
20 December 1966

78
78

67
68
68
69
70
71
71

72
72
72
73
74

77

Othe,. dedsions
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
.
.
Question of South West Africa (hearing of petitioners)

23
65

Having examined further the report submitted by
the Secretary-General- pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution
2063 (XX) of 16 December 1%5 concerning the Fund
for the Economic Development of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and SwaziIand,
Reaffirming its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0 containing- the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolutions 1817 (XVII) of 18 December 1%2,

2134 (XXI). Question of Basutoland, Beehuanaland and Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland.'
lOfficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l),
chapter VII.

2 Ibid., agenda

67

item 23, document A/6439.

68

General Assembly-Twenty.first Session

1954 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and 2063 (XX)
of 16 December 1965,
Noting with deep concern the economic and social
situation prevailing in the three Territories and their
imperative and urgent need for United Nations assistance,
Noting that the contributions so far pledged have not
been sufficient for the Fund for the Economic Development of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland, established by the General Assembly in paragraph 7 of
its resolution 2063 (XX), to be brought into operation,
Noting further the imminent accession of Bechuanaland and Basutoland to independence,
1. Reiterates its grave concern at the serious threat
to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland constituted by the
aggressive policies of the present regime in the Repub.lie of South Africa;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland and endorses the recommendations contained therein;
3. Appeals to all States which have not done so to
contribute to the Fund established by the General Assembly in paragraph 7 of its resolution 2063 (XX).
1422nd plenary meeting,
29 September 1966.

2138 (XXI). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolutions 1747 (XVI) of 28
June 1962, 1760 (XVII) of 31 October 1962, 1883
(XVIII) of 14 October 1963, 1889 (XVIII) of 6
November 1963, 1956 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963,
2012 (XX) of 12 October 1965, 2022 (XX) of 5
November 1965 and 2024 (XX) of 11 November 1965,
and Security Council resolutions 202 (1965) of 6 May
1965, 216 (1965) of 12 November 1965, 217 (1965)
of 20 November 1965 and 221 (1966) of 9 April 1966,
and the resolutions adopted by the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples on 22 April 1965,3 28
May 1965,421 April 19665 and 31 May 1966,6 concerning the Non-Self-Governing Territory of Southern
Rhodesia,
Noting with grave concern that the "talks about
talks" between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
illegal racist minori ty regime further jeopardize the
inalienable rights of the African people of Zimbabwe,
1. Condemns any arrangement reached between the
administering Power and the illegal racist minority
regime which will not recognize the inalienable rights
of the people of Zimbabwe to self-determination and
3 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter Ill, para. 292.
4 Ibid., pan. 513.
5 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.1). chapter HI, para. 587.
11 Ibid., para. 1097.

independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reaffirms the obligation of the administering
Power to transfer power to the people of Zimbabwe on
the basis of universal adult suffrage, in accordance
with the principle of "one man, one vote".
1450th plenary meeting,
22 October 1966.

2151 (XXI). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Southern Rhodesia,"
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolutions 2022 (XX) of 5 November
1965, 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and 2138
(XXI) of 22 October 1966 and the various resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular resolution 217
(1965) of 20 November 1965, which declared, inter
alia, that the racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia is illegal,
Recalling further that, since the illegal declaration
of independence by the racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has declared,
on several occasions, that that regime is illegal and
that it would not negotiate with the regime on the
future of Southern Rhodesia,
Reiterating its serious concern about the implications
which the pourparlers between the administering Power
and the representatives of the illegal racist minority
regime have for the right of the African people of
Zimbabwe to freedom and independence,
Noting with concern the increasingly harmful role
played by those foreign monopolies and financial interests in Southern Rhodesia whose support for the
illegal racist minority regime constitutes an impediment to the attainment of independence by the people
of Zimbabwe,
Noting with deep regret that the administering Power
has failed to take effective and concrete measures to
bring down the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, and to grant independence to the people
of Zimbabwe in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to freedom and independence, and the legitimacy of their struggle for the exercise of that right;
2. Deplores the failure of the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland so far to put an end to the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia;
3. Condemns any arrangement between the administering Power and the illegal racist minority regime
in the Territory which would transfer power to the
7lbid., addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.1), chapter
III.

69

Resolutlena adopted OD the repol'tll of the Fourth Committee

latter on any basis and which would fail to recognize
the inalienable right of the people of Zimbabwe to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
4. Condemns the Governments of Portugal and
South Africa for their support of the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia;
5. Condemns the activities of those foreign financial
and other interests which, by supporting and assisting
the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia,
are preventing the African people of Zimbabwe from
attaining freedom and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and calls
upon the Governments of the States concerned to take
all necessary measures to bring to an end such activities;
6. DrOlWS the attention of the Security Council once
again to the grave situation prevailing in Southern
Rhodesia, in order that it may decide to apply the
necessary enforcement measures envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to take prompt and effective measures to prevent
any supplies, including oil and petroleum products,
from reaching Southern Rhodesia;
8. Calls once again upon the Government of the
United Kingdom to take all the necessary measures,
including in particular the use of force, in the exercise
of its powers as the administering Power, to put an
end to the illegal racist minority regime of Southern
Rhodesia and to ensure the immediate application of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to report on
its actions in the implementation of the present resolution to the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
10. Calls upon all States to extend all moral and
material support to the people of Zimbabwe in their
legitimate struggle to overthrow the illegal racist regime and to achieve freedom and independence;
11. Requests the specialized agencies concerned and
other international assistance organizations to aid and
assist the refugees from Zimbabwe and those who are
suffering from oppression by the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
study of the situation in Southern Rhodesia;
13. Decides to keep the question of Southern
Rhodesia on its agenda.
1468th plenary meeting,
17 November 1966.

2183 (XXI). Question of Aden

The General Assembly,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Aden," which includes, in addition to Aden, the Eastern and Western Aden Protectorates, and the Islands of Perim, Kuria Muria, Kamaran and other off-shore islands,
8 Ibid.., chapter VI.

Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1949 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and
2023 (XX) of 5 November 1965, and the related
resolutions adopted by the Special Committee on 22
March and 15. June 1966,9
Having heard the statements ot the petitioners.
Having taken note of the declaration of the representative of the administering Power on his Government's readiness to co-operate with the United Nations
in the full implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions at the earliest possible time,
Having taken note of the assurances given by the'
representative of the administering Power, on 10 November 1966,10 concerning the territorial integrity and
the unity of South Arabia as a whole,
Having taken note also of the statement by the representative of the administering Power, on 17 N 0vember 1966,11 that the United Nations mission will
have free and unimpeded contact with the representatives of all shades of opinion in the Territory,
Taking note of the statement by the administering
Power that it will grant independence to the Territory
of South Arabia not later than 1968,
Having further taken note of .the declaration by the
administering Power on the question of the termination
of all treaties and the removal of military bases by the
time of independence, and in particular of its commitment not to enter into any defence arrangement with
South Arabia,
Considering that the United Nations mission should
have full freedom of action and unrestricted access to
all parts of the Territory and that the administering
Power should guarantee to the people the free exercise
of political rights and freedoms throughout the Territory,
Deeply disturbed by the reports issued by various
international humanitarian organizations on the maltreatment of political detainees and prisoners and by
the continuation of the military operations against the
people of the Territory,
Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive situation which might threaten peace and security in the
area owing to the failure of the administering Power to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of Aden, and the conclusions contained
therein, and endorses the resolutions adopted by the
Special Committee on 22 March and 15 June 1966;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and independence
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) ;
3. Reaffirms paragraph 8 of the resolution adopted
by the Special Committee on 15 June 1966 and urges
the administering Power to implement it;
4. Further reaffirms that the only authority responsible to the United Nations for the full implementation
of the' United Nations resolutions with regard to the
Territory is the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland;
9 Ibid., paras. 99 and 382.
10 Ibid., Twenty-first Session,

Fourth Committee, 1633rd

meeting, paras. 8-14.
11 Ibid., 1636th meeting, paras. 2-10.

General Assembly-Twenly-:6.1'81 Session

70

5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee and the administering
Power, to appoint immediately a special mission to be
sent to Aden for the purpose of recommending practical steps for the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and, in particular,
for the purpose of determining the extent of the United
Nations participation in the preparation and supervision
of the elections and submitting a report to him as soon
as possible for transmission to the Special Committee;
6. Requests the United Nations Special Mission on
Aden to consider recommending, inter alia, practical
steps for the establishment of a central caretaker government in the Territory to carry out the administration
of the whole Territory and to assist in the organization
of the elections;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take the
necessary measures, in accordance with paragraph 3
above, so that the United Nations Special Mission on
Aden can discharge its responsibilities on the basis of
the resolution adopted by the Special Committee on
15 June 1966;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the
necessary assistance and facilities for the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Decides to maintain the question of Aden on its
agenda.
1490th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.

•

•

•

The Secretary-General, in pursuance of paragraph 5 of the
above resolution, appointed the members of the United Nations
Special Mis.lion on Aden. 12
The Mission will be composed as follows: Manuel PEREZ
GUERRERO (Venezuela), Chairman, Mr. Abdul Satar SSALIZI
(Afghanistan) and Mr. Moussa Leo KEITA (Mali).

2184 (XXI). Question of Territories under Portuguese administration
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories under Portuguese administration.P
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 163
(1961) of 9 June 1%1, 180 (1963) of 31 July 1963,
.183 (1963) of 11 December 1963 and 218 (1965) of
23 November 1965,
Recalling further General Assembly resolutions 1807
(XVII) of 14 December 1962, 1819 (XVII) of 18
December 1962, 1913 (XVIII) of 3 December 1963
and 2107 (XX) of 21 December 1965, also the relevant resolution adopted by the Special Committee on
22 June 1966,14
12 See A/6636.
13 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l),
chapter V.
14 Ibid., para. 675.

Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive situation which is threatening peace and security owing to
the intensification of the measures of repression and
military operation against the people of the Territories
under Portuguese administration,
Noting with deep concern that the activities of the
foreign financial interests in these Territories which impede the African people in the realization of their aspirations to freedom and independence continue undiminished,
Further noting with deep concern that Portugal continues to use the aid and weapons that it receives from
its military allies against the population of these Territories,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
the Territories under Portuguese domination to freedom and independence, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and recognizes the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve this right;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories under Portuguese administration and
endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
3. Condemns, as a crime against humanity, the policy of the Government of Portugal, which violates the
economic and political rights of the indigenous population by the settlement of foreign immigrants in the
Territories and by the exporting of African workers to
South Africa;
4. Further condemns the activities of the financial
interests operating in the Territories under Portuguese
domination which exploit the human and material resources of the Territories and impede the progress of
their peoples towards freedom and independence;
5. Calls upon Portugal to apply immediately the
principle of self-determination to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and Security Council resolutions 183 (1963) and 218 (1965) ;
6. Appeals to all States to give the peoples of the
Territories under Portuguese domination the moral
and material support necessary for the restoration of
their inalienable rights and to prevent their nationals
from co-operating with the Portuguese authorities,
especially in regard to investment in the Territories;
7. Recommendru: the Security Council that it make
it obligatory for all States, directly and through their
action in the appropriate international agencies of
which they are members, to implement the measures
contained in General Assembly resolution 2107 (XX),
and in particular those mentioned in paragraph 7
thereof;
8. Requests all States, and in particular the military
allies of Portugal within the framework of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, to take the following
steps:
(a) To desist forthwith from giving the Portuguese
Government any assistance which enables it to continue
its repression of the African peoples in the Territories
under its domination;
(b) To take all the necessary measures to prevent
the sale or supply of arms and military equipment to
the Government of Portugal;

ResolutioDs adopted OD the reports of the Fourth Committee

(c) To stop the sale or shipment to the Government
of Portugal of equipment and materials for the manufacture or maintenance of arms and ammunition;
(d) To take the necessary measures to put an end to
such activities as are referred to in paragraph 4 above;
9. Appeals once again to all the specialized agencies,
in particular to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary
Fund, to refrain from granting Portugal any financial,
economic or technical assistance as long as the Government of Portugal fails to implement General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to enter into
consultation with the International Bank· for Reconstruction and Development in order to secure its compliance with General Assembly resolutions 2105 (XX)
of 20 December 1965 and 2107 (XX) of 21 December
1965 and with the present resolution;
11. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the specialized agencies concerned and other international relief organizations for the aid they have extended so far, and requests
them, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to increase their assistance to the refugees from
the Territories under Portuguese domination and to
the people who have suffered and are still suffering
owing to military operations;
12. Decides to include the question of the Territories under Portuguese administration in the provisional agenda of its twenty-second session.
1490th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.

2185 (XXI). Question of Fiji
Th« General Assembly,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Fijj,111
HavinO heard the statement of the administering
Power,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1951 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, 2068 (XX)
of 16 December 1965 and 2105 (XX) of 20 December
1965, also the resolution adopted by the Special Committee on 7 September 1966,16
Noting with regret that the administering Power
has not yet taken effective measures to implement the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Special
Committee,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Fiji to freedom and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Expresses its deep regret that the administering
Power has not yet taken effective measures to implement the various resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
concerning the Territory of Fiji;
.
3. Endorses the decision of the Special Committee
to appoint a sub-committee to visit Fiji for the purpose
111 Ibid., addendum to agenda
chagter VIII.
1 Ibid., para. 120.

item 23 (A/6300/Rev.1).

71

of studying at first hand the situation in the Territory, and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee, in consultation with the administering Power,
to appoint the sub-committee as early as practicable;
4. Calls upon the administering Power to implement
without delay the following measures:
(a) The holding of general elections in accordance
with the principle of "or?-e man, one vote" fC?r the. purpose of forming a constttutent assembly which WIll be
charged with the task of drawing up a de!TIocratlc
constitution and the formation of a representative government, and the transfer of full powers to that government;
(b) The fixing of an early date for the independence
of Fiji;
(c) The abolishing of all discriminatory measures
so as to foster communal harmony and national unity
in the Territory;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
the necessary facilities for the visit of the sub-committee
to the Territory;
6. Requests the administering Power to report to
the Special Committee on the implementation of the
present resolution;
7. Invites the Special Committee to keep the question under consideration and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session;
8. Decides to keep the question of Fiji on its agenda.
1490th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.

2226 (XXI). Question of the Tl"1Ut Territory of
Nauru
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2111 (XX) of 21 December
1965 on the question of the Trust Territory of Nauru,
H avillg examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 1 July 1965 to 26
July 1966,17
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Trust Territory of Nauru.P
Noting that the people of Nauru, through their
elected representatives in the Legislative Council which
was established on 31 January 1966, have expressed
the wish to achieve independence by 31 January 1968,
Recognizing that the phosphate deposits on the island
of Nauru belong to the Nauruan people,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Nauru to self-government and independence;
2. Recommends that the Administering Authority
should fix the earliest possible date, but not later than
31 January 1968, for the independence of the Nauruan
people in accordance with their freely expressed wishes;
3. Recommends further that the Administering Authority should transfer control over the operation of
17 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/6304).
18 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda

item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l). chapter XIX.

General Assembly-Twenty.first Session

72

the phosphate industry to the Nauruan pe~ple and take
immediate steps, irrespective of the cost mv?lv~d, towards restoring the island of Nauru for habitation by
the Nauruan people as a sovereign nation.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2227 (XXI). Question of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 1 July 1%5 to 26
July 1%6,19
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa~ion with regard ~o. the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ~elat­
ing to the Territory of Papua and the Trust Territory
of New Guinea.s"
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolution 2112 (XX) of 21
December 1965,
Noting with grave concern the discriminatory practices in the Territories,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and New Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Deplores the failure of the administering Power
to implement General Assembly resolution 2112 (XX) ;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to implement
fully resolution 1514 (XV) and to inform the Trusteeship' Council at its thirty-fourth session and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples of
the action taken in this regard;
4. Calls upon the administering Power to implement the following measures:
(a) Removal of all discriminatory electoral qualifications;
(b) Abolition of all discriminatory practices in the
economic, social, health and educational fields;

(c) Holding of elections on the basis of universal
adult suffrage with a view to transferring power to the
people of the Territories;
(d) Fixing of an early date for independence;

5. Further calls upon the administering Power to
refrain from utilizing the Territories for military activities incompatible with the Charter of the United
Nations;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the administering Power.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
1D/bid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/6304).
Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l). chapter XIX.
20 Ibid.,

2228 (XXI). Question of French Somaliland
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of French Somaliland (Djibouti),
Recalling'its resolution 1514 of 14 December 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa.tion with regard .to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to French Somaliland (Djiboutij ;"
Noting the decision taken by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its third ordinary session, held at Addis
Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966,
Having noted the recent political developments in
the Territory and the subsequent announcement ~ade
by the administering Power that a referendum Will be
held in the Territory before July 1967 to enable the
people to decide their political future,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
French Somaliland (Djibouti) to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) ;
2. Calls upon the administering Power to ensure
that the right of self-determination shall be freely expressed and exercised by the indigenous inhabitants of
the Territory on the basis of universal adult suffrage
and with full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
3. Urges the administering Power to create a proper
political climate for a referendum to be conducted on
an entirely free and democratic basis;
4. Requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, to make appropriate arrangements for a United Nations presence before, and
supervision during, the holding of the referendum;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the present resolution to the administering
Power and to report on its implementation to the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
6. Decides to retain the question of French Somaliland (Djibouti) on its agenda.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2229 (XXI). Question of Ifni and Spanish Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Ifni and Spanish Sahara,22
Having taken note of the oral and written statements
of the petitioners from Spanish Sahara,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

»nu«, chapter XII.
22 Ibid., chapter X.

RellOlutiODB adopted ou the reports of the Fourth Committee

Recalling further the resolution adopted on 16 October 1964 by the Special Committee.P
Reaffirming its resolution 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965,
Noting that the Spanish Government, as the administering Power, has not as yet applied the provisions of
the Declaration,
Having regard to the decision taken by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its third ordinary session, held. at
Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966, concernmg
the Territories under Spanish administration,
Noting the decision of the administering Power to
apply in full the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2072 (XX),24
Noting further the statement of the administering
Power on 7 December 1966 relating to Spanish Sahara,
in particular with regard to the sending of a special
United Nations mission to the Territory, the return of
exiles and the free exercise by the indigenous population of its right to self-determination.P
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Ifni and Spanish Sahara to self-determination in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) ;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories of Ifni and Spanish Sahara, and endorses the resolution adopted by the Special Committee
on 16 November 1966,26
3. Requests the administering Power to take immediately the necessary steps to accelerate the decolonization of Ifni and to determine with the Government of
Morocco, bearing in mind the aspirations of the indigenous population, procedures for the transfer of
powers in accordance with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Invites the administering Power to determine at
the earliest possible date, in conformity with the aspirations of the indigenous people of Spanish Sahara and
in consultation with the Governments of Mauritania
and Morocco and any other interested party, the procedures for the holding of a referendum under United
Nations auspices with a view to enabling the indigenous
population of the Territory to exercise freely its right
to self-determination and, to this end:
(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic
and impartial basis, by permitting, inter alia, the return of exiles to the Territory;
(b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous people of the Territory participate
in the referendum;
(c) To refrain from any action likely to delay the
process of the decolonization of Spanish Sahara;
(d) To provide all the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to par28 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l). chapter IX, para. 112.
24 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l), chapter X, annex.
211 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Fourth Committee. 1660th
meeting, paras. 1-4.
261bid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l) , chapter X, para. 243.

73

ticipate actively in the organization and holding of the
referendum;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee, to appoint immediately a special mission to be
sent to Spanish Sahara for the purpose of recommending practical steps for the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and in
particular for determining the extent of United Nations
participation in the preparation and supervision of the
referendum and submitting a report to him as soon as
possible for transmission to the Special Committee;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territories of Ifni
and Spanish Sahara and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-second session.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2230 (XXI). Question of Equatorial Guinea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Equatorial Guinea,
Having heard the statement of the petitioner,
Having also heard the statement of the representative of the administering Power,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Equatorial Guinea,27
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2067 (XX) of 16 December 1965,
Recalling the Basic Law of 1963 which recognized
Fernando Poo and Rio Muni as one entity thereafter
to be called Equatorial Guinea, and the declaration by
the administering Power of its intention to grant independence to Equatorial Guinea as a single entity,
Taking into account the declarations of the administering Power that it would accede to the desires of the
people of the Territory for independence whenever they
so requested,
Noting the desire of the overwhelming majority of
the people consulted that the Territory should become
independent not later than July 1968,
Having noted the statement of the representative
of the administering Power that a constitutional conference will be convened early in 1967,
Recognizing the need for further measures to promote the economic, social and educational advancement
of the people of the Territory,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Equatorial Guinea, and endorses the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein ;28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Equatorial Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Grant27 Ibid., chapter IX.
28 Ibid., chapter IX, annex, paras. 286-310.

74

General Assembly-Twenty·firat Session

ing of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Spain for having invited the Special Committee to visit
the Territory and for the co-operation rendered to the
Sub-Committee on Equatorial Guinea of the Special
Committee during its visit to the Territory;
4. Invites the administering- Power to implement as
soon as possible the following- measures:
(a) Removal of all restrictions on political activities and establishment of full democratic freedoms;
(b) Institution of an electoral system based on universal adult suffrage and the holding, before independence, of a general election for the whole Territory on the
basis of a unified electoral roll;
(c) Transfer of effective power to the government
resulting- from this election;
5. Requests the administering- Power to ensure that
the Territory accedes to independence as a single political and territorial unit and that no step is taken which
would jeopardize the territorial integrity of Equatorial
Guinea;
6. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the wishes of the people of Equatorial Guinea, to
set a date for independence as recommended by the
Special Committee and, for this purpose, to convene a
conference in which the various political parties and
all sections of the population would be fully represented;
7. Further requests the administering Power to establish in law and in practice full equality of political,
economic and social rights;
8. Urges the administering Power to take effective
measures, including increased assistance, to ensure the
rapid economic development of the Territory and to
promote the educational and social advancement of the
people, and requests the specialized agencies to render
all possible assistance towards this end;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action, in consultation with the administering Power
and the Special Committee, to ensure the presence of the
United Nations in the Territory for the supervision of
the preparation for, and the holding of, the election
envisaged in paragraph 4 (b) above, and to participate
in any other measures leading towards the independence
of the Territory;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the administering Power
and to report to the Special Committee on its implementation;
11. Decides to maintain the question of Equatorial
Guinea on its agenda.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2231 (XXI). Question of Gibraltar

The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of Gibraltar,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power and the representative of Spain,
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 2070 (XX) of 16 December
1965, and the consensus adopted by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementa-

tion of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples on 16 October 1964,28
Recalling further its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Taking into account the noted willingness of th~ administering Power and of the Government of Spain to
continue the present negotiations,
Regretting the occurrence of certain acts w~ie~ had
prejudiced the smooth progress of these negotiations,
1. Regrets the delay in the process of decolonization
and in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) with regard to Gibraltar;
2. Calls upon the two parties to continue their negotiations, taking into account the interests of the people
of the Territory, and asks the administering Power to
expedite, without any hindrance and in consultation with
the Government of Spain, the decolonization of Gibraltar, and to report to the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples as soon as possible, and in any
case before the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the
implementation of the present resolution.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2232 (XXI). Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and EIIice Islands,
Grenada, Guam, Mauritius, Montserrat, New
Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
Kltts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucla, St. Vincent,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands and the
Uuited States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Dominica,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts- Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories.s?
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII)
of 17 December 1962, 1956 (XVIII) of 11 December
1963, 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2069 (XX)
of 16 December 1965 and 2189 (XXI) of 13 December
1966,
Deeply concerned at the information contained in the
report of the Special Committee on the continuation of
policies which aim, among other things, at the disruption of the territorial integrity of some of these Terri29 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
CA/S800/Rev.!), chapter X, para. 209.
so lbid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l), chapters XIV-XIX and XXII.

Resolutions adopted on the reportll of the Fourth Committee

tories and at the creation by the administering Powers
of military bases and installations in contravention of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Deploring the refusal of some administering Powers
to allow visiting missions of the United Nations to
visit these Territories,
Conscious that these situations require the continued
attention and the assistance of the United Nations in
the achievement by the peoples of these Territories of
their objectives, as embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of geographical
location and economic conditions concerning some of
these Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
these Territories;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-determination and independence;
3. Calls upon the administering Powers to implement
without delay the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
4. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
5. Urges the administering Powers to allow United
Nations visiting. missions to visit the Territories, and
to extend to them full co-operation and assistance;
6. Decides that the United Nations should render all
help to the peoples of these Territories in their efforts
freely to decide their future status;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to pay
special attention to these Territories and to report on
the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide all possible assistance in the implementation of the
present resolution.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2233 (XXI). Information from Non·Self.Govern.
ing Territories transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
<;alonial Countries and Peoples to study the informati?n tran~mltted to the Secretary-General in accordance
WIth Article 73 e of the Charter of the- United Nations
a?d ~o tak~ it fully into account in examining the
situation With regard to the implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 2109 (XX) of 21 December 1965, in which it approved the procedures adopted
by the Special Committee for the discharge of the func-

7S

tions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII)8!
and requested the Committee to continue to discharge
those functions in accordance with the said procedures,
Having studied the chapter of the report or the Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the action
taken by it in respect of that information.P
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this information."
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Expresses its profound regret that, despite the
repeated recommendations of the General Assembly, including the most recent recommendation contained in
resolution 2109 (XX), some Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-SelfGoverning Territories have not seen fit to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter or have
done so insufficiently or too late j
3. Once again urges all Member States which have
or which assume responsibilities for the administration
of Territories whose peoples have not yet attained a full
measure of self-government to transmit, or continue
to transmit, to the Secretary-General the information
prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the
fullest possible information on political and constitutional development;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII) in accordance with
the procedures referred to above.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2234 (XXI). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non.Self.Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2110 (XX) of 21 December
1965,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,84
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Urges Member States to continue to offer scholarships to the inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories;
3. Requests Member States to facilitate the travel of
student.s from Non-Self-Governing Territories seeking
to avail themselves of the educational opportunities
which are offered to them;
4. Re9uests the Member States offering scholarships
to take mto account the necessity of furnishing corn81 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter I1, appendix I.
• 82 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
Item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l), chapter XXIII.
88 Ibid., agenda items 64 and 71 document A/645S
84 Ibid., document A/6503.'
•

General Assemb ly-Twe nty-firs t Session

76

plete information about the scholarships offered and the
need to provide, whenever possible, travel funds for
prospective studen ts;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the dissemination of information about the scholarships offered
by ~ember States;
6. Invites the administering Powers concerned and
the specialized agencies to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the dissemination of that information;
7. Invites th ... administering Powers concerned to
take all measures necessary to ensure that all scholarships and trainin g facilities offered by Member States
are utilized by the inhabitants of the N on-Self-Governing Territo ries and to render effective assistance to those
persons who have applied for, or have been granted,
scholarships or fellowships, particularly by facilitating
their travel formalities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
9. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Grantin g of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2235 (XXI) . Questi on of the consol idation and
integra tion of the 8pecia l educat ional and
trainin g progra mme8 for South We8t Africa ,
the specia l trainin g progra mme for Territories under Portug uese admtn tstratlo n and
the educat ional and trainin g progra mme for
South Africa ns

Taking into account the establishment of a refugee
education account by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in accordance with the decision of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Progra mme of 7 November 1966,B8
Further taking into account the roles of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies and organs of the
United Nations in matters of training and education,
Noting the interes t and activities of the Organization
of African Unity in the field of educational assistance,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to study, in consultation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Director-General of the Unite.d l':Jations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
and the heads of other appropriate agencies and organs,
and the Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, the question of a consolidation and an integration of the special educational and
training programmes for South West Africa, the special
training programme for Territo ries under Portug uese
administration and the educational and training programme for South Africans, and to report on the results
of this study to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session;
2. Author izes the Secretary-General to establish, if
he deems it desirable, a committee selected from among
host countries of refugees and from among States which
have made contributions to the United Nations educational and training programmes mentioned above, to
advise him on means to develop and expand those programmes.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

The General Assemb ly,
Considering that special educational and training programmes for South West Africa and for Territo ries
under Portug uese administration and an educational and
trainin g programme for South Africans have been established by the United Nations in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 1705 (XVI) of 19 December
1961 and 1808 (XVII ) of 14 December 1962, and Security Council resolution 191 (1964) of 18 June 1964,
Recalling the reports submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session regardi ng the said programmes for South West
AfricaB5 and for Territo ries under Portug uese administration,BlI and to the Security Council on 9 November
1965 regarding the programme for South Africans.s"
Noting that these programmes, although serving similar needs and purposes, are administered separately and
differ with regard to financing,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the way in which he has administered the programmes,
Holding the view that the question of a consolidation
and an integration of these programmes should be considered in order to ensure increased efficiency and to
promote further development and expansion of the
educational and training assistance thereunder,

2236 (XXI) . Specia l educat ional and trainin g
progra mmes for South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1705 (XVI) of 19 December
1961, by which it established a United Nation s Special
Trainin g Progra mme for South West Africans,
Having considered the report submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragra ph 7 of General
Assembly resolution 2076 (XX) of 17 December 1965,·.
Noting with satisfaction that several Member States
have offered scholarships to students from South West
Africa,
Further noting that a number of States have included.
in their offers opportunities for education at the secondary and vocational levels in response to the invitation contained in General Assembly resolutions 1901
(XVII I) of 13 November 1963 and 2076 (XX),
Taking note of the difficulties encountered by persons
residing in the Territo ry in taking advantage of the
"'enefits available under the Prog -amme, particularly in
securing the necessary travel documents,
Taking note of the measures adopted by the Secretary-General with a view to making the benefits of the
Progra mme available to as many South West Africans
as possible,

agenda items 66 and 68, document A/6463.

Twenty- first
38 Official Records of the General Assembl y
Session, Supplement No. 11A (A/63ll /Rev.I/Add.I), part
two, para. 117.
66 and
89 Ibid., Twenty- first Session, Annexes , agenda items
68, document A/6463.

BII lbid.,

all Ibid., document A/6464.
a7 Official Records of the Security Council, Twentie th Year,

Supplement for October, Novemb er and December 1965,
document 5/6891.

ResolutioDs adopted OD the reports of the Fourth Committee

Taking note also of the assistance provided by the
specialized agencies in the implementation of the Programme,
1. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships and travel grants available for the use of South West Africans;
2. Invites those Member States offering scholarships
and those which may subsequently do so to consider
including in their offers scholarships for secondary education and for vocational and technical training;
3. Further invites Member States to give sympathetic consideration to requests by the Secretary-General
for the placement in their secondary, vocational or
technical schools of candidates who have been awarded
scholarships under the Special Training Programme
for South West Africans;
4. Once again requests all Member States to facilitate in every possible way the travel of South West
Africans seeking to avail themselves of educational
'Opportunities provided under the Programme;
5. Requests all the Governments concerned to eo'Operate with the Secretary-General in the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
the necessary measures with a view to making the
benefits of the Programme available to as many South
West Africans as possible;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
'On this question to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

'2237 (XXI). Special training programme for
Territories under Portuguese administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1808 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 and 1973 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
by which it established a special training programme
for the indigenous people of the Territories under
Portuguese administration,
Having considered the report submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 8 of General
Assembly resolution 2108 (XX) of 21 December
1965,·0
Noting with deep regret that, notwithstanding paragraph 10 of resolution 1808 (XVII), paragraph 8 of
resolution 1973 (XVIII) and paragraph 7 of resolution 2108 (XX), the Government of Portugal has not
co-operated in the implernentatien of the special training
programme,
Noting with satisfaction that several Member States
have extended offers of scholarships to students from
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Noting further that a number of States have included
in their offers scholarships for secondary education and
vocational training, in response to the invitation contained in paragraph 4 of resolution 2108 (XX),
Noting with appreciation the measures adopted by the
Secretary-General with a view to making the benefits of
the special training programme available to as many
indigenous inhabitants of the Territories under Portuguese administration as possible, and the progress
achieved in this respect,
• 0 Ibid., document A/6464.

77

Taking note of the assistance provided by the specialized agencies in the implementation of the special training programme,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
measures with a view to making the benefits of the
special training programme available to as many
indigenous inhabitants of the Territories under Portuguese administration as possible;
2. Invites the United Nations programmes of technical assistance and the specialized agencies to continue
to co-operate in the implementation of the special training programme by offering every possible assistance
and such facilities and resources as they may be able to
provide to the recipients and the Governments participating in the programme;
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States
which have extended offers of scholarships to students
from Territories under Portuguese administration;
4. Invites the Member States which have offered
scholarships, and those which plan to do so, to consider offering in the first place scholarships for secondary education and for vocational and technical training;
5. Requests Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of any scholarships offered and of awards made
and utilized;
6. Further requests Member States to facilitate the
travel of students from Territories under Portuguese
administration who are seeking to avail themselves of
the educational opportunities offered;
7. Reiterates its request to the Government of Portugal to co-operate in the implementation of the special
training programme for inhabitants of Territories under
its administration;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its twenty-second
session.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2238 (XXI). Question of Oman
The General Assembly,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting .of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Oman.t!
Having also considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral,42
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling further its resolutions 2073 (XX) of 17
December 1965 and 2189 (XXI) of 13 December 1966,
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Deeply concerned at the serious and critical situation
arising from the colonial policies pursued by the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland in the Territory,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the Territory of Oman;
41 lbid., addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l),
chapter XIII.
42Ibid., agenda item 70, document A/6563.

General Assemb ly-Twe nly.firs l Session

78

to the peace and security of the region, and that their
immediate removal is therefore essential;
7. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to effect immediately the implementation in the
Territo ry of the following measur es:
(a) Cessation of all repressive action against the
people of the Territo ry;
(b) Withdr awal of British troops;
(c) Release of political prisone rs and political detainees and return of political exiles to the Territo ry;
(d) Elimina tion of British domination in any form;
8. Appeal s to all Member States to re~der a~l poss~­
ble assistance to the people of the Ternto ry III their
struggle to attain freedom and independence;
9. Reques ts the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the situation in the Territo ry;
10. Reques ts the Secretary-General to take, in consultation with the Special Committee, approp riate measures for the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its twenty-second session.
1500t/1 plenary 'meeting,
20 December 1966.

2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Territo ry as a whole to self-determination and independence and recognizes the legitimacy of their struggl e
to achieve the rights laid down in the Charter of the
United Nations, the Univer sal Declaration of Human
Rights and the Declaration on the Grantin g of Independence to Colonial Countries and People s;
3. Deplores the refusal of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northe rn Ireland to implement General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2073 (XX);
4. Furthe r deplores the policies of the United Kingdom in installing and supporting any unrepresentative
regime in the Territo ry in contravention of the relevant
General Assembly resolutions;
5. Recogn izes that the natural resources of the Territory belong to the people of Oman and that the concessions given to foreign monopolies withou t the consent
of the people constitute a violation of the rights of the
people of the Territo ry;
6. Considers that the maintenance of military bases,
depots and troops in the Territo ry constitutes a major
hindrance to the exercise by the people of their right to
self-determination and independence and is prejudicial

•
Othe r

•

•

deci sion s

ndence to
Implem entatio n of the Declar ation on the Granti ng of Indepe
23)
(item
s
People
and
ies
Countr
Coloni al
l Assembly
At its 1500th plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966, the Genera
as set
nas),
(Malvi
Islands
d
Falklan
the
ing
concern
us
consens
the
of
took note
ttee.P
Commi
Fourth
the
forth in paragra ph 13 of the report of
44
(item 65)
Questi on of South West Africa (heari ng of petitio ners)
ly took
At its l451st plenary meeting, on 26 Octobe r 1966, the General Assemb
ttee.s"
Commi
Fourth
the
of
report
the
of
part
first
note of the
l Assembly
At its 1500th plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966, the Genera
ittee."
Comm
Fourth
the
of
report
the
of
part
second
the
of
took note
the Special
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to transm it to Declaration
the
of
n
entatio
Implem
the
to
regard
with
n
Situatio
the
on
Committee
, for consideraon the Grantin g of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
ttee and of
Commi
Fourth
the
of
meeting
the
of
records
and
nts
tion, the docume
the second
in
raised
matters
the
to
the plenary meeting of the Assembly relating
"
report.t
ttee's
Commi
Fourth
part of the

.

43 Ibid., agenda item 23, document A/6628.
pp. 2 and 3.
44 See also resolutions 2ltf~ (XXI) and 2146 (XXI),
first Session,
45 Official Records of the General Assembl y, Twenty-

65, document A/6458.
46 Ibid., document A/6458/ Add.I,

Annexes , agenda item

General Assembly-Twenty-firsl Suston

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE
CONTENis
RWloluti",.
No.

Titlw

2135 (XXI) Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/6445
and Add.l )
76 (a)
Resolution A
.
76 (a)
Resolution B
.
2139 (XXI) Financial reports and accounts for the financial year ended 31
December 1965 and reports of the Board of Auditors (A/6477)
72
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
72
Resolution C
.
72
Resolution D
.
72
2140 (XXI) Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Committee
on Contributions (A/6471 and Add.I)
76 (b)
Resolution A
.
.
76 (b)
Resolution B
.
2141 (XXI) Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the United
76 (t)
Nations Staff Pension Committee (A/6472)
.
2150 (XXI) Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the
Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
80
(A/6495)
.
2157 (XXI) A.ppointment to fill a vacancy in the membership of the Board of
76 (c)
Auditors (A/6523)
.
2168 (XXI) Appointments to fill vacancies in the United Nations Administrative
76 (d)
Tribunal (A/6459)
.
.
2176 (XXI) United Nations International School (A/6565)
83
2190 (XXI) Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations
with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (A/6584)
Resolution A
. 12 and 79
Resolution B
. 12 and 79
2191 (XXI) Report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board (A/6S89)
82
2194 (XXI) United Nations Emergency Force (A/6588)
Resolution A
.
21 (b)
Resoluticn B
.
21 (b)
2195 (XXI) Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1966 (A/6590)
Resolution A
.
73
Resolution B
.
73
2196 (XXI) Audit reports relating to expenditure by specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (A/6596)
Resolution A
.
78
Resolution B
.
78
2239 (XXI) Pattern of conferences (A/6629)
.
75
2240 (XXI) Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the
United Nations (A/6630)
..
77
2241 (XXI) Composition of the Secretariat (A/660S)
Resolution A
.
81
Resolution B
.
81
Z242 (XXI) Budget for the financial year 1967 (A/6631)
74
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
,
74
Resolution C
.
74
224J (XXI) Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the financial year 1967
(A/6631)
.
74
2244 (XXI) Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1967 (A/6631)
.
74
2245 (XXI) System of travel and subsistence allowances to members of organs
and subsidiary organs of the United Nations (A/6631)
.
74

79

30 September 1966
25 November 1966

80

26 October 1966
26 October 1966
26 October 1966
26 October 1966

80
80
80
81

26 October 1966
25 November 1966

81

26 October 1966

81

4 November 1966

81

25 November 1966

82

6 December 1966
9 December 1966

82
82

15 December 1966
15 December 1966
15 December 1966

III
83
83

16 December 1966
16 December 1966

84

16 December 1966
16 December 1966

80

81

83

84
86

16 December 1966
16 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966

88

20 December 1966
20 December 1966

89

20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966

89
91
91

20 December 1966
20 December 1966

92

20 December 1966

93

89

92

General Assemb ly-Twen ty-fi.rst Session

80

CON TEN T S (colltin ued)
Resolution

Title

No.

2246 (XXI)
2247 (XXI)

Extension of
(A/6631)

conference facilities at the Palais des Nations
.

)
Publications and documentation of the United Nations (A/6631

O'her deci.iol U
Budget estimates for the financial year 1967
.. .. . ... . .
Pattern of conferences

.. .. .. .. . .. .
.

4. . . . . . . . . . . . .

and the Internat ional
Audit reports relating to expenditure by specialized agencies
... . . . .. .. . .. .. .. .. . ..
Atomic Energy Agency
...................
Personnel questions

2135 (XXI) . Appoi ntmen ts to fill vacanc ies in
the memb ership of the Adviso ry Comm ittee
on Admin istrativ e and Budge tary Questi ons

The General Assemb ly
1. Appoin ts the following persons as members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budget ary
Questio ns:
Mr. John 1. M. Rhodes,
Mr. Wilbur H. Ziehl;
2. Declares Mr. Rhodes to be appointed for a period
beginning on 1 October 1966 and ending on 31 December 1968, and Mr. Ziehl to be appointed for a
period beginning on 1 October 1966 and ending on 31
December 1966.
1424th plenary meeting,
30 September 1966.

B
The General Assemb ly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questio ns:
Mr. Jan P. Bannier,
Mr. Pedro Olarte,
Mr. V. F. Ulanchev,
Mr. Wilbur H. Ziehl;
2. Declares Mr. Bannier, Mr. Olarte, Mr. Ulanchev
and Mr. Ziehl to be appointed for a three-year term
beginning on 1 Januar y 1%7.
1478th plenary meeting,
25 November 1966.

•

DlJleof
lJd<>l>tio..

74

20 December 1966

93

74

20 December 1966

93

74

20 December 1966

94

75

20 December 1966

94

78

16 December 1966

94

81

20 December 1966

94

Page

2139 (XXI) . Financ ial report s and aeeoun ts for
the financ ial year ended 31 Decem ber 1965
and reporf s of the Board of Audito rs
A

A

*

Hem

•

As a result of the above appointments, the Advisor y Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions will be
composed as follows: Mr. Jan P. BANNIER (Nether lands),
Mr. Abdou CIss (Senega l), Mr. Paulo Lopes CORREA (Brazil), Mr. Andre GANEM (France ), Mr. Pedro OLARTE (Colombia) , Mr. John 1. M,. RHODES (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Norther n Ireland) , Mr. Mohamed RIAD (United
Arab Republic), Mr. E. Olu SANU (Nigeria ), Mr. Dragos
SERBANESCU (Roman ia), Mr. Shilendr a K. SINGH (India),
Mr. V. F. ULANCHEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
cnd Mr. Wilbur H. ZIEHL (United States of America ).

UNITED NATION S

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nation s for the financial year ended 31 December 1965 and the certificates of the Board of Audito rsj'
2. Concurs in the observations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as
set forth in its first report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-first session.>
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
B
UNITED NATION S CHILDR EN'S FUND

The General Assemb ly
1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nations Children's Fund for the financial year
ended 31 December 1%5 and the certificates of the
Board of Audito rs :"
2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its second report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session.s
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
C
FOR
UNITED NATION S RELIEF AND WORKS AGENC Y
PALEST INE REFUGE ES IN THE NEAR EAST

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the accounts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palesti ne Refugees in the
Near East for the financial year ended 31 December
1965 and the certificates of the Board of Audito rs;"
Twenty- first
1 Official Records of the General Assembl y,
Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/6306 and Corr.I),
item 72, docu2 Ibid.. TwentY- first Session, Annexes , agenda
ment A/6376.
6A (A/6306 /
II Ibid., Twenty- first Session, Supplem ent No.
Add.l and Corr.1/R ev.!).
• Ibid., TwentY-first Session, Annexes , agenda item 72. document A/6377.
6B (A/6306 /
li Ibid., Twenty- first Session, Supplem ent No.
Corr.1).
and
Add.2

Resolutions adopted OD the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Conunittee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its third report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session."
145200 plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

D
VOLUNTARY FUNDS ADMINISTERED BY THE UNITED
NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the accounts of the voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the financial year ended 31 December
1965 and the certificates of the Board of Auditors ;?
2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its fourth report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session."
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
2140 (XXI). Appointments to fill vacancies In
the membership of the Committee on Contributions
A

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following person as a member of
the Committee on Contributions:
Mr. John 1. M. Rhodes;
2. Declares Mr. Rhodes to be appointed for a period
beginning on the date of the present resolution and
ending on 31 December 1968.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
B

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions:
Mr. Amjad Ali,
Mr. J orge Pablo Fernandini,
Mr. Evgeny Nikolaevich Makeev,
Mr. Maurice Viaud;
2. Declares Mr. Ali, Mr. Fernandini, Mr. Makeev
and Mr. Viaud to be appointed for a three-year term
beginning on 1 January 1%7.
1478th plenary meeting,
25 November 1966.

• * •
As a result of the above appointments, the Committee on
Contributions will be composed as follows: Mr. Amjad Au
(Pakistan), Mr. Raymond T. BOWMAN (United States of
America), Mr. Jorge Pablo FERNANDINI (Peru), Mr. LouisDenis HUDON (Canada), Mr. F. Nouredin KIA (Iran), Mr.
Evgeny Nikolaevich MAKEEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Re8 Ibid.,

Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, docu-

ment A/6378.
7 Ibid.,

Add.3).
8 Ibid.,

TwentY-first Session, SuppleffU!'nt No. 6C (A/6306/

publics), Mr. Stanislaw RACZKOWSKI (Poland), Mr. John 1. M.
RHODES (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). Mr. David SILVEIRA DA MOTA (Brazil) and Mr. Maurice
VIAUD (France).

2141 (XXI). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the United Nationll
Staff Pension Committee

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of
the United Nations Staff Pension Committee:
Mr. John 1. M. Rhodes,
Mr. Wilbur H. Ziehl;
2. Declares Mr. Rhodes and Mr. Ziehl to be appointed for a period beginning on the date of the present resolution and ending on 31 December 1967.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

*

* •

As a result of the above appointments, the members and
alternate members elected by the General Assembly to th~
United Nations Staff Pension Committee will be the following:
MEMBERS
Mr. Jose ESPINOZA (Chile);
Mr. John 1. M. RHODES (United Kingdom of Great B,.itai"

and Northern Ireland);
Mr. Wilbur H. ZIEHL (United States of America).
ALTERNATE MEMBERS
Mr. Brian J. LYNCH (New Zealand) ;
Mr. Jean-Oaude RENAUD (France);
Mr. Shilendra K. SINGH (ilndia).

2150 (XXI). Report of the Ad Hoc Committee
of Experts to Examine the Finances of the
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2049 (XX) of 13 December
1965 establishing the Ad Hoc Conunittee of Experts to
Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the
Specialized Agencies,
Noting with appreciation the work done by the Ad
Hoc Committee with the co-operation of the United
Nations Secretariat, the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency and other United
Nations organs and related bodies,
Noting further that the Ad Hoc Committee, in compliance with paragraph 6 (b) of the above-mentioned
resolution, has submitted its recommendations to the
General Assembly in its report dated 19 July 1966,9
Bearing in mind that certain subsequent actions must
be taken by Member States, the United Nations organs
and related bodies, and the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency, to ensure
the effective implementation of the recommendations
made by the Ad Hoc Committee,
Recognizing that the full implementation of the
recommendations made by the Ad Hoc Committee
would also require the co-operation of the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency

Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, docu-

ment A/6379.

81

9 Ibid., agenda item 80, document A/6343.

General Assemb ly-Twe nly-firs l Session

82

in the spirit of Article 58 of the Charte r of the United
Nations and in the light of the agreem ents betwee n them
and the United Nations ,
1. Appr01Jes the report of the Ad Hoc Commi ttee
of Expert s to Examin e the Finance s of the United
Nation s and the Special ized Agenci es and the recommendat ions contain ed therein ;
2. Urges that the recomm endatio ns and comme nts
contain ed in the report be given the most attentiv e
conside ration hy Membe r States and by the United
Nation s organs and related bodies with a view to the
earliest implem entation of the recomm endatio ns;
3. Reques ts the Secreta ry-Gen eral, as chief adminis trative officer of the United Nations , to take the appropriate measur es to give effect to those recomm endatio ns
requirin g his action, includi ng the submis sion of proposals to the compet ent United Nation s organs and
related bodies;
4. Recom mends to the specialized agencie s and the
Interna tional Atomic Energy Agency that they give the
most attentiv e conside ration to the recomm endatio ns
contain ed in the report and that they take approp riate
measur es, within their respect ive areas of competence,
with a view to the earliest possibl e implem entation of
those recomm endatio ns;
S. Reques ts the Secreta ry-Gen eral, as Chairm an of
the Admini strative Commi ttee on Co-ord ination , to encourage the adoptio n of the approp riate measur es by
the specialized agencie s and the Interna tional Atomic
Energy Agency , particu larly those requirin g concert ed
. action;
6. Furthe r requests the Secreta ry-Gen eral to transmit the present resoluti on and the report of the Ad
Hoc Commi ttee to the specialized agencies and the Internatio nal Atomic Energy Agency ;
7. Jmntcs the Secreta ry-Gen eral to submit to the
Genera l Assemb ly at its twenty- second session a report
on the implem entation of the recomm endatio ns of the
Ad Hoc Commi ttee by the United Nation s family of
organiz ations.
1458th plenary meeting.
4 Novem ber 1966.

•

•

•

At the 1501st plenary meeting, on 20 Decemb er 1966 the
Presiden t of the General Assembl y announc ed that he' had
drawn up the list of countrie s mention ed in paragrap h 67 of
the report of the Ad Hoc Committ ee of Experts to Examine
the Finances of the United Nations and the Speciali zed Aqen-o
cies,9 dealing with the establish ment of an inspectio n unit.l
That list comprise s the followin g M ember States: FRANCE,
INDIA, MEXICO, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and
YUGOSLAVIA.

2157 (XXI) . Appoi ntmen t to fill a vacanc y in
the memb ership of the Board of Audito rs
The General Assemb ly
Appoin ts the Audito r-Gene ral of Pakista n as a member of the Board of Audito rs for a three-y ear term beginning on 1 July 1967.
1478th plenary meeting ,
25 Novem ber 1966.
10 See A/6635.

As a result of the aboie appointsncn t, the Board of Auditors
will be comlio scd as follows: the First Presiden t of the Audit
Office of DELGlUM, the Auditor- General of COLOMBIA and
the Auditor- General of PAKISTAN,

2168 (XXI) . Appoi ntmen ts to fill vacanc ies in
the United Nation s Admin istrativ e Tribun al
The General Assemb ly
1. Appoin ts the following persons as membe rs of
the United Nation s Admini strative Tribun al:
l\'1r. Hector Gros Espiell,
Mr. Zenon Rosside s ;
2. Declares Mr. Gras Espiell and Mr. Rosside s to
be appoint ed for a three-y ear term beginni ng on 1
Januar y ] 967.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.

..

*

As a result of the above appointm ents, the Unit cd Nations
Adminis trative Tribuna l 'Will be compose d as follows: Mrs.
Paul BASTID (France ), the Right Honoura ble Lord CROOK
(United Kingdom of Great Britain. and N orthcrn Ireland)
Mr. Hector GROS ESPIELL (Urugua y), Mr. Louis IGNACI~
PIIno (Dahom ey), Mr. Francis T. P. PLIMPTON (United
States of America ), Mr. Zcnon ROSSIDES (CyPrus ) and Mr.
R VENKATARAMAN (India).

2176 (XXI) . United Nation s Intern ationa l School
The General Assemb ly,
Having considered the report of the Secreta ryGenera l!' and the report of the Board of Trustee s of
the United Nation s Interna tional School annexe d
there~o! and. the report of the Adviso ry Commi ttee on
Admini strarive and Budget ary Questio ns thereon .P
N oting tha~. the Secreta ry-Gen eral has accepte d the
offer by the CIty of New York of a perman ent site for
t~e School, as authori zed by Genera l Assemb ly resoluhas entered
tlO11 2123 (XX) of 21 Decem ber 1965 and
into a ninety- nine-ye ar lease for this site,
Noting that contrac ts for the prepara tion of the site
detailed specifications for the new buildin z and certain
other prelimi nary steps in the constru ction have been
m~d.e possibl e by the generou s contrib utions of $7.5
million from the For.d. Founda tion to build and equip
the School and $1 million from the Rockef eller family
to prepare the site,
Recalling that a major conditio n of the Ford Founda tio,:! gra~t is the establis hment of a Develo pment Fund
which will ensure the financial viabilit y of the School
and promot e its educati onal excellence,
Expres sing its appreciation to the forty-fo ur Govern ments which have made. pledges to the Develo pment
Fund and to generou s private donors, whose combin ed
contrib utions have now brough t the total amount of the
Fund to $1,014, 613,
Cognizant of the fact that the Board of Trustee s of
a
th~ School and the Secreta ry-Gen eral believe that
lish
accomp
to
raised
be
must
minimu m of $3 million
the major purpos es of the Fund.

P

fficial Records of Ih~ General Assembl y. Twenty- first
11
Sesswn; Annexes , agenda Item 83. documen t A/6507.
12 lbid., documen t A/6536.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

I. A uthorizes the Secretary-Ceneral to transfer to
the Board of Trustees of the United Nations International School from the grants already available the
amounts necessary to ensure the speedy completion of
the new building;
2. Urges Member States which have not yet done so
to contribute promptly to the Development Fund for
the School under the terms of General Assembly resolutions 1982 (XVIII) of 17 December 1963, 2003
(XIX) of 10 February 1965 and 2123 (XX) of 21
December 1%5 ;
3. Decides to contribute $48,900 to the International
School Fund in 1967 to cover the operating deficit
foreseen for the current school year.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.

2190 (XXI). Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the
specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency

A
The General Assembly,
Having in mind that in its resolution 311 B (IV) of
24 November 1949 it expressed the belief that there is
room for a closer relationship between the assessments
of Member States in the contributions both of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies,
Noting with appreciation that since the adoption of
resolution 311 B (IV) several specialized agencies have
brought the assessments of their member States into a
substantial degree of harmony with the United Nations
scale of contributions,
Noting also that, even alIowing for differences in
membership, there still remain variations and fluctuations in the scales of contributions of some of those
agencies which apply methods of assessment similar to
those of the United Nations,
Taking note of the comments and observations of. the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, contained in its fourteenth report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session,18 with regard to the desirability of reducing the aforementioned
variations to a minimum,
1. Recommends that, in the spirit of General Assembly resolution 311 B (IV) and in the interest of coordination and uniformity, the specialized agencies
should keep this matter under review;
2. Recommends further that the specialized agencies
which apply methods of assessment similar to those of
the United Nations and whose scales of contributions
still differ appreciably from the United Nations scale
take steps to bring their scales into harmony with the
United Nations scale as soon as possible, taking into
account differences in membership and other pertinent
factors;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
specialized agencies concerned the present resolution,
together with the relevant comments and observations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions set forth in its fourteenth report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.
1494th plenary meeting,
15 December 1966.
18 Ibid .. agenda items 12 and 79, document A/6522. paras.
39-43.

83

B
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions 14 on
the administrative budgets for 1967 of the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to refer to the
executive heads of the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, through the consultative machinery of the Administrative Committee on
Co-ordination, matters arising under chapter II of that
report which caIl for their attention, together with the
record of the related discussion in the Fifth Committee;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to refer
to the executive heads of the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency the observations of the Advisory Committee, contained in chapters
III and IV of its report, on their administrative budgets
for 1967.
1494th plenary meeting,
15 December 1966.
2191 (XXI). Report of the United Nations Joint
StaB Pension Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board for 196615 and the related
reports of the Secretary-General'" and the Advisory
Committee On Administrative and Budgetary Questions,lT
I
ADJUSTMENT OF BENEFITS IN RESPECT OF COST-OFLIVING CHANGES

Decides to continue until 31 December 1969 the system of adjustment of pensions, annuities and deferred
annuities laid down in General Assembly resolution
2122 (XX) of 21 December 1965;
II
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE FUND

Resolves that the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund shall be amended, with effect
from I January 1967, in accordance with annex V to
the report of the Joint Staff Pension Board'" to the
General Assembly and to the member organizations of
the Fund for 1966.
1494th plenary meeting,
15 December 1966.
2194 (XXI). United Nations Emergency Force

A
The General Assembly
1. Approves the revised cost estimates submitted by
the Secretary-General for the financial year 1966 in
the amount of $16,146,000;
document A/6S22.
Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/6308).
Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 82,
document A/C.S/l078.
17 Ibid., documents A/6380 and A/6537.
18 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, SUPPlement No. 8 (A/6308),
14 Ibid.,
15 Ibid.,
16 Ibid.,

p. 40.

General Assem bly-Tw enty.6n t Session

2. Author izes the Secreta ry-Gen eral to meet the
cost of actual require ments over the approp riation of
$15 million, and within the amount of $16,146,000, by
the use of the surplus accoun t of the United Nation s
Emerge ncy Force.
1495th plenary meeting ,
16 Decemb er 1966.

B
The General Assemb ly,
Having considered the report of the Secreta ryGenera l on the cost estimat es of the United Nations
Emerge ncy Force for the period from 1 January to 31
Decem ber 1967 10 and the report of the Adviso ry Committee On Admini strative and Budget ary Questio ns
thercon.t?
Expres sing the hope that the ad hoc arrange ments
provide d in the present resolution will not need to be
repeate d in future years and that the General Assembly
will be able to reach agreem ent on an acceptable
method for the equitab le sharing of the cost of peacetaking
~eeping operati ons involvi ng heavy expend iture,
es by
guidelin
as
d
affirme
les
princip
the
t
into accoun
the Assembly in its resoluti on 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June
1963,
Taking into account the fact that the economically
more developed countri es are in a position to make
relative ly larger contrib utions and that the economically less developed countri es have a relatively limited
capacit y to contrib ute toward s peace-keeping operati ons
involving heavy expend itures,
1. Decides to approp nate an amount of $14 million
for the operati on of the United Nation s Emerge ncy
Force for 1%7;
2. Decides, as an ad hoc arrange ment, withou t prejudice to the positions of principle which may be taken
by Membe r States in any conside ration by the Genera l
Assembly of arrange ments for the financing of peacekeeping operati ons:
item 21,
19 Ibid., Twenty- first Session, Annexes , agenda
document A/6498.
20 Ibid., document A/6542.

(a) To apporti on an amount of $740,000 for 1%7
among the economically less developed Membe r States
in the proport ions determ ined by the scale of assessments for 1967;
(b) To apporti on an amount of $13,260,000 for
1967 among the economically develop ed Membe r States
in the proport ions determ ined by the scale of assessments for 1%7, plus-i n order to meet reserve require ments -an additio nal amoun t from each contrib utor in
this group equal to 25 per cent of its apporti onment ,
such additio nal contrib utions to be reimbu rsable on a
pro rata basis when the Genera l Assemb ly shall determine that all or part of these additio nal contrib utions
arc no longer needed ;
3. Calls upon States membe rs of the specialized
agencies and of the Interna tional Atomic Energy
Agency which are not Membe rs of the United Nation s
to make contrib utions approp riate to their circum stances ;
4. Decide s that the contrib utions called for in paragraph 2 above may be made by a Membe r State, at its
option, in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secreta ry-Gen eral, furnish ed for use in connex ion
with the United Nation s Emerge ncy Force during the
period from 1 Januar y to 31 Decem ber 1%7, for
which the Membe r State does not require reimbu rsement, the Membe r State to be credite d with the fair
value thereof as agreed upon by the Membe r State and
by the Secreta ry-Gen eral;
5. Decides that, for the purpos e of the present resolution, the term "economically less developed Membe r
States" shall mean all Membe r States except Austral ia,
Austria , Belgium , the Byeloru ssian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Canada , Czechoslovakia, Denma rk, Finland ,
France , Hungar y, Iceland, Ireland , Italy, Japan, Luxem bourg, the Nether lands, New Zealand , Norway , Poland, Romanfa, South Africa, Sweden , the Ukrain ian
Soviet Sociali st Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdo m of Great Britain
and Northe rn Ireland and the United States of
Americ a.
1495th plenary meeting ,
16 Decemb er 1966.

1966
2195 (XXI) . Supple menta ry estima tes for the financ ial year
A
1966
BUDGE T APPRO PRIAT IONS FOR THE FINAN CIAL YEAR

The General Assemb ly
Resolve s that for the financial year 1966:
on 2125 A (XX) of 21 December 1965
1. The amoun t of $US 121,567,420 approp riated by its resoluti
:
shall be decreas ed by $US 486,890 as follows
Amount
appropriated
by resolution
2125 A (XX)

Increase
(or decrease)

Revised
amoulIt of
appropriatIOn

(US dollars)

Section,

1. Session s of the General Asscml;ly, the councils,
commis sions and commit tees.. special meeting s and conferences
1. Travel and other expense s of represe ntative s and membe rs of
.
commissions, commit tees and other subsidi ary bodies
PART

1,107,400

(78,100 )

1,029,300

85

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1966 (r ontinucd ;
Amount
appropriated
b» resolution
2i25 A (XX)

Revised
I ncrease
(or decrease)

amount of

a ppro'priation

(US dollars)
Section

2. Special meetings and conferences
TOTAL, PART I
PART II. Staff costs and related expenses
3. Salaries and wages
.
4. Common staff costs
.
.
5. Travel of staff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
6. Payments under annex I, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the Staff
Regulations; hospitality
.

1,741,000

(84,900)

1,656,100

2,848,400

(163,000)

2,685,400

56,300,000
13,195,300
2,144,400

(417,700)
(171,300)
(23,400)

55,882,300
13,024,000
2,121,000
125,000

125,000

II

71,764,700

.
.
.
.
.

4,360,000
525,930
3,800,000
4,701,000
1,800,000

III

15,186,930

505,000

15,691,930

8.885,800

3,200

8,889,000

IV

8,885,800

3,200

8,889,000

Techn£cal programmes
13. Economic development, social activities and public administration
.
14. Human rights advisory services
15. Narcotic drugs control

6,105,000
220,000
75,000

6,105,000
220,000
75,000

TOTAL, PART V

6,400,000

6,400,000

TOTAL, PART

Ill. Premises, equipment, supplies and services
7. Buildings and improvements to premises
8. Permanent equipment
9. Maintenance, operation and rental of premises
10. General expenses
11. Printing

(612,400)

71,152,300

PART

TOTAL, PART

IV. Special expenses
12. Special expenses
.

125,000
380,000

4,360,000
525,930
3,925,000
5,081,000
1,800,000

PART

TOTAL, PART
PART V.

PART VI. Special missions and related activities
16. Special missions
17. United Nations Field Service
.

.
.

4,317,990
2,106,200

(69,790)
(120,200)

4,248,200
1,986,000

TOTAL, PART VI

6,424,190

(189,990)

6,234,200

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
18. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

3,011,800

80,300

3,092,100

TOTAL, PART VII

3,011,800

80,300

3,092,100

.

1,074,100

1,074,100

TOTAL, PART VIII

1,074,100

1,074,100

PART VII.

PART VIII.

International Court of Justice
19. International Court of Justice

General Assemb ly-Twen ty-fh-st Session

86

~~~----~~~

BUDGE T APPRO PRI:\TI ONS FOR THE

Fl~AN CIAL YEAR

-

1966 (c ontinucdv

~lmoll/lt

Re,Jisl'd
t of

appropriated
bv resolu tion
ZiZ5 A (XX)

!Ilcrtas,'

("r decrease}

(I III 0 ItII

ap,IJropriatioll

(I 's dollars}

Section

IX. United Nation s Conference OH Trade and Developm ent
20. United Nation s Conference on Trade and Development
PART

IX

5,971,500

( 110,000)
--(110,000)

GRAND TOTAL

1.2l.5G7,420

("fI'6.890)

TOTAL, PART

5,971,500

5,861,500
5,861,500
121,080,530

-----

between sections of the budget with the
2. The Secreta ry-Gen eral shall be authori zed to transfer credits
ary Questio ns;
Budget
and
e
istrativ
prior concurr ence of the Adviso ry Committee on Admin
part V shall be admini stered in accordance
3. The approp riations for technical assistance program mes under
definition of obligations and the period
the
that
with the Financ ial Regula tions of the United Nations , except
practices approv ed by the Technical
and
res
procedu
the
with
nce
accorda
in
of validity of obligations shall be
nce;
Assista
cal
Assistance Committee for the Expand ed Progra mme of Techni
t of $197,460 relating to the Perman ent
4. The provisions under sections 1, 3, 5 and 11, in a total amoun stered as a unit;
admini
be
Central Opium Board and the Drug Superv isory Body, shall
amount of $454,550 relating to the United
5. The provisions under sections 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 10, in a total
n Committee, shall be admini stered in
Pensio
Nation s Joint Staff Pension Board and the United Nation s Staff
Joint Staff Pension Fund;
s
Nation
United
the
of
tions
accordance with article XXVI I of the Regula
million in respect of the United Nation s
6. The unexpe nded balances of the 1966 approp riations of $1 rred on 31 December 1966 to the Santiag o
transfe
be
shall
III),
building in Santiag o, Chile (section 7, chapter
1692 (XVI) of 18 December 1961;
Buildin g Fund established under Genera l Assembly resolution
an amount of $17,500 is approp riated
7. In additio n to the approp riations voted under paragra ph 1 above,
for the purchas e of books, periodicals, maps and
from the accumulated income of the Library Endow ment Fund
Palais des Nation s as are in accordance with
the
at
Library
library equipm ent and such other expenses of the
the objects and provisi ons of the endowment.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 Decemb er 1966.

B
I~COME

ESTIM ATES FOR THE FINAN CIAL YEAR 1966

The General Assemb ly
Resolve s that for the financial year 1966:
of 21 December 1965 shall be revised
1. The estimates of income approv ed by its resolut ion 2125 13 (XX)
as follows:
Estimate
aiit roned

l-v resolution
.!i?5Jl( XX)

--- --- --- ~-- -~~

--- -~~ --~ --- -~~

hcrl'<lse
(or decrease )

~~- --~ --- --~ --~

Revised
estimate

~~- -~~ ~-

(US d ollors)

Income section
PART

1. Income from staff assessment

13,114,900

(664.900)

12,450,000

I

13,114.900

(664,900)

12,450,000

.
2. Funds provide d from extra-b udgetar y accounts , .. ,
.
,.,
,.,
.,
,.",,'
..,.,.
3. Genera l income
Postal
s
Nation
(United
stamps
4. Sale of United Nation s postage
,
,
,
,.',
,
Admin istratio n)

1,916.200
1,566,200

221.600
625,800

2,137,800
2,192,000

1,670.000

405,000

2.075,000

1. Staff assessment income ... , .... ,., .. , .. ,.,.
TOTAL, PART

PART

n. Other income

87

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

INCOME ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1966 (continued)
Estimate
approved
&1' resolution
ZiZ5 B (XX)

IlIcrease
(or decrease)

Revised
estimate

(US dollars)

Income section

718,000
805,400

27,000

718,000
832,400

TOTAL, PART II

6,675,800

1,279,400

7,955,200

GRAND TOTAL

19,790,700

614,500

20,405,200

5. Sale of publications
6. Services to visitors and catering services

.
.

2. The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
3. Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, catering and related
services, and the sale of publications, not provided for under the budget appropriations, shall be charged
against the income derived from those activities.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2196 (XXI). Audit reports relating to expenditure
by specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency
A

The General Assembly
Takes note of the audit reports relating to expenditure by specialized agencies and by the International
Atomic Energy Agency of technical assistance funds
allocated from the Special Account, for the financial
year ended 31 December 1965,21 and of the observations thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as set forth
in its twenty-eighth report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session.P
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
B

The General Assembly
Takes note of the audit reports relating to expenditure
by specialized agencies, acting as executing agencies,
of funds earmarked from the Special Fund, for the
financial year ended 31 December 1965 23 and of the
observations thereon of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions as set forth
in its twenty-ninth report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-first session."
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2239 (XXI). Pattern of conferences

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1202 (XII) of 13 December 1957, 1851 (XVII) of 19 December 1962,

21 Ibid., addendum 1 to agenda item 78 (A/6511).
22 Ibid.,
23 Ibid.,

agenda item 78, document A/6580.
addendum 2 to agenda item 78 (A/6512).
24 Ibid., agenda item 78, document A/6581.

1987 (XVIII) of 17 December 1963 and 2116 (XX)
of 21 December 1965,
Recognizing that the unique forum provided to
Member States by meetings and conferences is essential in furthering the work of the United Nations,
Mindful of the concern expressed by Member States
and the Secretary-General at the recent proliferation
in the number of meetings, conferences and related
documents,
Convinced of the need to achieve a proper balance
each year between the calendar of meetings and conferences desired by Member States and the resources,
both human and material, available to the Organization
for this purpose,
Noting that, under the Charter of the United Nations,
the Financial Regulations of the Organization and the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, final approval of the annual calendar of meetings and conferences rests with the General Assembly, and responsibility for the organization of the calendar rests with
the Secretary-General in his capacity as chief administrative officer of the Organization,
Bearing in mind the observations and recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine
the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies contained in chapter IX of its second report,25
subsequently approved by the General Assembly in
resolution 2150 (XXI) of 4 November 1966,
Bearing in mind also the fact that the Special Committee on Co-ordination of the Economic and Social
Council has suggested in its report'" the establishment
of a committee of the General Assembly to deal with
the calendar of meetings, and that this proposal has
been endorsed by both the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the
Secretary-General,
1. Decides to establish, on an experimental basis
subject to review by the General Assembly at its twenty-------~

2;; Ibid.,

agenda item 80, document A/6343.

26 Official

Records 0/ the Economic and Social Council.
Forty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document E/4215.

88

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ . __. _ . this calendar to the General Assembly for final apfourth session, a Committee on Conferences, consisting
proval;
of fifteen Member States;
8. Requests that the action required in sub-para2. Decides further that this Committee shall have
graphs 7 (b) and (c) above be taken in sufficient time
the following functions:
to enable the Secretary-General, and in turn the Ad(a) To submit to the General Assembly at each
visory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
regular session a calendar of meetings and conferences
Questions and the Fifth Committee, to recommend the
for the following year for the competent organs of the
inclusion of funds for carrying out the approved calendar
United Nations, including the subsidiary organs of
in the regular budget estimates for the following year;
the General Assembly;
9. Recommends that all competent organs of the
( b) To undertake such other tasks in this general
United Nations, including subsidiary organs of the
field as may be requested by the General Assembly;
General Assembly, should bear in mind that proposals
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
involving new meetings and conferences would be
to designate the Member States, on the basis of broad
subject to the recommendations of the Committee on
equitable geographical distribution, to serve on the
Conferences and to final approval by the Assembly;
Committee fo: three years;
10. Invites the Secretary-General of the United
4. Requests the members of the Committee to noNations and the executive heads of the specialized
minate representatives with wide experience in the work
agencies and of the International Atomic Energy
of the United Nations;
Agency to give the Committee on Conferences whatever
assistance it may require in discharging its responsi5. Requests the Secretary-General:
bilities.
(a) To consult with the other members of the Ad1501st plenary meeting,
ministrative Committee on Co-ordination, in accordance
20 December 1966.
with the recommendation in chapter IX of the second
report of the Ad Hoc Commitee of Experts to Examine
* * •
the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies, and to draw up in August of each year, for
The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
submission to the General Assembly, in his capacity
paragraph 3 of the above resolution, designated the members
as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coof the Committee on Conferences. 27
ordination, the provisional calendar of meetings and
The Committee on Conferences will be composed of the
conferences planned by the entire United Nations
following Member States: ALGERIA, BURMA, CONGO (DEMOCRATIC REpUBLIC OF), CZECHOSLOVAKIA, FRANCE, INDIA, JAfamily of organizations for the two following calendar
MAICA, JAPAN, NEW ZEALAND, SPAIN, UNION OF SOVIET Soyears;
CIALIST REpUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
(b) To prepare at the same time, in his capacity as
NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA
chief administrative officer of the United Nations, a
and ZAMBIA.
complete statement of the existing resources and of
the additional resources which would be required for
the proposed schedule of meetings and conferences of
2240 (XXI). Scale of assessments for the apthe Organization for the two following calendar years;
portionment of the expenses of the United
(c) To transmit this material, together with an inNations
dication of any difficulties foreseen in reconciling the
The General Assembly
resources available and the proposed schedule, to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Resolves that:
Questions and to the Committee on Conferences;
(a) For the year 1967, the rates of assessment for
the States admitted to membership in the United
6. Invites the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions to examine, early in its
Nations at the twenty-first session of the General A1;,autumn session, the material provided by the Secretarysembly shall be as follows:
General and to forward its comments to the Committee
Member State
Rate of assessment
on Conferences;
Barbados
0.04
7. Requests the Committee on Conferences to meet
Botswana
0.04
as necessary to perform its functions, and:
Guyana ...
0.04
(a) Early in the regular session of the General
Lesotho
0.04
Assembly, to review the information submitted to it
And for Indonesia, which resumed full
and formulate recommendations on proposals for new
participation in the Organization on
meetings and conferences under consideration by the
0.39
28 September 1966 ...
Assembly, for transmission to the appropriate Main
These rates shall be added to the scale of assessments
Committee;
for 1967 as established in General Assembly resolution
(b) In the course of the regular session, to examine
2118 (XX) of 21 December 1965;
any further proposals for new meetings and conferences
(b) For the year 1966, Guyana, which became a
and submit its recommendations to the Main Committee
Member of the United Nations on 20 September 1966,
concerned;
Botswana and Lesotho, which became Members on 17
(c) In the closing stages of the regular session, and
October 1966, and Barbados, which became a Member
in consultation with the Chairmen of the principal
on 9 December 1966, shall contribute an amount equal
organs and of the Main Committees, to draw up the
to one ninth of their rates of assessment for 1967, apcalendar of United Nations mcetings and conferences
plied to the net budget for 1966;
for the following year, with recommendations concerning the schedule for the succeeding year, and to transmit
27 See A/6634.

89

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Believes that, as a temporary measure and under
the existing conditions, increased recruitment on the
basis of fixed-term contracts, especially in the case of
developing countries, might help to achieve a balanced
geographical distribution;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to give preference
to candidates from inadequately represented countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to study the
question of determining the desirable ranges of posts
for individual countries, taking into account the level
of appointment together with the number of posts;
4. Further invites the Secretary-General, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, to draw the attention of the competent
authorities of the specialized agencies to this problem
at a forthcoming session of that Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take the present
resolution into account in his future reports on the
composition of the Secretariat.
1501st plen<JJry meeting,
20 December 1966.

(c) The four new Members-Barbados, Botswana,
Guyana and Lesotho-and Indonesia shall make advances to the Working Capital Fund at their rates of
assessment for 1967 applied to the authorized amount
of the Fund for that year.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2241 (XXI). Composition of the Secretariat

A

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the considerable changes which have
occurred in the membership of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies,
Recalling the provisions of Articles 100 and 101 of
the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling further its resolution 1928 (XVIII) of 11
December 1963 on this question,
Noting that in the determination of the recruitment
priorities the Secretary-General bears in mind the
need for a more equitable distribution of staff among
the Member States within the various regions, in
particular at the levels of 'senior posts,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts already made by
the Secretary-General to improve the geographical distribution of posts in the Secretariat and mentioned in
his report on the composition of the Secretariat."
Considering nevertheless that arrangements should
be made to ensure an even more equitable distribution
of posts,
Recognizing the need for a large proportion of
permanent contracts and fixed-term contracts of longer
duration to ensure the stability and efficient operation
of the Secretariat, and noting the statement of the
Secretary-General in paragraph 14 of his report,

B
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind rule 51 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly,
Noting the statement by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 3 of his report on the composition of the
Secretariat.s"
Recognizing the limitations in regard to the recruitment of staff which result from language considerations,
Requests the Secretary-General to study the methods
which should be used to ensure a more equitable use
of the working. languages of the Organization and a
better balance among those languages in the recruitment of staff at all levels, and in particular at the higher
levels. of the Secretariat, and to include his conclusions
on this question in his future reports.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 81, document A/6487.

2242 (XXI). Budget for the financial year 1967

A
BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1967

The General Assembly
Resolves that for tM' financial year 1967:
1. An amount of $US 130,314,230 is appropria.ted for the following purposes:
Section
([ 'S dollars)

Sessions of the General Assembly, the councils, commissions and committees; special meetings and conferences

PART 1.

1. Travel and other expenses of representatives and members of commissions,
committees and other subsidiary bodies
..........
.
.
2. Special meetings and conferences
.

PART

n. Staff costs and related expenses

3. Salaries and wages
4. Common staff costs

TOTAL, PART

1,241,750
1,818,150

I
.
.

3,059,900
57,046,500
13,572,700

General Asscmbly-Twenty.fil'"t Session

90

- - - - - ----------------

BUDGET APl'ROPR1ATlONS FOR Till': FINA"\Cli\L YF"\I{ 1967 (Clllztilll/,'d)

-------------------Section

(US dollars)

5. Travel of staff
6. Payments under annex I, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the Staff Regulations;
hospitality

121,000
72,751,830

II

TOTAL, PART

Ill. Premises, equipment, supplies and services
- _. _. - - _--. ---. --9. Maintenance, operation and rental of premises
10. General expenses
11. Printing

2,011,630

PART

7. Buildings and improvements to premises _. _
. _.. 8. Permanent equipment

- ..
.

4,930,700
633,900
4,000,500
5,122,900
1,835,900
16,523,900

III

TOTAL, PART
PART IV. Special expenses
12. Special expenses

9,072,200
9,072.200

IV

TOTAL, PART
PART V. Technical programmes
13. Economic development, social development and public administration
14. Human rights advisory services
15. Narcotic drugs control

6.105,000
220,000
75,000

TOTAL, PART

6,400,000

V

PART VI. Special missions and related activities
16. Special missions
17. United Nations Field Service

3,163,000
1,824,000
4,987,000

VI

TOTAL, PART
PART VII. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refu[!ees
18. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

3,233,000
3,233,000

VII

TOTAL, PART
PART VIII. International Court of Justice
19. International Court of Justice

1,149,900
TOTAL, PAHT

1,149.000

VIII

PART IX. United Nations Conference on Trade and Dcnelo pmcnt
20. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
TOTAL, PART

7,407,000
7,407,000

IX

PART X. United Nations Industrial Development Organization
21. United Nations IndustrialOWDevelopment Organization

5,729.500
X

5,729,500

GRAND TOTAL

130.314.230

TOTAL, PAIn

2. The Secretary-General shall be authorized to transfer credits bet ween sections of the hudget with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
3. The appropriations for technical assistance programmes under part V shall be administered in accordance
with the Financial Regulations of the United Nations, except that the definition of obligations and the period of
validity of obligations shall be in accordance with the procedures and practices established for the Technical Assistance component of the United Nations Development Programme;
4. The provisions under sections 1, 3, 5 and 11, in a total amount of $192,880 relating to the Permanent
Central N arcotics Board and the Drug Supervisory Body, shall be administered as a unit;

91

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. The provisions under sections 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 10, in a total amount of $494,560 relating to the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and the United Nations Staff Pension Committee, shall be administered in
accordance with article XX VII of the Regulations of the United Nations] oint Staff Pension Fund;
6. In addition to the appropriations voted under paragraph 1 above, an amount of $17,500 is appropriated
from the accumulated income of the Library Endowment Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps,
and library equipment and such other expenses of the Library at the Palais des Nations as are ill accordance with
the objects and provisions of the endowment.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

B
INCOME ESTIMATES FOR THE

FI~ANCIAL YEAR

1967

The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1967:
1. Estimates of income other than assessments on Member States totalling $US 21,642,426 are approved
as follows:
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ----------------------~._-------_. -_.Income section
(US dollars)

1. Income from staff assessment
1. Staff assessment income
PART

13,249,800
TOTAL, PART

PART

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

I

13,249,800

n. Other income

Funds provided from extra-budgetary accounts
__ .
..
.
.
General income
Sale of United Nations postage stamps (United Nations Postal Administration)
Sale of publications
_.. _. _
_.
Services to visitors and catering services
.

2,196,276
2,777,400
1,800,000
827,650
791,300

TOTAL, PART II

8,392,626

GRAND TOTAL

21,642,426

2. The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
3. Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, catering and related
services, and the sale of publications, not provided for under the budget appropriations, shall be charged against
the income derived from those activities.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

c
FINANCING OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1967

The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1967:
1. Budget appropriations totalling $US 130,314,230, decreased by revised approprrations for 1966 totalling
$486,890,29 shall be financed as follows, in accordance wi th regulations 5.I and 5.2 of the Financial Regulations
of the United Nations:
( a) As to $8,392,626, by income other than staff assessment approved under resolution B above ;
(b) As to $1,279,400,29 by the revised income other than staff assessment for 1966;
(c) As to $1,904,268, by the amount available in the surplus account for the financial year 1965;
(d) As to $164,247, by the contributions of Indonesia for the years 1965 and 1966;
(e) As to $18,128, by the contributions of new Member States for 1966:
(f) As to $118,068,67 I, by assessment on Member States in accordance with General Assembly resolution
2118 (XX) of 21 December 1965 on the scale of assessments for 1967:
:19 See

resolution 2195 (XXI), p. 84.

92

General Assemb ly-Twe nty.firs t Session

States, subject to the provisi ons of Genera l
2. There shall be set off against the assessm ent on Membe r
ive shares in the Tax Equaliz ation Fund in a
Assemb ly resolut ion 973 (X) of 15 Decem ber 1955, their respect
total amount of $12,688,736, compri sing:
income for 1967;
(a) $13,249 ,800, being the estimat ed staff assessm ent
income from staff assessm ent for 1966;
revised
the
in
e
(b) Less $664,900,29 represe nting the decreas
approv ed estimat ed income from staff assess(c) $103,836, being the excess of the actual income over the
ment for 1965.
1501st plenary meeting .
20 Decemb er 1966.

2243 (XXI) . Unfore seen and extrao rdinar y expenses for the financ ial year 1967

The General Assemb ly
1. Author izes the Secreta ry-Gen eral, with the prior

concurr ence of the Adviso ry Commi ttee on Admin istrative and Budget ary Questio ns and subject to the
Financi al Regula tions of the United Nation s and the
provisio ns of paragra ph 3 below, to enter into commitmen ts to meet unfores een and extraor dinary expenses in the financial year 19C7, provide d that the
concurr ence of the Adviso rv Commi ttee shall not be
'
necessa ry for:
not exceedi ng a total of
ments,
commit
(a) Such
SUS 2 million, as the Secreta ry-Cen erul certifie s relate
to the mainten ance of peace and securit y;
(b) Such commit ments as the Preside nt of the Internationa l Court of Justice certifies relate to expens es
occasio ned by;
(i) The designa tion of ad hoc judges (Statut e of
the Court, Article 31), not exceed ing a total
of $37,500 :
(ii) The appoint ment of assesso rs (Statut e, Article
30), or the calling of witness es and the appoint ment of experts (Statnt e. Article 50), not exceeding a total of $25,000 ;
(iii) The mainten ance in office of judges who have
not been re-elect ed (Statut e, Article 13, paragraph 3), not exceed ing a total of $50,00 0;
(iv) The holding of session s of the Court away from
The Hague (Statut e, Article 22), not exceedi ng
a total of $75,000 ;
(v) The paymen t of pension s and travel and removal expens es of judges not re-elect ed. and
travel and remova l expens es of new membe rs
of the Court, not exceedi ng a total of $58,50 0;
2. Resolve s that the Secreta ry-Gen eral shall report
to the Adviso ry Commi ttee on Admin istrativ e and
Budget ary Questio ns and to the Genera l Assemb ly
at its twenty- second session all commit ments made
under the provisi ons of the present resoluti on, togethe r
with the circums tances relating thereto , and shall submit supplem entary estimat es to the Assemb ly in respect
of such commi tments;
3. Decides that if, as a result of a decision of the
Securit y Council , commit ments relating to the maintenance of peace and security should arise in an estimated total exceedi ng $10 million before the twentysecond session of the Genera l Assemb ly, a special
session of the Assemb ly shall be conven ed by the
Secreta ry-Gen eral to conside r the matter.
1501st plenary meeting .
20 Dcremb er 1966.

2244

(XXI).

Worf.<,ing Capita l Fund for the
financi al year 1967

The Ccncra ! Assemb ly
Resolve s that:
1. The Workin g Capital Fund shall be establis hed
for the vcar cndin« 31 Decem ber 19(17 in the a1110Ul1t
of SuS ~40 million';'
2. MCJ11ber St::tcs shall make advanc es to the Working Capital Fund ill accorda nce with the scale adopted
by the (;l'~1Cral Assemh lv for contrib utions of Membe rs
to the lJUdgct for the fill:mcia1 year 1967;
3. There shall 1,(' set off against this allocati on of
advnnc cs :
(a) C rcdi is tl) :\1 Cl111ll'rs resultin g from transfe rs
made ill 1u59 :\I1d 1(l(,O Irom surplus account to the
\Vor!;ing' Capital FUl1(l in a total a111011nt 'lf $1,079. 158:
(b) Cash :'c!V;d1C Ci p:!id liv Membe rs to the \Vorkin g
Capital Fund for the fin.mcin l vcar 19(J() under Genera l
Assemb ly resoluti on 2127 (XX) of 21 Decem ber E)(>5;
ry-Cene ral is authori zed to advanc e
4. The Secret:J
r
from tIle Vv orking' Capital Fund:
(a) Such SUJ11S :IS may iJl: necessa ry to finance budgetary approp riations pending the receipt of contrib utions; S11111S s.. .ulv.mr ed s11:l11 he reimbu rsed as soon as
receipts from contrib utions arc availab le for the purpos e:
(b) Such SUl1'.S as mav he necessa ry to finance commitmen ts which may h~' duly autlu-)rizec1 under the
provisi ons of the resoluti ons adopted by the Genera l
Assemb ly, in particu lar resoluti on 22·kj (XX I) of 20
Decem ber 1966 relating to unfores een and extraor dinary
cxpens es ; the Secreta ry-Gen eral shall make provisi on
ill the budget estimat es for reimbu rsing the Workin g
Capital Fund;
(c) Such sums as, togethe r with net sums outstan ding for the same purpose , do not exceed $125,000, to
continu e the revolvi ng fund to finance miscell aneous
self-liq uidating purchas es and activiti es; advanc es in
excess of the total of $125,00 0 mav be made with the
prior concurr ence of the Adviso ry' Commi ttee on Administr ative and Budget ary Questio ns;
(d) With the prior concurr ence of the Adviso ry
Commi ttee on Admin istrativ e and Budget ary Questio ns,
such sums as may be require d to finance paymen ts of
advanc e insuran ce premiu ms where the period of insurance extends beyond the end of the financial year
in which paymen t is made; the Secreta ry-Gen eral shall
make provisi on in the budget estimat es of each year,
during the life of the related policies, to cover the
charges applica ble to each such year;
( e) Such sums as may be necessa ry to enable the
Tax Equaliz ation Fund to meet current commit ments
pending the accumu lation of credits ; such advanc es
shall be repaid as soon as credits are availab le in the
Tax Equaliz ation Fund;

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
93
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~~._------5. Should the provision in paragraph 1 above prove
3. Further authorizes the Secretary-General to acinadequate to meet the purposes normally related to
cept the offer of the Swiss authorities of a gift of
the Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is
4 million Swiss francs ($925,000) towards the cost
authorized to utilize, in 1967, cash from special funds
of the project and to accept a loan, as required, at 3
and accounts in his custody, under the conditions apper cent interest to assist in the financing of the project
proved in General Assembly resolution 1341 (XIII)
and to be repayable in instalments within the period
of 13 December 1958, or the proceeds of loans au1972-1980;
thorized by the Assembly.
4. Decides to finance the programme in such a way
lS01st plenary meeting,
that the amount to be met from the budget estimates in
20 December 1966.
successive years over the period 1967 to 1980 shall be:
us dollar.

2245 (XXI). System of travel and subsistence
allowances to members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of its resolution 1798 (XVII)
of 11 December 1962 on the system of travel and
subsistence allowances to members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations, and the provisions of the annex to that resolution,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on standards of air travel accommodations" and
the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on that subject;"
Decides that paragraph 4 of the annex to its resolution 1798 (XVII), as amended by resolution 2128
(XX) of 21 December 1965, shall be amended to read
as follows:
"4. Payment of travel expenses shall be limited
to the cost of economy class accommodation by air
or its equivalent by recognized public transport via
a direct route, except that in the case of one representative of each Member State attending regular, special
or emergency special sessions of the General Assembly and of all persons who serve in their individual capacities, as distinct from those serving as
representatives of Governments, payment of travel
expenses shall be limited to the cost of first-class
accommodation by air or its equivalent by recognized
public transport via a direct route. The cost of air
travel shall normally be regarded as the ceiling
regardless of any alternative mode of transport used."

lSOlst plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2246 (XXI). Extension of conference facilities
at the Palals des Natiolls

The General Assembly,
Taking note with approval of the reports of the
Secretary-Generals" and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions 33 concerning
the extension of the conference facilities at the Palais
des Nations, Geneva,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the Swiss governmental
authorities for the co-operation and assistance given
to the United Nations in this matter;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed with
the plans for the extension of the Palais des Nations
within a maximum expenditure of $15 million;
80 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 74, document A/C.5/1074.
31 Ibid., document A/6502.
32 Ibid., document A/C.5/1076.
33 uu., document A/6524.

For the years 1967-1974
For the years 1975-1979
For the year 1980

1,000,000
1,500,000
495,000

5. Decides to establish a special account in which all
funds made available for the project of the extension
of the Palais des Nations willbe deposited and to which
the unexpended balance of the annual appropriations
will automatically revert.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2247 (XXI). Publications and documentation of
the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the budget estimates for the
financial year 196734 and the sixth report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session.s"
Bearing in mind the second report of the Ad Hoc
Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies.s"
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance
with the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee
of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United
Nations and the Specialized Agencies and of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, to instruct the Publications Board:
(a) To review the present practice of preparation
and publication of Official Records and Supplements.
and Annexes of all organs of the United Nations, with
the aim of determining whether any economy can be
achieved;
(b) To review the publications programme in order
to ascertain whether publications, studies and reports
are prepared in accordance with pertinent resolutions
of .the General Assembly. and other policy-making
bodies, as well as to determine whether any publication
may have lost its usefulness or become redundant·
(c) To study the documentation of the Organization
with a view to suggesting possible ways and means of
achieving possible economy both in extent and cost;
(d) To harmonize the publication programme of the
United Nations :vith those ?f the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency with a
view to eliminating possible duplication;
,
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(rz) To submit to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions at its summer
34 Ibi.d.,
311

Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/6305).

uu., Supplement No. 7 (A/6307).

36 Ibid., Twenty-first Session,
document A/6343.

Annexes, agenda item 80
•

94

General Assembly-Twenty·fint Session

Social Council resolution 1090 E (XXXIX) of 31
July 1965, that documents submitted to the United
Nations organs should be available to the Member
States in sufficient time and simultaneously in the
working languages envisaged by various internal regulations.

session, on the basis of the above-mentioned studies by
the Publications Board, a preliminary report containing
such suggestions and recommendations as may be appropriate for the elimination, consolidation or reduction
in frequency of various publications;
(b) To report to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session;
3. Asks the Secretary-General to ensure, in the
spirit of. paragraph 3 of section I of Economic and

*
Other

1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

*

*

decisions

Budget estimates for the financial year 1967 (item 74)
At its 1501st plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of the decision of the Fifth Committee, contained in paragraph 76 of its
report." to postpone further discussion of the question of the United Nations bond
issue to the twenty-second session.
Pattern of conferencee88 (item 75)
At its 1501st plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee." took note with approval of the
programme of conferences for 1967 given in the Secretary-General's report'°
and of the observations contained in the twenty-seventh report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session.v
Audit reports relating to expenditure by specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy AgenCYU (item 78)
At its 1495th plenary meeting, on 16 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Fifth Committee's report4S and, in particular,
of the proposed interpretation of the modification of paragraph 53 of part B of
its resolution 1240 (XIII) of 14 October 1958 by resolution 2029 (XX) of 22
November 1965, as follows:
"The United Nations Development Programme shall be governed by
financial regulations consistent with the financial regulations and policies of
the United Nations. The financial regulations for the United Nations Development Programme shall be drafted by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in consultation with the Administrator, for approval by the Governing
Council, after review by the Advisory Committee for Administrative and
Budgetary Questions."
Personnel questions'" (item 81)
At its 1501st plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966, the General Assembly
took note of the decision. of the Fifth Committee contained in paragraph 35
of its report. 45
87 Ibid.; agenda item 74, document A/6631.
38 See also resolution 2239 (XXI), p. 87.
89 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item
75, document A/6629, para. 11.
40 Ibid., document A/6437.
41 Ibid., document A/6575.
42 See also resolution 2196 (XXI), p. 87.
48 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item
78, document A/6596.
44 See also resolution 2241 (XXI), p, 89.
45 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item
81, document A/660S.

General Assembly--TWl'nty-first Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
R,sol",itm
No.

Till'

2166 (XXI)

International conference of plenipotentiaries on the law of treaties
(A/6516)
.
Reports of the International Law Commission (A/6516)
.
Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations (A/6547)
.
Question of methods of fact-finding (A/6547)
.
Draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum (A/6570)
.
Technical assistance to promote the teaching, study, dissemination
and wider appreciation of international law (A/6576)
.
Establishment of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (A/6594)
.

2167 (XXI)
2181 (XXI)

2182 (XXI)
2203 (XXI)
2204 (XXI)
2205 (XXI)

D"t,of

1I.m

CldoPl'Ofl

84
84

5 December 1966
5 December 1966

95

87
87
85

12 December 1966
12 December 1966
16 December 1966

96

86

16 December 1966

98

88

17 December 1966

99

96

97
98

treaties prepared at its fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth sessions, and that at its eighteenth session the
Commission finally adopted the draft articles,
Recalling that, as stated in paragraph 36 of the report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its eighteenth session, the Commission decided to
recommend that the General Assembly should convene
an international conference of plenipotentiaries to study
the Commission's draft articles on the law of treaties
and to conclude a convention on the subject,
M indful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter
of the United Nations, which provides that the General
Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
B elie'ving that the successful codification and progressive development of the rules of international law
governing the law of treaties would contribute to the
development of friendly relations and co-operation
among States, irrespective of their differing constitutional and social systems, and would assist in promoting
and implementing the purposes and principles set forth
in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on the law of
treaties and to the Special Rapporteurs for their con·tribution to this work;
2. Decides that an international conference of plenipotentiaries shall be convened to consider the law of
treaties and to embody the results of its work in an
international convention and such other instruments as
it may deem appropriate;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to convoke, at
Geneva or at any other suitable place for which he receives an invitation before the twenty-second session
of the General Assembly, the first session of the conference early in 1968 and the second session early in
1909;
4. Invites States Members of the United Nations,
States members of the specialized agencies. States Par-

2166 (XXI). International conference of plenipotentiaries on the law of treaties
The General Assembly>
Having considered chapter II of the report of t~e
International Law Commission on the work of Its
eighteenth sess~on,l which contains ~nal draft articles
and commentaries on the law of treaties,
Noting that the International Law Commission at its
first session in 1949 listed the law of treaties among
the topics of international law as being suitable for
codification, that at its thirteenth session in 1961 it decided to prepare draft articles on the law of treaties
intended to serve as the basis for a convention, and
that at its fourteenth session in 1962 it included the
law of treaties in the revised programme for its future
work,
Recalling that in its resolutions 1686 (XVI) of 18
December 1961, 1765 (XVII) of 20 November 1962,
1902 (XVIII) of 18 November 1963 and 2045 (XX) of
8 December 1965 it recommended that the International Law Commission should continue the work of
codification and progressive development of the law of
treaties, taking into account the views expressed in
the General Assembly and the comments submitted by
Governments, in order that the law of treaties might be
placed upon the widest and most secure foundations,
and that in its resolution 2045 (XX) of 8 December
1965 it recommended that a final draft on the law of
treaties should be submitted to the Assembly by the
Commission in its report on the work of its eighteenth
session,
Noting further that, at its seventeenth and eighteenth
sessions in 1965 and 1966, the International Law Commission, in the light of the observations and comments
submitted by Governments and taking into account the
relevant resolutions and debates of the General Assembly, revised the provisional draft articles on the law of
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfirst Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/6309/Rev.l), part Il.

95

96

General Assemhly-Twenty.6rst Session

ties to the Statute of the International Court of Justice
and States that the General Assembly decides specially
to invite, to participate in the conference;
S. Invites the States referred to in paragraph 4
above to include as far as possible among their representatives experts competent in the field to be considered;
6. Invites the specialized agencies and the interested
intergovernmental organizations to send observers to
the conference;
7. Refers to the conference the draft articles contained in chapter II of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its eighteenth session
as the basic proposal for consideration by the conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
conference all relevant documentation and recommendations relating to its method of work and procedures,
and to arrange for the necessary staff and facilities
which will be required for the conference, including
such experts as may be necessary;
9. Invites Member States, the Secretary-General
and the Directors-General of those specialized agencies
which act as depositaries of treaties to submit, not later
than 1 July 1967, their written comments and observations on the final draft articles concerning the law of
treaties prepared by the International Law Commission;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate such
comments so as to facilitate the discussion of the subject at the twenty-second session of the General Assembly;
11. Decides to include an item entitled "Law of
treaties" in the provisional agenda of its twenty-second
session with a view to further discussion of the draft
articles in order to facilitate the conclusion of a convention on the taw of treaties at the conference of plenipotentiaries convened pursuant to the present resolution.
1484th plenary meeting,
5 December 1966.

2167 (XXI). Reports of the International Law
Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the International
Law Commission on the second part of its seventeenth
session and on its eighteenth session,"
Recalling its resolutions 1686 (XVI) of 18 December 1961, 1765 (XVII) of 20 November 1962, 1902
(XVIII) of 18 November 1963 and 2045 (XX) of 8
December 1965, by which it recommended that the International Law Commission should continue its work
of codification and progressive development of the taw
of treaties, State responsibility; succession of States and
Governments, special missions and relations between
States and intergovernmental organizations,
Emphasizing the need for the further codification and
progressive development of international law in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing
the purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2
of the Charter of the United Nations and to give increased importance to its role in relations among nations,
2 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 9 (A/6309/Rev.l).

Noting with satisfaction that at its eighteenth session the International Law Commission adopted the
final text of its draft articles on the law of treaties and
also made progress in the codification and progressive
development of the international law relating to special
missions,
Noting further with appreciation that the United
Nations Office at Geneva organized in May 1966, during the eighteenth session of the International Law
Commission, a second session of the Seminar on International Law for advanced students and young government officials responsible in their respective countries
for dealing with questions of international law and that
the Seminar, which was made possible by thegenerous
collaboration of members of the Commission, was well
organized and functioned to the satisfaction of all,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of the second part of its seventeenth session and of chapters I, III and IV of the
report on the work of its eighteenth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work it has accomplished;
3. Notes with approval the programme of work for
1967 proposed by the International Law Commission.
in chapter IV of the report on the work of its eighteenth session;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue the work of codification and progressive development of the international law relating tospecial missions, taking into account the views expressed at the twenty-first session of the General Assembly and the comments which may be submitted by
Governments, with the object of presenting a final'
draft on the topic in the report on the work of its
nineteenth session;
( b) Continue its work on succession of States and
Governments, State responsibility and relations between
States and intergovernmental organizations, taking into
account the views and considerations referred to in
General Assembly resolutions 1765 (XVII) and 1902"
(XVIII) ;
5. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars be organized which should continue toensure the participation of a reasonable number of nationals from the developing countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the'
International Law Commission the records of the discussions at the twenty-first session of the General Assembly on the reports of the Commission.
1484th plenary meeting,
5 December 1966.
2181 (XXI). Consideration of principles of international law conceming friendly relations
and co-operation among State, in accord.
ance with the Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963 and
2103 (XX) of 20 December 1965, which affirm the
importance of the 'progressive development and codification of the principles of international law concerning
friendly relations and co-operation among States,

ReaoIutions adopted OD the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling further that among the fundamental purposes
of the United Nations are the maintenance of international peace and security and the development of
friendly relations and co-operation among- States,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principles of international law concerning friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations is of paramount importance for the maintenance of international peace and
security and the improvement of the international situation,
Considering further that the progressive development
and codification of those principles, so as to secure
their more 'effective application, would promote the
realization of the purposes of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that the Second Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which met at Cairo in 1964, recommended to the
General Assembly the adoption of a declaration on these
principles as an important step towards their codification,
Being convinced of the significance of continuing
the effort to achieve general agreement in the process
of the elaboration of the seven principles of international
law set forth in General Assembly resolution 1815
(XVII), but without prejudice to the applicability of
the rules of procedure of the Assembly, with a view to
the adoption of a declaration which would constitute a
landmark in the progressive development and codification of those principles,
Having considered the report of the 1966 Special
Committee on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation, among
States," which met in New York from 8 March to 25
April 1966, and having considered specifically that it
was noted in that Committee that the differences between
the various points of view on the formulation of the
principles had been materially reduced and that among
the factors which hampered the achievement by the
Committee of a greater measure of agreement was lack
of sufficient time for additional deliberation and negotiation,
1. Takes note of the report of the 1966 Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States;
2. Expresses its appreciation to that Committee for
the valuable work it has performed;
3. Takes note also of the formulations of the 1966
Special Committee concerning the principle that States
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered and the principle of sovereign equality of States, and of the Special
Committee's decision that with regard to the principle
of non-intervention it will abide by General Assembly
resolution 2131 (XX) of 21 December 1965;
4. Decides to ask the Special Committee, as reconstituted by General Assembly resolution 2103 (XX),
to continue its work;
5. Requests the Special Committee, in the light of
the debate which took place in the Sixth Committee
during the seventeenth, eighteenth" twentieth and
twenty-first sessions of the General Assembly and in
the 1%4 and 1966 Special Committees, to complete the
formulations of:
a Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 87,
document A/6230.

97

(a) The principle that States shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity and political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations;
(b) The duty of States to co-operate with one another in accordance with the Charter;
(c) The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples;
(d) The principle that States shall fulfil in good
faith the obligations assumed by them in accordance
with the Charter;
6. Requests the Special Committee to consider proposals on the principle concerning the duty not to intervene in matters within the domestic jurisdiction of
any State, in accordance with the Charter, with the
aim of widening the area of agreement already expressed in General Assembly resolution 2131 (XX);
7. Requests the Special Committee, having considered, as a matter of priority, the principles referred
to in paragraphs 5 and 6 above, to examine any additional proposals with a view to widening the areas of
agreement expressed in the formulations of the 1966
Special Committee concerning the principle that States
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered and the principle of sovereign equality of States;
8. Requests the Special Committee, having regard
to the work already accomplished by the 1966 Special
Committee, as specified in paragraph 3 above, to submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-second session a comprehensive report on the principles entrusted
to it for study and a draft declaration on the seven
principles set forth in Assembly resolution 1815
(XVII) which will constitute a landmark in the progressive development and codification of those principles;
9. Requests the Special Committee to meet at Geneva
or at any other suitable place for which the SecretaryGeneral receives an invitation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate
with the Special Committee in its task and to provide
all the services, documentation and other facilities
necessary for its work;
11. Decides to include an item entitled "Consideration of principles of international law concerning
friendly relations .and co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations" in
the provisional agenda of its twenty-secondsession.
1489th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.

2182 (x..U). Question of methods of fact-finding

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1967 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963 and 2104 (XX) of 20 December 1965 on
the question of methods of fact-finding,
Nothing with appreciation the two reports submitted
by the Secretary-General in pursuance of the abovementioned resolutions.t
• Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda items 90 and 94,
document A/5694; ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda
item.87, document A/6228.

98

General Aasembly-Twenty.fint Session

Noting the comments submitted by Member States
pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 1967 (XVIII)
and paragraph 2 of resolution 2104 (XX) and the
views expressed during its twentieth and twenty-first
sessions,
Noting chapter VII of the report of the Special
Committee on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States,"
established under General Assembly resolution 1966
(XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
Reaffirming its belief that an important contribution
to the peaceful settlement of disputes and to the prevention of such disputes could be made by providing for
impartial fact-finding within the framework of international organizations and in bilateral and multilateral
conventions,
Noting that, with regard to methods of fact-finding
in international relations, considerable documentation
has now been made available by the Secretary-General
in his reports on practice in relation to the settlement of
disputes and the execution of international agreements,
and by the views expressed and the proposals made by
Member States,
Recalling its belief that a study of the question
might include the feasibility and desirability of establishing a special international body for fact-finding or
of entrusting to an existing organization fact-finding
responsibilities complementary to existing arrangements
and without prejudice to the right of parties to any dispute to seek other peaceful means of settlement, of
their own choice,
Having been unable, owing to lack of time, to consider the substance of the question of methods of factfinding,
1. Invites Member States to submit in writing to
the Secretary-General, before 1 August 1967, any
views, or further views, they may have on this subject,
taking into account the reports of the Secretary-General,
the views expressed and the proposals made;
2. Decides to include an item entitled "Question of
methods of fact-finding" in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session, with a view to considering
what further action may be appropriate.
1489th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.
2203 (XXI). Draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1839 (XVII) of 19 December 1962 and 2100 (XX) of 20 December 1965 relating
to the draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum,
1. Takes note of the report of the Sixth Committee,"
to which is annexed a draft Declaration On Territorial
Asylum, together with the amendments and proposals
considered in connexion with its elaboration;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States, for their further consideration, the text
of the above-mentioned draft Declaration, together with
the report of the Sixth Committee thereon;
3. Decides to place an item entitled "Draft Declaration on Territorial Asylum" on the provisional agenda
5 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda items' 90 and 94,
document A/5746.
6 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Anne.-res, agenda item 85, document A/6570.

of its twenty-second session, with a view to the final
adoption of a declaration on this subject.

1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2204 (XXI). Technical assistance to promote the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider
appreciation of international law

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2099 (XX) of 20 December
1965 establishing a programme of ::.:~:<;tance and exchange in the field of international law,
Noting 'With appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral? on the implementation of resolution 2099
(XX) and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law,
which are contained in that report,
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1967 the activities specified in his report, including the
following items of direct assistance:
( a) The holding of a regional training and refresher
course, in co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
(b) The award of ten fellowships at the request of
Governments of developing countries;
(c) The provision of a set of United Nations legal
publications to up to fifteen institutions in developing
countries;
(d) The provision of advisory services of experts,
if requested by developing countries, within the framework of existing technical assistance programmes;
2. Accepts 'With satisfaction the offer of the United
Republic of Tanzania to provide facilities for the regional training and refresher course to be held in Africa
in 1967;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made voluntary contributions towards the financing of the programme and reiterates
its invitation to Member States, interested bodies and
individuals to make voluntary contributions for this
purpose;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the programme;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its activities in
the field of international law and expresses the hope
that it will continue and, if possible, expand these activities;
6. Decides that the programme established under
General Assembly resolution 2099 (XX) shall henceforth be known as the United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law, and that
accordingly the Advisory Committee set up under that
resolution shall be known as the Advisorv Committee
on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session on the
7 Ibid.,

agenda hem 86, documents A/6492 and Add.l.

99

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

preparation and execution of the items of the Programme for performance in 1%7 and 1968 and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee, to
submit recommendations regarding the execution of
the Programme in subsequent years;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session an item entitled "United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law".
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

Having in mind the responsibilities of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the
field of international trade,
Recalling that the Conference, in accordance with
its General Principle Six," has a particular interest in
promoting the establishment of rules furthering international trade as one of the most important factors in
economic development,
Recognizing that there is no existing United Nations
organ which is both familiar with this technical legal
subject and able to devote sufficient time to work in this
field,
I

2205 (XXI). Establishment of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2102 (XX) of 20 December
1965, by which it requested the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session a comprehensive report on the progressive development of the law of international trade,
Having considered with appreciation the report of
the Secretary-General on that subject,"
Considering that international trade co-operation
among States is an important factor in the promotion
of friendly relations and, consequently, in the maintenance of peace and security,
Recalling its belief that the interests of all peoples,
and particularly those of developing countries, demand
the betterment of conditions favouring the extensive
development of international trade,
Reaffirming its conviction that divergencies arising
from the laws of different States in matters relating
to international trade constitute one of the obstacles to
the development of world trade.
Having noted with appreciation the efforts made by
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
towards the progressive harmonization and unification
of the law of international trade by promoting the adoption of international conventions, uniform laws, standard contract provisions, general conditions of sale,
standard trade terms and other measures,
Noting at the same time that progress in this area
has not been commensurate with the importance and
urgency of the problem, owing to a number of factors, in particular insufficient co-ordination and cooperation between the organizations concerned, their
limited membership or authority and the small degree
of participation in this field on the part of many developing countries,
Considering it desirable that the process of harmonization and unification of the law of international trade
should be substantially co-ordinated, systematized and
accelerated and that a broader participation should be
secured in furthering progress in this area,
Convinced that it would therefore be desirable for
the United Nations to play a more active role towards
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade,
Noting that such action would be properly within the
scope and competence of the Organization under the
terms of Article 1, paragraph 3, and Article 13, and
of Chapters IX and X of the Charter of the United
Nations,
8 Ibld.,

agenda item 88, documents A/6396 and Add.1 and 2.

Decides to establish a United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (hereinafter referred to as
the Commission), which shall have for its object the
promotion of the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of international trade, in accordance
with the provisions set forth in section II below;

II
ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW

1. The Commission shall consist of twenty-nine
States, elected by the General Assembly for a term of
six years, except as provided in paragraph 2 of the
present resolution. In electing the members of the
Commission, the Assembly shall observe the following
distribution of seats:
( a) Seven from African States;
( b) Five from Asian States;
(c) Four from Eastern European States;
(d) Five from Latin American States;
( e) Eight from Western European and other States.
The General Assembly shall also have due regard to
the adequate representation of the principal economic
and legal systems of the world, and of developed and
developing countries.
2. Of the members elected at the first election, to
be held at the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly, the terms of fourteen members shall expire
at the end of three years. The President of the General
Assembly shall select these members within each of the
five groups of States referred to in paragraph 1 above,
by drawing lots.
3. The members elected at the first election shall
take office on 1 January 1%8. Subsequently, the members shall take office on 1 January of the year following
each election.
4. The representatives of members on the Commission shall be appointed by Member States in so far as
possible from among persons of eminence in the field of
the law of international trade.
5. Retiring members shall be eligible for re-election.
6. The Commission shall normally hold one regular
session a year. It shall, if there are no technical difficulties, meet alternately at United Nations Headquarters and at the United Nations Office at Geneva.
7. The Secretary-General shall make available to the
Commission the appropriate staff and facilities required
by the Commission to fulfil its task.
9 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Deuelo pment, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.ll). annex A.I.l, p. 18.

190

General Assembly-Twenly-firsl Session

8. The Commission shall further the progressive
harmonization and unification of the law of international trade by:
(a) Co-ordinating the work of organizations active
in this field and encouraging co-operation among them;
(b) Promoting wider participation in existing international conventions and wider acceptance of existing
model and uniform laws;
(c) Preparing or promoting the adoption of new international conventions, model laws and uniform laws
and promoting the codification and wider acceptance
of international trade terms, provisions, customs and
practices, in collaboration, where appropriate, with the
organizations operating in this field;
(d) Promoting ways and means of ensuring a uniform interpretation and application of international conventions and uniform laws in the field of the law
of international trade;
(e) Collecting and disseminating information on national legislation and modern legal developments, including case law, in the field of the law of international
trade;
(f) Establishing and maintaining a close collaboration with the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development;
(g) Maintaining liaison with other United Nations
organs and specialized agencies concerned with international trade;
(h) Taking any other action it may deem useful to
fulfil its functions.
9. The Commission shall bear in mind the interests
of all peoples, and particularly those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of international
trade.
10. The Commission shall submit an annual report,
including its recommendations, to the General Assembly, and the report shall be submitted simultaneously
to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development for comments. Any such comments or recommendations which the Conference or the Trade and
Development Board may wish to make, including suggestions on topics for inclusion in the work of the Com-

mission, shall .be transmitted to the General Assembly
in accordance with the reve1ant provisions of Assembly
resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964. Any
other recomtnendations relevant to the work of the
Commission which the Conference or the Board may
wish to make shall be similarly transmitted to the General Assembly.
11. The Commission may consult with or request
the services of any international or national organization, scientific institution and individual expert, on any
subject entrusted to it, if it considers such consultation
or services might assist it in the performance of its
functions.
12. The Commission may establish appropriate working relationships with intergovernmental organizations
and international non-governmental organizations concerned with the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of international trade.

III
1. Requests the Secretary-General, pending the
election of the Commission, to carry out the preparatory
work necessary for the organization of the work of the
Commission and, in particular:
(a) To invite Member States to submit in writing
before 1 July 1967, taking into account in particular
the report of the Secretary-General.l? comments on a
programme of work to be undertaken by the Commission in discharging its functions under paragraph 8 of
section Il above;
(b) To request similar comments from the organs
and organizations referred to in paragraph 8 (t) and
(g) and in paragraph 12 of section IT above;
2. Decides to include an item entitled "Election of
the members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law" in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
10 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 88, documents A/6396 and
Add.! and 2.

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

INDEX OF RESOLUTIONS AND DECISIONS
This index provides a reference, by agenda item, to the resolutions adopted
and other action taken by the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.
POll'

1. Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation
of Italy
2. Minute of silent prayer or meditation
3. Credentials of representatives to the twenty-first session
of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee

.
.

xi
7
xi

5. Constitution of the Main Committees and election of
officers
.

xi

6. Election of Vice-Presidents

xi

Resolution 2219 (XXI)

4. Election of the President

.

7. Notification-by the Secretary-General under Article 12,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations ..
8. Adoption of the agenda

Decision

.

7
v

9. General debate
10. Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization
. .. . .. .. . ... . . . .. . .. . . .. . .. . . .. .

Decision

7

11. Report of the Security Council

Resolution 2201 (XXI)

6

12. Report of the Economic and Social Council

Resolption 2190 (XXI)
Resolution 2214 (XXI)
Decisions

'60
7 and 43

Resolution 2226 (XXI)
Resolution 2227 (XXI)

72

Resolution 2156 (XXI)

3

13. Report of the Trusteeship Council
14. Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency ....

83

71

15. Election of five non-permanent members of the Security
Council
.

xi

16. Election of nine members of the Economic and Social
Council
.

xii

17. Election of five members of the International Court cf
Justice
.

xii

18. Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
Nations

United
.

Resolution 2147 (XXI)
Resolution 2161 (XXI)

19. Election of the members of the International Law Commission
.

3
4

xiii
Resolution 2133 (XXI)
Resolution 2136 (XXI)
Resolution 2137 (XXI)
Resolution 2175 (XXI)

5

.
.

Decision
Resolution 2194 (XXI)

83

22. Co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity: report of the SecretaryGeneral
.

Resolution 2193 (XXI)

6

20. Admission of new Members to the United Nations ....

21. United Nations Emergency Force:
(a) Report on the Force
(b) Cost estimates for the maintenance of the Force

101

I
2
2

7

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

102

.t....

Ag'Nda

Page

23. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ....

Resolution 2134 (XXI)
Resolution 2138 (XXI)
Resolution 2151 (XXI)
Resolution 2183 (XXI)
Resolution 2189 (XXI)
Resolution 2228 (XXI)
Resolution 2229 (XXI)
Resolution 2230 (XXI)
Resolution 2231 (XXI)
Resolution 2232 (XXI)
Decision
Appointment to fill a vacancy
in the Special Committee
Appointment of the members of
the United Nations Special
Mission on Aden

67
68
68
69

Resolution 2174 (XXI)

4

Decisions

7

Resolution 2153 (XXI)
Appointment of the members of
the Preparatory Committee
for the Conference of NonNuclear-Weapon States

9

10

Resolution 2162 (XXI)
Decision

10
17

28. Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear
tests: report of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament
.

Resolution 2163 (XXI)

11

29. Question of convening a conference for the purpose of
signing a convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear
and thermonuclear weapons: report of the Conference of
the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament ." ....

Resolution 2164 (XXI)

12

Resolution 2221 (XXI)
Resolution 2222 (XXI)
Resolution 2223 (XXI)

12
13
15

31. The Korean question: report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea

Resolution 2224 (XXI)

16

32. Report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
.
Near East

Resolution 2154 (XXI)

19

33. Comp-rehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in· all their aspects: report of the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations

Resolution 2220 (XXI)

21

34. The policies of apartheid of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa: report of the Special Committee
on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa
.

Resolution 2202 (XXI)

20

35. Effects of atomic radiation: report of the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation

Resolution 2213 (XXI)

21

36. Peaceful settlement of disputes

Decision

22

Resolution 2177 (XXI)
Resolution 2206 (XXI)
Resolution 2207 (XXI)
Resolution 2208 (XXI)
Resolution 2209 (XXI)
Resolution 2210 (XXI)

33
39
39
39
40
41

24. Report of the
operation Year

Committee for

the

International

Co.

25. Installation of mechanical means of voting: report of the
Secretary-General
.
26. Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons: report of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament
"
.

27. Question of general and complete disarmament: report
of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on
Disarmament
.

30. International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer
space: report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space

.. _

.

37. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development:
report of the Trade and Development Board .

5
72
72
73
74
74
78

7
70

103

Index of resolutions and decisions
Apenda
.t....

PIJII/I

38. Establishment of a United Nations capital development
fund: report of the Committee on a United Nations
Capital Development Fund
.
39. United Nations Development Decade: report of the
Secretary-General
.
40. Accelerated flow of capital and technical assistance to
the developing countries: report of the Secretary-General
41. Activities in the field of industrial development:
(a) Report of the Committee for Industrial Development
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the United Nations
Organization for Industrial Development. .
.

Resolution 2186 (XXI)

34

Resolution 2218 (XXI)

42

Resolution 2169 (XXI)
Resolution 2170 (XXI)

30
30

Resolution 2178 (XXI)

33

Resolution 2152 (XXI)
Resolution 2212 (XXI)
Decision
Election of the members of
the Industrial Development
Board

24
42

44
xiv

(c) Confirmation of the

appointment of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
.

42. Inflation and economic
Secretary-General

development:

report

of

44

the
.

Decision

44

43. Decentralization of the economic and social activities of
the United Nations
.

Decision

44

44. Conversion to peaceful needs of the resources released by
disarmament: report of the Secretary-General
.
45. Permanent sovereignty over natural resources

.

-M. Population growth and economic development
47. World campaign for universal literacy

.
.

48. United Nations Institute for Training and Research:
report of the Executive Director of the Institute
.
49. Operational activities for development
.
(a) Activities of the United Nations Development Pro-

Resolution 2171 (XXI)

32

Resolution 2158 (XXI)
Resolution 2211 (XXI)

41

Resolution 2192 (XXI)

38

29

Resolution 2187 (XXI)

37

Resolution 2179 (XXI)
Resolution 2180 (XXI)

33
34

Resolution 2155 (XXI)

28

Decision

44

Resolution 2188 (XXI)
Appointment of five additional
members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination

37

gramme

(b) Activities undertaken by the Secretary-General

SO. Programme of studies on multilateral food aid: report
of the Secretary-General
.
51. Review and reappraisal of the role and functions of the
Economic and Social Council: report of the SecretaryGeneral
.
52. General review of the programmes and activities in
the economic, social, technical co-operation and related
fields of the United Nations, the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United
Nations Children's Fund and all other institutions and
agencies related to the United Nations system
.

38

53. International Tourist Year

.

Resolution 2148 (XXI)

24

54. World social situation

.

Resolution 2215 (XXI)

60

Resolution 2197 (XXI)
Resolution 2198 (XXI)

48
48

Resolution 2199 (XXI)

48

Resolution 2142 (XXI)

4S

55. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
.
56. Draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women
.
57. Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination
.
(a) Measures to implement the United Nations Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(b) Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination: report
of the Secretary-General

• The English name of the Organization was changed during the session. See A/6S08, para. 10.

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

10&
Apenda

Page

Item

58. Manifestations of racial
religious intolerance

prejudice

and

national

and
Resolution 2143 (XXI)

46

59. Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance
(a) Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Religious Intolerance
(b) Draft International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Religious Intolerance

Decision

65

60. Freedom of information
(a) Draft Convention on Freedom of Information
(b) Draft Declaration on Freedom of Information

Resolution 2216 (XXI)

61

61. Creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights

Decision

65

62. Draft International Covenants on Human Rights ....

Resolution 2200 (XXI)

49

63. International Year for Human Rights
.
(a) Programme of measures and activities to be undertaken in connexion with the International Year for
Human Rights
(b) Report of the Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Human Rights

Resolution 2217 (XXI)
Appointment of six additional
members of the Preparatory
Committee for the International Conference on Human
Rights

61

64

Resolution 2233 (XXI)

75

Resolution 2145 (XXI)
Resolution 2146 (XXI)
Decisions
Appointment of the members of
the Ad Hac Committee for
South West Africa

2
3

64. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United
Nations
.
(a) Report of the Secretary-General
(b) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples
65. Question of South West Africa: report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
.

66. Special educational and traimng programmes for South
West Africa: report of the Secretary-General
.
67. Question of Territories under Portuguese administration:
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples
68. Special training programme for Territories under Portuguese administration: report of the Secretary-General
69. Question of Fiji: report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
70. Question of Oman
(a) Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples
(b) Report of the Secretary-General
71. Offers by Member States of study and training facilities
for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories': report
of the Secretary-General

78
3

Resolution 2235 (XXI)
Resolution 2236 (XXI)

76
76

Resolution 2184 (XXI)

70

Resolution 2235 (XXI)
Resolution 2237 (XXI)

77

Resolution 2185 (XXI)

71

Resolution 2238 (XXI)

77

Resolution 2234 (XXI)

75

76

105

Index of resolutions and decisions
Page

72. Financial reports and accounts for the financial year
ended 31 December 1965 and reports of the Eoard of
Auditors
.
(a) United Nations
(b) United Nations Children's Fund
(c) United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East
(d) Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees

Resolution 2139 (XXI)

so

73. Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1966 ..

Resolution 2195 (XXI)

84

74. Budget estimates for the financial year 1967

Resolution 2242 (XXI)
Resolution 2243 (XXI)
Resolution 2244 (XXI)
Resolution 2245 (XXI)
Resolution 2246 (XXI)
Resolution 2247 (XXI)
Decision

89
92

.

92

93
93
93
94

Resolution 2239 (XXI)
Decision
Appointment of the members of
the Committee on Conferences

er

Resolution 2135 (XXI)
Resolution 2140 (XXI)
Resolution 2157 (XXI)
.Resolution 2168 (XXI)
Resolution 2141 (XXI)

80
81

Resolution 2240 (XXI)

88

Resolution 2196 (XXI)
Decision

87
94

Resolution 2190 (XXI)

83

Resolution 2150 (XXI)
Appointments (inspection unit)

81
82

81. Personnel questions
.
(a) Composition of the Secretariat: report of the Secretary-General
(b) Other personnel questions

Resolution 2241 (XXI)
Decision

89
94

82. Report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board

Resolution 2191 (XXI)

83

83. United Nations International
Secretary-General

Resolution 2176 (XXI)

82

Resolution 2166 (XXI)
Resolution 2167 (XXI)

95
96

.

Resolution 2203 (XXI)

98

86. Technical assistance to promote the teaching, study,
dissemination and wider appreciation of international law:
report of the Secretary-General

Resolution 2204 (XXI)

98

75. Pattern of conferences: report of the Secretary-General

94
88

76. Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of
subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly
(a) Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
.
(b) Committee on Contributions
.
(c) Board of Auditors
.
(d) United Nations Administrative Tribunal
.
(e) United Nations Staff Pension Committee
.

82

82
81

77. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses
o~ th~ United Nations: report of the Committee on Contributions
.

78. Audit

reports relating to expenditure by specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(a) Earmarkings

and contingency authorizations. from
the Special Account of the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance
(b) Allocations and allotments from the Special Fund

79. Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United
Nations with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency: report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
.
SO. Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine
the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies
.

School:

report

of

the
.

84. Reports of the International Law Commission on the second
part of its seventeenth session and on its' eighteenth
session
.

85. Draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum

106

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session
Agenda

,'em

87. Consideration of principles of international law concerning
friendly relations and co-operation among States' in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
(a) Report of the 1966 Special Committee on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States
(b) Report of the Secretary-General on methods of factfinding

Resolution 2181 (XXI)
Resolution 2182 (XXI)

96
97

Resolution 2205 (XXI)

99

Resolution 2221 (XXI)
Resolution 2222 (XXI)
Resolution 2223 (XXI)

12
13
15

Resolution 2159 (XXI)

3

Resolution 2221 (XXI)
Resolution 2222 (XXI)
Resolution 2223 (XXI)

12
13
15

92. Strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use
of force in international relations, and of the right of
peoples to self-determination
.

Resolution 2160 (XXI)

4

93. Withdrawal of all United States and other foreign forces
occupying South Korea under the flag of the United
Nations and dissolution of the United Nations Commission
for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea

Resolution 2224 (XXI)

16

Resolution 2172 (XXI)
Resolution 2173 (XXI)

32
32

95. Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including policies of racial discrimination and
segregation and of apartheid, in all countries, with particular reference to colonial and other dependent countries
and territories

Resolution 2144 (XXI)

46

96. Status of the implementation of the Declaration on the
Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs
of States and the Protection of Their Independence and
Sovereignty

Resolution 2225 (XXI)

16

97. Renunciation by States of actions hampering the conclusion of an agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons

Resolution 2149 (XXI)

9

98. Elimination of foreign military bases in the countries of
Asia, Africa and Latin America

Resolution 2165 (XXI)

12

88. Progressive development of the law of international trade
89. Conclusion of an international treaty on principles governing the activities of States in the exploration and use
of outer space, the Moon and other celestial bodies

90. Restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic
of China in the United Nations
.
91. Treaty governing the exploration and use of outer space.
including the Moon and other celestial bodies ..

94. Development of natural resources

.

COMPOSITION OF ORGANS
This list provides a reference to the composition of the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council and the International Court
of Justice, and of certain organs established by the General Assembly. The composition of an organ will be found in the volume of resolutions for the session
indicated in roman figures, on the page of that volume given in the right-hand
column.
Ort/4..

SlSnOJl

PtIfI·

XX
XXI

73
3

IV
XXI

23

XX
XXI
XXI

90

Ad H QC Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United
Nations and the Specialized Agencies

.
..
Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
fur Palestine Refugees in the Near East (members appointed by
the General Assembly)
.
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
.
Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance
in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Laws
;
.
.
Board of Auditors
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination (enlarged Committee) ..
Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa
.
Committee on Conferences
.
Committee on Contributions
.

Ad Hoc Committee for South West Africa

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

.

Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament
.
Economic and Social Council
.
.
.
Industrial Development Board
International Court of Justice
.
.
International Law Commission
Investments Committee
.
Peace Observation Commission
.
Preparatory Committee for the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States
.
Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Human
Rights
,
.
Security Council
.
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
.
Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
.
Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of
the Republic of South Africa
.
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
.
Trusteeship Council
.
United Nations Administrative Tribunal .. ,
,
.
United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea
.
.
United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine
United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee

.

United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation
United Nations Special Mission on Aden
.
United Nations Staff Pension Committee (members appointed by the
General Assembly)
.

XX
XXI
XXI
IV
XVI
XVI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XIX
XX

-G

80

82
38

18
88

81
5
7
7
xii
xiv
xiii
xiii
6

5

XXI

10

XXI
XXI
XIX

64
xii

-G

71

vm

8

XX

92

XVII

10

XXI
XX
XXI

xvii
82

7

V
Ill, part I

25

9

-&111

60

X
XXI

70

XXI

81

5
5

a The Committee received this designation pursuant to General Assembly resolution 2204
(XXI). It was originally established under resolution 2099 (XX) as the Advisory Committee
on Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law.

107

CHECK. LIST OF RESOLUTIONS
The resolutions of the General Assembly are numbered in the order
of their adoption. This check list includes all the resolutions adopted by the
Assembly during its twenty-first session. It also includes the other decisions
taken by the Assembly during the session.
R.loltlliMl

No.

Tit/.

2133 (XXI) Admission of Guyana to membership in the United Nations
.
2134 (XXI) Question of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland
2135 (XXI) Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Advisory

2136 (XXI)
2137 (XXI)
2138 (XXI)
2139 (XXI)

2140 (XXI)

2141 (XXI)
2142 (XXI)
2143 (XXI)
2144 (XXI)

2145 (XXI)
2146 (XXI)
2147 (XXI)
2148 (XXI)
2149 (XXI)
2150 (XXI)
2151 (XXI)
2152 (XXI)
2153 (XXI)
2154 (XXI)
2155 (XXI)
2156 (XXI)
2157 (XXI)

2158 (XXI)
2159 (XXI)
2160 (XXI)
2161 (XXI)

Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
Admission of Botswana to membership in the United Nations
.
Admission of Lesotho to membership in the United Nations
.
Question of Southern Rhodesia
.
Financial reports and accounts for the financial year ended 31
December 1965 and reports of the Board of Auditors
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
Resolution C
.
Resolution D
..
Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Committee
on Contributions
Resolution A
.
.
Resolution B
.
Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee
.
Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination
.
Manifestations of racial prejudice and national and religious intolerance
.
Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including policies of racial discrimination and segregation and of
apartheid, in all countries, with particular reference to colonial
and other dependent countries and territories
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
(luestion of South VVest Africa
.
Petitions concerning South VVest Africa
.
.
Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
International 1r~st 1{ear
'"
.
Renunciation by States of actions hampering the conclusion of an
agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons
.
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the
Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
.
Question of Southern Rhodesia
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
.
Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
Report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and VVorks Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ..
Programme of studies on multilateral food aid
.
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
.
Appointment to fill a vacancy in the membership of the Board of
Auditors
.
Permanent sovereignty over natural resources
.
,
.
Representation of 0Una in the United Nations
Strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force
in inte~~onal relations, and of the right of peoples to selfdetermination
.
Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations

108

I,.".

DGf. of
~

PtIfJ.

20
23

20 September 1966
19 September 1966

1
67

76 (a)
76 (a)
20
20
23

30 September 1966
25 November 1966
17 October 1966
17 October 1966
22 October 1966

80
80

72
72
72
72

26 October 1966
26 October 1966
26 October 1966
26 October 1966

80
80
80

76 (b)
76 (b)

26 October 1966
25 November 1966

81
81

76 (,)
57

26 October 1966
26 October 1966

81
45

58

26 October 1966

46

9S
95

18
53

26 October 1966
26 October 1966
27 October 1966
27 October 1966
1 November 1966
4 November 1966

-46
47
2
3
3
24

97

4 November 1966

9

80
23

4 November 1966
17 November 1966
17 November 1966

81
68
24

17 November 1966
17 November 1966

9
10

SO
14

17 November 1966
22 November 1966
22 November 1966

28

76 (c)
4S
90

2S November 1966
2S November 1966
19 November 1966

82
29
3

92
18

30 November 1966
2 December 1966

4

6S
6S

41 (b)
26

26
32

2
2
68

81

19
3

4

109

Cheek Ust of resolutions
R'601flli""

Title

No.

lIem

Pllf/'

2162 (XXI)

Question of general and complete disarmament
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
Resolution . C
.
2163 (XXI) Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests
.
2164 (XXI) Question of convening a conference for the purpose of signing a
convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons
.
.
2165 (XXI) Elimination of foreign military bases in the countries of Asia,
Africa and Latin America
.
2166 (XXI) International conference of plenipotentiaries on the law of treaties
2167 (XXI) Reports of the International Law Commission ..... . .....
2168 (XXI) Appointments to fill vacancies in the United Nations Administrative
Tribunal
.
.
2169 (XXI) External financing of economic development of developing countries
2170 (XXI) Flow of external resources to developing countries .,
2171 (XXI) Conversion to peaceful needs of the resources released by disarmament
.
.
2172 (XXI) Resources of the sea
.........
.
.
2173 (XXI) Development of natural resources
.
2174 (XXI) Report of the Committee for the International Co-operation Year
2175 (XXI) Admission of Barbados to membership in the United Nations
2176 (XXI) United Nations International School
.
.
2177 (XXI) Special session of the Trade and Development Board
.
2178 (XXI) International Symposium on Industrial Development
.
2179 (XXI) Provision of operational personnel under the Technical Assistance
component of the United Nations Development Programme ....
2180 (XXI) Reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme
.
2181 (XXI) Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations
.
2182 (XXI) Question of methods of fact-finding
.
.
2183 (XXI) Question of Aden
.
2184 (XXI) Question of Territories under Portuguese administration ...
2185 (XXI) Question of Fiji
.
2186 (XXI) Establishment of the United Nations Capital Development Fund
2187 (XXI) United Nations Institute for Training and Research
.
2188 (XXI) General review of the programmes and activities in the economic,
social, technical co-operation and related fields of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the United Nations Children's Fund and all
other institutions and agencies related to the United Nations
system
.
2189 (XXI) Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples
.
2190 (XXI) Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations
with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency
Resolution A
.
Resolution B

2191 (XXI) Report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
.
2192 (XXI) World campaign for universal literacy
.
2193 (XXI) Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity
.
2194 (XXI) United Nations Emergency Force
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
2195 (XXI) Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1966
Resolution A
.
Resolution B
.
2196 (XXI) Audit reports relating to expenditure by specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency
..
Resolution A
Resolution B
.
2197 (XXI) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ..

27
27
27
28

5 December 1966
5 December 1966
5 December 1966
5 December 1966

11

29

5 December 1966

12

98
84

5 December 1966
5 December 1966
5 December 1966

12
95
96

6 December 1966
6 December 1966
6 December 1966

30
30

84

76 (d)
40
40

44

10
11
11

82

32
32
32
4
5

24
20
83
37
41 (a)

6 December 1966
6 December 1966
6 December 1966
7 December 1966
9 December 1966
9 December 1966
9 December 1966
9 December 1966

49

9 December 1966

33

49

9 December 1966

34

87
87
23
67

96
97

69
38
48

12 December 1966
12 December 1966
12 December 1966
12 December 1966
12 December 1966
13 December 1966
13 December 1966

52

13 December 1966

37

23

13 December 1966

5

94
94

82

33
33

69

70
71
34
37

12
and 79
12
and 79
82
47

15 December 1966

83

15 December 1966
IS December 1966
15 December 1966

83
83
38

22

15 December 1966

6

21 (b)
21 (b)

16 December 1966
16 December 1966

83
84

73
73

16 December 1966
16 December 1966

84
86

78
78
55

16 December 1966
16 December 1966
16 December 1966

87
87
48

General Assemb ly-Twe nty.firs t Session

110
R.&ol"tion
No.

Title

Protoco l relating to the Status of Refugee s
Draft Declarat ion on the Elimina tion of Discrim ination against
.
.
Wome n......
Cultural Rights,
Z200 (XXI) Internat ional Covenan t on Economic, Social and
l
Internat ional Covenan t on Civil and Political Rights and Optiona
Political
and
Civil
on
t
Covenan
ional
Internat
Protoco l to the
Rights
Resoluti on A
Resoluti on B
Resoluti on C
2201 (XXI) Report of the Security Council
the Republic of
2202 (XXI) The policies of aparthei d of the Governm ent of
South Africa
.
Resoluti on A
.
Resoluti on B
.
Asylum
of
Right
the
on
2203 (XXI) Draft Declarat ion
dissemination
2204 (XXI) Technic al assistance to promote the teaching, study,
.
law
onal
internati
of
tion
and wider apprecia
Internati onal
on
sion
Commis
Nations
United
the
of
hment
Establis
2205 (XXI)
Trade Law
on Trade and
2206 (XXI) Second session of the United Nations Confere nce
.
ment
Develop
.
fields
related
and
trade
in
e
assistanc
al
Technic
(XXI)
2207
.
2208 (XXI) Internat ional monetar y reform
s made by the United Nations
endation
recomm
2209 (XXI) Impleme ntation of the
Conference on Trade and Develop ment at its first session
.
2210 (XXI) Internat ional agreeme nt on cocoa
.
ent
developm
c
economi
and
growth
on
2211 (XXI) Populati
Orment
2212 (XXI) Headqu arters of the United Nations Industri al Develop
.
.
......
ganizati on
.
2213 (XXI) Effects of atomic radiation
.
2214 (XXI) United Nations Children 's Fund
.
situation
2215 (XXI) World social
.
2216 (XXI) Freedom of informat ion
2217 (XXI) Internat ional Year for Human Rights
.
Resolution A
.
"
..
,
,
,
.
B
on
Resoluti
.
...................... .
Resoluti on C
.
,
.
Resoluti on D
2218 (XXI) United Nations Development Decade
.
.
Resoluti on A
.
Resoluti on B
of the
2219 (XXI) Credenti als of represen tatives to the twenty-f irst session
.
General Assembl y
eping
peace-ke
of
Z2ZO (XXI) Comprehensive review of the whole question
.
operatio ns in all their aspects
Uses
ZZZI (XXI) United Nations Conference on the Explora tion and Peaceful
.
of Outer Space

2198 (XXI)
2199 (XXI)

ZZZZ (XXI)

the
Treaty on Principl es Governi ng the Activitie s of States in
Explora tion and Use of Outer Space, includin g the Moon and
.
Other Celestial Bodies

ZZZ3 (XXI)

Report M the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

2224 (XXI)

The Korean question

2225 (XXI)

Status of the impleme ntation of the Declarat ion on the Inadmis
sibility of Interven tion in the Domestic Affairs of States and
the Protecti on of Their Independ ence and Sovereig nty

2229 (XXI)
2230 (XXI)
2231 (XXI)

Question of Equator ial Guinea
Question of Gibralta r

ZZ28 (XXI)

DlJleof
adoption

55

16 Decemb er 1966

48

56

16 December 1966

48

62
62
62
11

16 December 1966
16 December 1966
16 December 1966
16 December 1966

49
60
60

34
34
85

16 Decemb er 1966
16 December 1966
16 December 1966

86

16 December 1966

98

17 Decemb er 1966

99

37
37
37

17 December 1966
17 Decemb er 1966
17 Decemb er 1966

39
39
39

37

17 December 1966
17 Decemb er 1966
17 December 1966

40
41

17 December 1966
17 Decemb er 1966
19 December 1966
19 December 1966
19 Decemb er 1966

42
21
60
60
61

63
63
63

19 December 1966
19 Decemb er 1966
19 Decemb er 1966
19 December 1966

61
63
64
64

39
39

19 December 1966
19 December 1966

42
43

3 (b)

19 Decemb er 1966

7

33

19 December 1966

21

30,89

19 Decemb er 1966

12

19 December 1966

13

19 December 1966

15

19 December 1966

16

19 December 1966
20 December 1966

16

37

46
41 (b)

35
12
54
60
63

30,89
and 91
30,89
and 91

96

zo
21
98

41

23

20 December 1966
20 Decemb er 1966

71
72
72
72
73

23

20 December 1966

74

13
13
.

6

and 91

31
and 93

.

Question of the Trust Territor y of Nauru
Question of Papua and the Trust Territor y of New Guinea
Question of French Somalila nd
.
Question of Ifni and Spanish Sahara

22Z6 (XXI)
ZZ27 (XXI)

!tern

23
23

20 Decemb er 1966
20 December 1966

111

Cheek net of reeoludou
R.601t1fitm
No.

2232 (XXI)

2233 (XXI)
2234 (XXI)
2235 (XXI)

Titl,

Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda,
British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon
Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands and the
United States Virgin Islands
.
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations ...
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories .....
Question of the consolidation and integration of the special educational and training programmes for South West Africa, the
special training programme for Territories under Portuguese
administration and the educational and training programme for
South Africans
.

2236 (XXI)
2237 (XXI)

Special educational and training programmes for South West Africa
Special .train!ng programme for Territories uf,lder Portuguese
administration
.
2238 (XXI) Question of Oman
.
.
2239 (XXI) Pattern of conferences
.
.
2240 (XXI) Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the
United Nations
.
.
2241 (XXI) Composition of the Secretariat
Resolution A
Resolution B
.
.
2242 (XXI) Budget for the financial year 1967
Resolution A
.
.
Resolution B
.
Resolution C
.
2243 (XXI) Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the financial year 1967
2244 (XXI) Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1967
.
2245 (XXI) System of travel and subsistence allowances to members of organs
and subsidiary organs of the United Nations
.
2246 (XXI) Extension of conference facilities at the Palais des Nations
.
2247 (XXI) Publications and documentation of the United Nations
.

23

20 December 1966

74

64

20 December 1966

75

71

20 December 1966

75

66
and 68
66

20 December 1966
20 December 1966

76
76

68
70
75

20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966

77
77
87

77

20 December 1966

88

81
81

20 December 1966
20 December 1966

89
89

74
74
74
74
74

20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966

89
91
91
92

92

74
74
74

20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966

93
93
93

7
10

24 September 1966
20 December 1966

7
7

12

17 December 1966

43

12
21 (0)

19 December 1966
16 December 1966

7
7

23

20 December 1966

78

23

20 December 1966
7 December 1966
19 December 1966
19 December 1966
17 December 1966

7
7
17
22
44

6 December 1966
6 December 1966
22 November 1966

44

Olla. tleeldo...
Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations
.
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization.
Report of the Economic and Social Council (chapters II to IX, X (section II),
XII, XIII (sections II to VII), XIV and XV) .....
Report of the Economic and Social Council (chapters XIII (section IX),
XVI and XVII).
Report on the United Nations Emergency Force
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
.
Appointment to fill a vacancy in the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
.
Installation of mechanical means of voting ~ .....
Question of general and complete disarmament
Peaceful settlement of disputes
.
Headquarters of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
Confirmation of the appointment of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization ..
Inflation and economic development
.
Decentralization of the economic and social activities of the United Nations
Review and reappraisal of the role and functions of the Economic and Social
Council
.
.
Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance
Creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Question of South West Africa (hearing of petitioners).
Budget estimates for the financial year 1967
Pattern of conferences '. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .
.
Audit reports relating to expenditure by specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency
.
Personnel questions
.

25
27
36
41 (b)
41 (c)

42
43
51
59
61
65
74
75

22 November 1966
19 December 1966
19 December 1966
26 October 1966 and
20 December 1966
20 December 1966
20 December 1966

78
81

16 December 1966
20 December 1966

44
44
44

65
65
78
94
94
94
94

Reprinted in United Nations, New York
June 1973 - 310
