S/2018/889

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 October 2018
Original: English

Situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2414
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until 31 October 2018 and
requested me to submit a report on the situation in Western Sahara before the end of
the mandate period. It covers developments that have occurred since the issuance of
my previous report, of 29 March 2018 (S/2018/277), and describes the situation on
the ground, the status and progress of the political negotiations on Western Sahara,
the implementation of resolution 2414 (2018) and the existing challenges to the
Mission’s operations and steps taken to address them.

II. Recent developments
2.
During the period since the issuance of my previous report, overall calm has
prevailed throughout the Territory on both sides of the berm, al though the previously
reported underlying tensions between the parties (ibid., para. 3) continue.
3.
On the political front, my Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, Horst Koehler,
has stepped up efforts to advance the political negotiations between the part ies.
Following the adoption of resolution 2414 (2018), he undertook consultations with
relevant interlocutors, including Security Council members, members of the Group
of Friends on Western Sahara and regional organizations. From 23 June to 1 July
2018, he carried out a second visit to the region, during which he held discussions
with a wide range of high-level officials of both the parties and neighbouring States
and civil society representatives. Following the visit, and in accordance with
resolution 2414 (2018), he briefed the Council on 8 August and announced his
intention to invite the parties and the neighbours to direct negotiations before the end
of the year. Letters of invitation to an initial round -table meeting in Geneva on 5 and
6 December 2018 were subsequently sent to the parties, on 28 September.
4.
Meanwhile, “police” of the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía
el-Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO) have not been present in the buffer
strip in Guerguerat (ibid.7, paras. 3–10) since 22 April 2018. The Secretary-General
of Frente POLISARIO, Brahim Ghali, verbally confirmed to my Personal Envoy on
26 June, during their meeting in Rabouni, Algeria, that the withdrawal was

18-16439 (E)

081018

*1816439*

S/2018/889

permanent. In view of that development, in mid-July MINURSO began to draw down
its daytime monitoring post in Guerguerat. Regular aerial and ground patrols of the
area are being maintained. At the same meeting in June, Mr. Ghali also pledged not
to relocate any new administrative installations to Bir Lahlou or Tifariti, in keeping
with resolution 2414 (2018).
5.
While no major threats to the ceasefire have been record ed to date, MINURSO
reported a number of new violations of military agreement No. 1. In all instances of
alleged or observed violations, MINURSO engaged with the parties to prevent or
resolve the violations. On a number of occasions, it was able to persuad e the parties
to at least partially restore the status quo ante or to abandon planned actions that could
potentially violate military agreement No. 1 or create tensions.
6.
Not all allegations raised by the parties were corroborated by the Mission’s
reconnaissance on the ground. Such instances of alleged or observed violations have
occurred once a week on average since the beginning of the year, and the repeated
pattern of reduced tensions following the Mission’s actions provides evidence of the
effectiveness of its role in preventing conflict and in maintaining an environment
conducive to the work of my Personal Envoy.
7.
Both Morocco and Frente POLISARIO justified some of their activities as being
necessary to prevent drug trafficking and other criminal activities. Military agreement
No. 1 does not address anti-smuggling or criminal prevention activities by military
forces.
8.
With respect to paragraph 9 of resolution 2414 (2018), in which the Security
Council recognized that fundamental questions related to the ceasefire and related
agreements remained and called upon the Secretary-General to interview the parties
in an effort to better understand those issues, the Secretariat launched a process of
engagement with the parties, seeking written responses regarding their understanding
of the ceasefire and related agreements, and views on any aspects of them that might
need to be adjusted. In their responses, both parties provided detailed overviews of
their understanding of the current ceasefire architecture, including their views on the
context and origin of the agreements. The parties shared the view that the current
ceasefire architecture had played a central role in stabilizing the situation in Western
Sahara. The parties also reaffirmed their commitment to the ceasefire architecture and
their adherence to its terms and those of military agreement No. 1. The parties did not
see a need for the adjustment of either the ceasefire architecture or military agr eement
No. 1. However, both parties expressed widely divergent views on their implications
and application.
9.
During the reporting period, insofar as MINURSO was able to observe,
Morocco continued to make considerable investments in infrastructure and eco nomic
development projects west of the berm. Morocco maintains that the investments and
projects benefit the people of Western Sahara and are implemented in full consultation
with them. Frente POLISARIO continues to protest that the investments and
development activities, as well as the exploitation of the natural resources of Western
Sahara, are in violation of international law and of the status of Western Sahara as a
Non-Self-Governing Territory. Frente POLISARIO also claims that all expressions of
dissent, especially public pro-referendum or pro-independence demonstrations, by the
Sahrawi population west of the berm are systematically and violently repressed by
Moroccan security forces.
10. Frustration and anger at the lack of progress in the political process continue to
prevail among the general population of the refugee camps near Tindouf, Algeria,
compounded by persistent difficulties, such as rising malnutrition, brought about by
the steady reductions in humanitarian aid. No significant security inc idents were
reported in the refugee camps during the reporting period, and, unlike previously,
2/17

18-16439

S/2018/889

MINURSO received no reports of major public demonstrations against the political
and military leadership.
11. In a letter dated 30 March 2018, King Mohammed VI wrote to me denouncing
repeated provocations and violations of the ceasefire and related military agreements
by Frente POLISARIO. In his letter, he drew particular attention to the announced
intention of Frente POLISARIO to move some of its administrative structures to Bir
Lahlou or Tifariti, east of the berm. He defined those intentions as acts aimed at
illegally changing the status quo on the ground, which would force Morocco to
unilaterally take action to preserve the status of the Territory to the east of the berm.
Assurances were later given by Frente POLISARIO that no administrative structures
would be moved. Additional letters were received from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the United Nations complaining about Frente POLISARIO violations
east of the berm (see para. 34 below).
12. I also received a letter from the Secretary-General of Frente POLISARIO
claiming that, on 19 May, a Sahrawi student at Ibn Zohr University in Agadir,
Morocco, had been murdered as a result of the country’s polic y against the Sahrawi
population and that a campaign against peaceful Sahrawi demonstrators had been
conducted in Laayoune and Smara during the visit by my Personal Envoy to the
Territory.

III. Political activities
13. During the reporting period, my Personal Envoy continued the consultations on
the issue of Western Sahara with relevant interlocutors, including members of the
Security Council, members of the Group of Friends on Western Sahara and regional
organizations. On 10 April, he travelled to Moscow to meet with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
and brief them on Western Sahara. From 26 to 30 April, he travelled to Rwanda to
meet with the Chairpersons of the African Union and of the African Union
Commission to exchange views on recent developments in Western Sahara. In May,
he travelled to Brussels and briefed the European Parliament Committee on Foreign
Affairs. In August, he met with the Deputy Secretary of State and the Assi stant to the
President for National Security Affairs of the United States of America in Washington,
D.C.
14. During his second visit to the region, from 23 June to 1 July 2018, my Personal
Envoy travelled to Algiers, Dakhla, Laayoune, Nouakchott, Rabat, Ra bouni, Smara
and Tindouf. The purpose of the visit was to gain a better understanding of the
situation and to discuss with all relevant actors the way forward in the political
process, following the six-month extension of the Mission’s mandate in accordanc e
with resolution 2414 (2018).
15. In Rabouni, my Personal Envoy met with Mr. Ghali as well as with the
negotiation team led by Katri Idoh. Both expressed full support for my Personal
Envoy and his mission as well as their serious intention to help to find a solution for
Western Sahara. Mr. Ghali confirmed to my Personal Envoy, as a sign of good faith,
the withdrawal of Frente POLISARIO from Guerguerat and its commitment not to
return or move any institutions to Tifariti or Bir Lahlou. Mr. Ghali, however,
expressed concern about the “settlement policy” and new “administrative
configuration” of Morocco, which was changing the demographic composition of
Western Sahara.
16. In Rabat, my Personal Envoy met with the Prime Minister of Morocco, SaadEddine El Othmani, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International

18-16439

3/17

S/2018/889

Cooperation, Nasser Bourita, and was assured of the full support of Morocco for his
work. Mr. Bourita reiterated the call, made in resolution 2414 (2018), for a realistic,
practicable and enduring political solution and stressed the commitment of Morocco
to its autonomy proposal of 2007, which, in his view, should be the basis for
negotiations. The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister stated that, while tension
in Guerguerat had significantly decreased, Morocco was still very concerned about
Frente POLISARIO “provocations” east of the berm.
17. In Algiers, my Personal Envoy met with the Prime Minister of Algeria, Ahmed
Ouyahia, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Abdelkader Messahel. Both reiterated
the country’s consistent assurances of its full support as a neighbour and stressed the
importance of self-determination. While insisting that it was not a party to the conflict
and could not take the seat of Frente POLISARIO at the negotiating table,
Mr. Messahel announced that Algeria was prepared to step up its role in the political
process, as a neighbour, as required by resolution 2414 (2018).
18. In Nouakchott, the President of Mauritania, Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ismael Ould Cheikh Ahmed, also expressed full support
for my Personal Envoy and for the political process. Both emphasized the strong
cultural ties that existed between Mauritania and the Sahrawi people. They confirmed
that Mauritania was also ready to scale up its engagement in the political process in
the hope of putting an end to the conflict. President Ould Abdel Aziz stressed that
finding a peaceful solution to the conflict was crucial for the entire region, which was
struggling with drug trafficking, extremism and poverty.
19. During the visit, all interlocutors recognized the key role of M INURSO in
maintaining the ceasefire and preventing conflict. They noted that withdrawing
MINURSO could have a significant impact on the stability of the region and come at
a much higher cost to the international community than the Mission’s current budget.
Frente POLISARIO, Algeria and Mauritania voiced particular concern over the
frustration and disillusionment of some of the youths living in the camps.
20. While Frente POLISARIO stressed that it was ready to engage in negotiations
and wanted to avoid the drawing-down of MINURSO, it noted that the Mission was
hampered in its ability to fulfil its mandate, owing to the lack of human rights
monitoring and interaction with the Sahrawi people and the use of Moroccan licence
plates. Frente POLISARIO also expressed disappointment with the United Nations
for not implementing paragraph 3 of Security Council resolution 2351 (2017) to
explore ways to resolve fundamental questions related to the ceasefire, as well as with
recent MINURSO reports to the Council, which, they stated, were “incorrect and
biased”.
21. In Laayoune, Dakhla and Smara, my Personal Envoy met with a large number
of locally elected officials. They highlighted developments in the education, health
and economic sectors and stated that the people west of the berm were grateful for
the support received from Morocco, particularly the $7.7 billion development plan.
They noted, however, that it was important to gain clarity on the legal status of
Western Sahara, as the current uncertainty hampered foreign investment. While the
Territory enjoyed stability unlike some of the neighbouring countries in the Sahel
zone, they acknowledged that some problems still persisted, such as youth
unemployment and a lack of education and health infrastructure.
22. My Personal Envoy also convened meetings in Dakhla and Laayoune with civil
society representatives, who presented a wide range of views. Some expressed full
support for the Moroccan autonomy plan and urged the United Nations to find a
political solution that would allow the people in Tindouf to return to the homeland
and benefit from the development seen in the Territory. They expressed gratitude for
the financial support provided by Morocco, which had improved inf rastructure,
4/17

18-16439

S/2018/889

education and health services in the Territory and had increased awareness of human
rights.
23. However, other civil society representatives expressed concern about
Moroccan-funded development projects in the Territory, claiming that they did not
benefit the original Sahrawi population. They stressed that the “elected” officials in
the Territory did not represent the Sahrawi people in their entirety, but rather the
interests of an elite minority. They expressed frustration over the discrimi natory
policies imposed on them as Sahrawi activists, which prevented them from gaining
access to jobs and economic opportunities and curtailed their freedom to voice
political views. Some non-governmental organizations reported serious human rights
violations committed by the Moroccan police and expressed concern for their own
safety. These non-governmental organizations were unanimous in declaring selfdetermination to be the only way to resolve the conflict.
24. My Personal Envoy visited a number of development projects financed by
Morocco, among them a conference centre and a hospital, as well as a phosphate
treatment unit run by the Cherifian Office of Phosphates in Laayoune. He also
discussed the socioeconomic development of the Territory with local of ficials,
businesspeople and civil society.
25. In line with paragraph 14 of resolution 2414 (2018), my Personal Envoy briefed
the Security Council on 8 August on his mission and his plans for the way for ward.
Council members had expressed readiness to receive a briefing from my Personal
Envoy when deemed appropriate ahead of the renewal of the MINURSO mandate in
October. He also informed the Council that he intended to invite the parties and
neighbouring States to a first round of direct negotiations in the fourth quarter of the
year to build trust and discuss the way forward in the political process. My Personal
Envoy received broad support from the Council for his initiative.
26. The Office of my Personal Envoy has been actively engaged in preparatory work
for preliminary talks in 2018. This has included discussions with the parties, Security
Council members and other interested Member States and regional organizations.
Discussions have also been ongoing with United Nations entities and partners,
including the United Nations Office at Geneva, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the Internati onal Committee of the
Red Cross.
27. As announced during his briefing to the Security Council on 8 August, on
28 September my Personal Envoy sent invitations to the parties and immediate
neighbours for preliminary talks, to be held in Geneva in December. In the invitation
letter, my Personal Envoy requested the parties to respond by 20 October. At the time
of reporting, Morocco had positively responded on 2 October to the invitation of my
Personal Envoy for the initial round-table meeting in Geneva. On 3 October, Frente
POLISARIO also accepted the invitation to attend the initial round -table meeting. I
am confident that Algeria and Mauritania will respond favourably.
28. From 24 to 28 September, my Personal Envoy visited New York. On the margins
of the annual general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session, he
held extensive consultations with the parties and interested Member States in
preparation for the preliminary talks.

18-16439

5/17

S/2018/889

IV. Activities of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara
A.

Operational activities
29. As at 5 September 2018, the military component of MINURSO consisted of 233
personnel, 29 of whom were female, against the authorized strength of 245. From
1 April to 1 September 2018, MINURSO conducted approximately 392,673 km of
ground patrols and 328 air patrols. Cooperation between MINURSO team site
commanders and the parties was generally satisfactory. The reporting period included
monthly visits to approximately 920 units, headquarters and strongpoints and 28
training areas. Military observers also visited 365 observation posts east and west of
the berm and monitored more than 292 notified operational activities by both parties.
30. As indicated above, with the withdrawal since 22 April 2018 of Frente
POLISARIO “police” from Guerguerat, as of mid-July the Mission’s temporary
observation post, established in August 2016, had begun to reduce its daily presence,
and it will continue to monitor the area through regular ground and air patrols. This
will reduce the burden on the MINURSO military component by removing the need
to dedicate a team the size of an average team site to this task within the authorized
strength. MINURSO will, nonetheless, remain ready to resume a daily presence at
short notice should developments in the area require it.
31. Owing to security concerns, ground patrolling east of the berm remains
restricted to a 100 km radius from team sites, and no night patrols are conduct ed on
either side of the berm. The General Assembly approved funding in the MINURSO
budget for financial year 2018/19 for the Mission’s proposed acquisition of protective
bunkers for all team sites east of the berm, which will contribute significantly to t he
existing protection of military observers in those areas, consistent with the
recommendations set out in the report entitled “Improving security of United Nations
peacekeepers: we need to change the way we are doing business”, of 19 December
2017.
32. During the reporting period, MINURSO recorded six violations of military
agreement No. 1 by the Royal Moroccan Army, in addition to 10 long -standing
violations (ibid., para. 37). Two of those violations were general in nature, three
consisted of what military agreement No. 1 defines as “tactical reinforcements” and
one was a freedom-of-movement violation.
33. MINURSO recorded 13 general violations of military agreement No. 1 by Frente
POLISARIO, 1 tactical reinforcement and 12 freedom-of-movement violations. The
number of freedom-of-movement violations has significantly increased since the
issuance of my previous report (ibid., para. 38), in addition to the three long-standing
violations referred to in the same report.
34. In late March 2018, a MINURSO ground patrol observed that the Royal
Moroccan Army was rebuilding a sand wall established in 1987 near Mahbas. The
Royal Moroccan Army had requested permission for the work in February, April and
June 2017, with MINURSO denying all three requests and noting that rebuilding a
previously existing wall would constitute a reinforcement in violation of military
agreement No. 1. MINURSO found that a new and larger wall (3–4 metres high and
8–10 metres wide) was being built on top of an existing one of a height of 1 to 1.5
metres high, along a course of 63.8 km running north to south in parallel to the berm.
They also observed several new observation posts, as well as four gates in the wall
enabling access between units located close to the berm.

6/17

18-16439

S/2018/889

35. In April 2018, the violations working group of MINURSO assessed the
situation, ruling that the new sand wall constituted a violation of military agreement
No. 1. The Royal Moroccan Army notified MINURSO of its intention to remove all
observation posts close to the newly established sand wall while retaining the four
gates, proposing to maintain a presence of four unarmed soldiers at each gate. The
Royal Moroccan Army asserts that the reinforced wall and the new installations are
needed to enhance its capacity to prevent drug smuggling and other criminal
activities. It also argues that the work constitutes the rehabilitation of an existing
structure and, as such, is not a violation; however, military agreement No. 1 does not
provide for any exemption for the rehabilitation of existing structures.
36. In late May 2018, MINURSO discovered 13 new Royal Moroccan Army
observation posts at a distance of approximately 15 km from the berm in Bir Gandouz,
in the southern part of the Territory. The matter was referred to the violations working
group, which ruled that the posts constituted a violation of military agreement No. 1.
Further ground patrols have discovered 10 additional new observation posts in nearby
locations, which at the time of reporting remained under consideration by the
violations working group.
37. Shortly after the start of the crisis in Guerguerat in 2016, Frente POLISARIO
established four small military positions inside the buffer strip, approximately 20 km
south-east of Guerguerat, which were declared violations by MINURSO. After
receiving notification from the Force Commander, Frente POLISARIO withdrew
from three of those locations, maintaining a small military presence at the “waypoint
6” position (16.6 km east of the Guerguerat road and 4 km south of the berm), which
remains a violation. Frente POLISARIO disputes that the post is inside the buffer
strip and justifies maintaining it on the basis of its need to continue to monitor
developments in Guerguerat and maintain readiness to react should Morocco decide
to resume work on the road inside the buffer strip. MINURSO has called on Frente
POLISARIO several times to remove the post from the buffer strip.
38. On 24 March 2018, Frente POLISARIO notified MINURSO of its intention to
establish nine new military posts near Bir Lahlou, east of the berm, justifying them
as needed to respond to increased drug trafficking in the area. MINURSO
immediately conducted a reconnaissance of the proposed new positions and, on
27 March 2018, wrote to Frente POLISARIO, warning that the proposed new posts
would be a violation of military agreement No. 1. On 3 May 2018, MINURSO
received a second notification, proposing only six new observation posts. After a
second reconnaissance, on 5 May 2018 MINURSO wrote to Frente POLISARIO,
warning that the proposed new posts would also violate the terms of military
agreement No. 1. To date, no work has been done to establish any new posts, but
MINURSO continues to monitor these locations.
39. Over the course of the reporting period, Morocco provided MINURSO and the
Secretariat with various satellite photographs of alleged construction activities east
of the berm, which, they suggest, may be in violation of the ceasefire or military
agreement No. 1. MINURSO has reconnoitred the areas in question and, in seven
cases, found that they did not constitute violations. In another eight cases, including
the one in Bir Lahlou mentioned above, investigations are ongoing.
40. The Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Morocco,
during a meeting held in New York on 4 April, protested to me about the planned new
positions, calling on MINURSO to condemn them as a violation of military agreement
No. 1. He also warned that Morocco would not tolerate such actions by Frente
POLISARIO, which would have to take full responsibility for any consequences. The
complaint was reiterated in letters from the Permanent Representative of Morocco to
my Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
18-16439

7/17

S/2018/889

41. On 26 June 2018, the Secretary-General of Frente POLISARIO provided my
Personal Envoy with assurances of his intention not to move administrative structures
to the Territory, in compliance with resolution 2414 (2018). However, in early May
2018 MINURSO confirmed that a large, single-storey structure was being built near
Tifariti, consisting of approximately 36 rooms. The local Frente POLISARIO military
representative informed MINURSO military observers that the building was a civilian
structure. Access to MINURSO was, however, denied by Frente POLISARIO military
personnel guarding the facility. Several subsequent requests for access to the site have
also been denied, and the issue has been referred to the violations working g roup as
a freedom-of-movement violation. At this stage, the building is not in use, and it has
not been possible to determine its intended function.
42. On 20 May 2018, Frente POLISARIO organized a series of events, including a
military parade, in Tifariti to commemorate the forty-fifth anniversary of its founding.
MINURSO military observers reported that the preparatory work for the military
parade had started approximately 10 days before the event. On 18 May, the
MINURSO Force Commander wrote to Frente POLISARIO, warning that
participation in the parade by military personnel normally stationed outside the
Tifariti military region might constitute a violation of military agreement No. 1.
Frente POLISARIO offered assurances that no military personnel or equ ipment would
be brought from other regions or from Rabouni for the parade and celebrations.
43. The parade eventually involved approximately 700 uniformed elements,
including cadets, as well as military vehicles and equipment. Prior to the event, the
Permanent Representative of Morocco wrote to me denouncing the planned military
parade as a violation of military agreement No. 1, a provocation and a destabilizing
action violating resolution 2414 (2018). He demanded that MINURSO intervene with
Frente POLISARIO to demand that it refrain from the activity. In June 2018, the
Mission’s violations working group ruled that, although the concentration of troops
was in the area of limited restriction, in view of the purely ceremonial and temporary
nature of the event, it was not a violation of military agreement No. 1. Frente
POLISARIO troops were observed departing from the parade area starting on 21 May
2018.
44. MINURSO also observed two demonstrations by Sahrawi civilians inside the
buffer strip close to the berm, both of which the Royal Moroccan Army denounced as
provocations in violation of the ceasefire agreements. They were not assessed as
violations of military agreement No. 1, as they were civilian in natur e.

B.

Mine action
45. Landmines and other explosive remnants of war continue to pose a threat to
MINURSO personnel and logistical convoys. As at 1 September 2018, 48 known
cluster strike areas and 26 known minefields remained to be addressed east of the
berm. The Mission’s Mine Action Coordination Centre, operated by the United
Nations Mine Action Service, continues to function from Tindouf.
46. East of the berm, the Mine Action Coordination Centre conducted survey and
clearance of 2,086,639 m 2 of land contaminated by landmines and explosive remnants
of war, releasing 41 medium- and high-priority cluster strike areas and one minefield.
A total of 59,320m 2 , equivalent to 7.4 km, of mission patrol and logistic routes have
been verified east of the berm, facilitating the movements of MINURSO military
observers. A total of 458 items of explosive remnants of war were destroyed,
consisting of 336 submunitions and 122 other explosive remnants of war. The Centre
conducted landmine safety training for 42 newly arrived civilian and military
personnel of MINURSO and five landmine safety refresher training sessions for 37

8/17

18-16439

S/2018/889

personnel. The Centre also conducted 33 quality assurance assessments of its
operations. Frente POLISARIO destroyed a stockpile of 2,500 anti -personnel mines
in compliance with Geneva Call’s Deed of Commitment for Adherence to a Total Ban
on Anti-Personnel Mines and for Cooperation in Mine Action, signed in 2005. The
last phase of anti-personnel mine stockpile destruction is planned for November 2018,
whereby Frente POLISARIO will have destroyed all of its declared anti -personnel
mine stockpile.
47. The Mine Action Coordination Centre, through its local partner east of the berm,
the Sahrawi Mine Action Coordination Office, remains in contact with F rente
POLISARIO on matters related to mine action to better ascertain the impact of
landmines and other explosive remnants of war in Western Sahara. The Centre also
continues to provide technical assistance to the Office in the areas of operations, data
management, administration and finance.
48. Since April 2018, west of the berm, the Royal Moroccan Army has reported one
injury to military personnel due to an accident related to landmines or explosive
remnants of war. The Royal Moroccan Army reported the clearance of more than
84 million m2 of land west of the berm and the destruction of 344 items, consisting
of 268 items of unexploded ordnance, 74 anti-personnel mines and 2 anti-vehicle
mines.

C.

Security
49. The general threat assessment conducted by MINURSO as part of the broader
2018 security risk management concept identified a moderate security level for all
zones in the Mission’s area of responsibility. The highest threat level remains in the
areas east of the berm, owing to previous explicit threats from extremist elements in
the Sahel. MINURSO continues to employ mitigation measures in line with a security
risk mitigation priority list established in February 2017. Remaining measures and
additional improvements will be implemented during the 2018/19 financial year, with
emphasis placed on team sites located east of the berm.

D.

Substantive civilian activities
50. From 28 June to 1 July 2018, MINURSO provided substantive and logistical
support for the visit of my Personal Envoy to Western Sahara, as well as for his visit
to Rabouni to meet with Frente POLISARIO authorities.
51. Frente POLISARIO has yet to agree to officially receiving my Special
Representative at its headquarters in Rabouni, in accordance with long -established
practice. Frente POLISARIO insists that the meeting be held in the Territory of
Western Sahara, although meetings with other senior officials continue to take place
in Rabouni. On 18 April, I wrote to Secretary-General Ghali requesting him to resume
the accepted practice, but as yet there has been no change in its position. This situation
represents a significant obstacle to the relationship between MINURSO and Frente
POLISARIO, which is currently limited to telephone and written contacts between
my Special Representative and the Frente POLISARIO coordinator. Day-to-day
working-level contacts continue to be managed by the Mission’s liaison offic e in
Tindouf, while my Special Representative has met with the Frente POLISARIO
coordinator on one occasion outside the Mission area. Since the beginning of 2018,
Frente POLISARIO has demanded that all meetings with the MINURSO Force
Commander also take place in the Territory, with the effect that all senior military
contacts with Frente POLISARIO are also stalled.

18-16439

9/17

S/2018/889

52. Frente POLISARIO argues that MINURSO regularly meets with the Moroccan
coordinator in Laayoune and should, therefore, be free to meet with Frente
POLISARIO inside the Territory. That position is part of a broader request by Frente
POLISARIO for equal treatment with Morocco as a party to the conflict. The
Moroccan authorities argue that any meetings held by MINURSO in the Territory
with any representatives of Frente POLISARIO, who are normally based in Rabouni,
would constitute a recognition of Frente POLISARIO control over the Territory east
of the berm, which Morocco denies, as well as an implicit and unacceptable
recognition of the “Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic”.
53. Within the constraints imposed by the lack of access to local interlocutors west
of the berm, MINURSO continued to provide regular reporting and analysis to the
Secretariat on developments in and affecting Western Sahara. To improve situational
awareness and coordination between its substantive civilian and military components,
MINURSO introduced a new joint mission analysis structure, which brings civilian
and military analysts together on a daily basis to combine their asse ssments and
ensure follow-up. The Mission also started to implement the United Nations
situational awareness programme and continued to receive regular visits by
representatives of Member States.
54. With the exception of the obstacles highlighted above with regard to interaction
between my Special Representative and Frente POLISARIO, the Mission’s access to
civil society and other relevant interlocutors east of the berm and in the refugee camps
near Tindouf remained unhindered.

E.

Challenges to the operations of the Mission
55. As previously reported (ibid., paras. 52–54), the diverging interpretations by the
parties of the MINURSO mandate continue to pose a major challenge to the Mission’s
operations, which frequently lead to vocal and systematic criticism of its activities.
In particular, the Mission’s press releases and statements are met with negative
responses by the parties, each trying to ensure that its vision of the MINURSO
mandate and the status of the conflict and of the Territory are fully reflected. More
recently, the Mission’s prerogative to issue public statements has been questioned.
56. The Mission’s lack of access to interlocutors continues to limit its ability to form
an independent assessment of the situation in Western Sahara west of the berm. The
perception of the Mission’s impartiality also remains affected by the requirement by
Morocco that MINURSO use Moroccan vehicle number plates west of the berm (ibid.,
para. 57).
57. Security remains the highest concern for the operation of MINURSO, especially
with respect to the Mission’s ground patrols and resupply convoys travelling through
the desert areas east of the berm. MINURSO has full confidence in the commitment
of Frente POLISARIO to protecting MINURSO static team sites, but the nature of the
extremist threat from other points in the Sahel, and risks to patrols away from team
sites, remain a concern. The General Assembly approved funding for MINURSO to
acquire a third helicopter in the second half of the year, which will allow for more
frequent aerial reconnaissance in advance of logistics convoys and the replacement
of ground patrols in remote and at-risk areas.

10/17

18-16439

S/2018/889

V. Humanitarian activities and human rights
A.

Persons unaccounted for in the conflict
58. The International Committee of the Red Cross continued, as a neutral
intermediary, to seek opportunities to enhance dialogue and facilitate the exchange of
information between the parties, in respect of individuals who are still unaccounted
for in relation to past hostilities.

B.

Assistance to the protection of Western Saharan refugees
59. UNHCR continued to provide international protection and, together with the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the World Food Programme (WFP),
continued to provide humanitarian assistance to Sahrawi refugees living in the five
camps near Tindouf. For planning purposes, a multi-agency vulnerability assessment
is currently under way.
60. WFP continued to cover the refugees’ basic food and nutrition needs through
the monthly distribution of 125,000 basic food rations. In March 2018, a food security
assessment was conducted to determine the level of food insecurity among the refugee
population and will inform future planning for general food assistance. Malnutrition
and anaemia prevalence remained public health concerns. UNHCR and WFP
continued to work closely together on the prevention and treatment of anaemia,
stunting and malnutrition among pregnant and lactating women, girls and young
children. WFP provided mid-morning snacks to more than 41,000 boys and girls in
primary schools and kindergartens to encourage attendance and retention. To
contribute to resilience and improve food security, WFP scaled up its hydroponic
project to produce fresh animal fodder and initiated a fish farm project.
61. UNICEF is also present in the camps and provides support in maternal and child
health programmes, including support for the expanded programme of immunization,
child protection and education activities.
62. The main challenge for humanitarian actors remained the funding shortfall. In
May 2018, the three agencies, along with 11 international non-governmental
organizations, launched an appeal for $137 million to support essential lifesaving
activities in the biennium 2018–2019. United Nations agencies have so far received
only 41 per cent of the required budget, with UNHCR being the lowest-funded (12
per cent). Owing to chronic underfunding, UNHCR also struggled to meet
international standards in the areas of protection, shelter, health, education, energy
provision and livelihoods. In addition, UNHCR could provide an average of only
10 litres of drinking water per person per day, which is half of the minimum standard
of 20 litres per person per day.

C.

Confidence-building measures
63. The confidence-building measures, pursuant to Security Council resolution
1282 (1999) and subsequent resolutions, to allow family links between Sahrawi
refugees in the Tindouf camps and their communities of origin in the Territory of
Western Sahara remain on hold.

18-16439

11/17

S/2018/889

D.

Human rights
64. During the reporting period, OHCHR 1 received a number of reports alleging that
demonstrators had been forcibly dispersed during protests related to the right to
self-determination, the disposal of natural wealth and resources and the rights of
detainees.
65. OHCHR continues to receive reports alleging lack of accountability for human
rights violations perpetrated against Sahrawis, including arbitrary arrest, torture and
ill-treatment. As at 15 August 2018, a national preventive mechanism had yet to be
established as envisaged in the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, ratified in 2014
(ibid., para. 65).
66. OHCHR continues to be concerned by reports of alleged exce ssive surveillance
operations targeting human rights defenders and journalists, particularly those located
in Western Sahara. The Moroccan authorities continue to restrict access to Western
Sahara for foreign visitors, including journalists and lawyers fro m Morocco. 2
67. In its concluding observations of July 2018 on the fourth periodic report of
Algeria, the Human Rights Committee, reviewing compliance with the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, raised concern about the “de facto devolu tion
of authority to the Frente POLISARIO, especially jurisdictional authority”, in the
camps at Tindouf, and about the reports that, as a result, victims of violations of
provisions of the Covenant in the camps do not have access to an effective remedy in
the State party’s courts (see CCPR/C/DZA/CO/4, para. 9).

VI. African Union
68. At its thirty-first session, held in Nouakchott on 1 and 2 July 2018, the Assembly
of the African Union considered a report prepared by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on the issue of Western Sahara and, in its decision 693 (XXXI),
decided to establish an African mechanism, comprising the Troika of the African
Union 3 as well as the Chairperson of the Commission, to support the United Nationsled efforts and to report regularly on the implementation of its mandate to the
Assembly and, as necessary, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at
the level of Heads of State and Government. It also decided that the issue of Western
Sahara would be raised only within that framework and at that level. In the same
decision, the Assembly requested the Chairperson of the Commission to initiate the
required consultations for the reactivation of the African Un ion Office to MINURSO
in Laayoune and appealed to African Union member States to support the United
Nations-led efforts. Further to a request by the Chairperson of the Commission, the
decision was brought to the attention of the United Nations Security Cou ncil on
7 August 2018.

__________________

Gaps in human rights reporting persist, owing to the limited monitoring capacity of OHCHR.
OHCHR was able to conduct four assessment missions in Western Sahara, in 2006, 2014 and
2015. In its resolution 2414 (2018), the Security Council encouraged enhanced cooperation with
OHCHR, including through facilitating visits to the region.
2
In December 2016, the Human Rights Committee recommended that Morocco e nsure that any
breach of privacy was in keeping with the principles of legality, proportionality and necessity
(see CCPR/C/MAR/CO/6, para. 38).
3
The Troika is composed of the outgoing, the current and the incoming Chairpersons of the
African Union.
1

12/17

18-16439

S/2018/889

VII. Financial aspects
69. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/301 and decision 72/558 of 5 July
2018, appropriated the amount of $52.4 million gross for the maintenance o f
MINURSO for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019. Should the Security
Council decide to extend the Mission’s mandate beyond 31 October 2018, the cost of
maintaining the Mission would be limited to the amounts approved by the Assembly.
70. As at 11 September 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for MINURSO amounted to $50.9 million. The total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$2,628.2 million.
71. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 31 October
2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned major equipment and
self-sustainment has been made for the period up to 30 September 2017, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Independent review of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
72. In line with my request to initiate a comprehensive review of peacekeeping
operations, a review of MINURSO was undertaken during the reporting period t o
examine how the Mission could best respond to the challenges it faces. The review
was led by an independent external expert, Diane Corner, former Deputy Special
Representative of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. Ms. Corner was supported by a team
comprising representatives from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
from the Department of Field Support. The MINURSO review team held
consultations with stakeholders at Headquarters, and also meetings in New York with
the Permanent Representative of Morocco and with the Representative of Frente
POLISARIO. The team travelled to the Mission area from 16 to 22 June 2018 to
assess the work of MINURSO, including through field visits to team sites both east
and west of the berm and to the Mission’s liaison office in Tindouf.
73. The review determined that currently, MINURSO performs three decisive
conflict prevention functions. First, it prevents ceasefire -related incidents from
escalating, in an environment where there are no direct contacts between the two
sides, both of which rely on MINURSO to adjudicate their various allegations.
Second, MINURSO ensures that the situation on the ground supports the efforts of
my Personal Envoy to revive the political process. Third, the Mission’s presence
contributes to the maintenance of regional stability in the Maghreb.
74. The review found that there is significant scope for technical improvement in
the Mission’s ability to carry out monitoring and conflict mitigation activities,
observing that the extensive use of largely predictable and repetitive ground patrols
does not optimize the Mission’s resources. It was felt that attempts to achieve full
theatre awareness of some 2,500 km of berm are unrealistic and that the military
component should define its output less in terms of quantity and more in terms of
quality. To achieve such improvements, the consent of the parties would be required.
75. The review also noted the importance of restarting the cur rently suspended
UNHCR-led programme of confidence-building measures as a significant instrument
in supporting the peace process. The review also commended the MINURSO mine
action programme, noting that every effort should be made to persuade the parties
that demining and the removal of explosive remnants of war should be expanded and
18-16439

13/17

S/2018/889

strengthened. The review also expressed some reservations with regard to certain
administrative requirements placed on MINURSO operations, among them the
insistence of Morocco that MINURSO vehicles bear Moroccan rather than United
Nations licence plates and that passports be stamped in Laayoune.

IX. Observations and recommendations
76. I am encouraged that the parties, despite occasional violations and tensions,
continue to maintain the ceasefire and generally observe related military agreements.
I am concerned, however, about the rise in tension between the parties and
increasingly uncompromising rhetoric. Maintaining peaceful and stable conditions on
the ground is essential to providing a climate for the resumption of the political
process. I call on the parties to continue engaging with the Mission to resolve the
remaining long-standing and recent violations, in full respect for the Mission’s
mandate, the ceasefire and related military agreements.
77. My Personal Envoy’s visit to the region allowed him to further improve his
understanding of the current situation in Western Sahara. The commitment of Frente
POLISARIO not to go back to Guerguerat and not to move new institutions to the
area east of the berm are positive developments and demonstrate its readiness to come
back to the negotiating table. Algeria and Mauritania have both confirmed their
readiness to take on a more active role in the negotiating process. The willingness on
the part of Morocco to facilitate the visit to Western Sahara is also an encouraging
sign.
78. I urge the parties and the neighbours to respond positively to the invitation of
my Personal Envoy to come to the negotiating table in good faith and without
preconditions. I also call on Security Council members, friends of Western Sahara
and other relevant actors to encourage the parties and the neighbours to accep t the
invitation of my Personal Envoy.
79. I am concerned by the disruption in the relationship between MINURSO and
Frente POLISARIO, which prevents my Special Representative and the Force
Commander from meeting with their counterparts. I therefore call o nce again on
Frente POLISARIO to resume the meetings with senior MINURSO leadership in
Rabouni, in accordance with the long-established practice.
80. The Mission’s role is predicated on its ability to impartially and independently
fulfil the mandate set forth by the Security Council, and I call on the parties to fully
respect that independence. I also call on the Security Council to support the Mission
in that respect.
81. MINURSO continues to rely on unarmed military observers to implement its
ceasefire monitoring tasks. I remain deeply concerned about the security and safety
of MINURSO personnel in Western Sahara, who remain extremely vulnerable to a
variety of threats, especially from criminal and terrorist groups, particularly east of
the berm. I am grateful for the support of the Security Council and the General
Assembly for the Mission’s efforts to improve its security resources, and seek the
continued support of Member States in that respect.
82. Following the independent review, I look forward to the implementation of
measures in close cooperation with the parties to increase the Mission’s operational
effectiveness, including by modernizing its approach to monitoring and observation
tasks and making the best use of innovative techniques and new tech nologies, with a
view to making the MINURSO military monitoring operation more effective and
leaner. Such measures would be aimed at, inter alia, enhancing early warning,
ensuring better compliance with the ceasefire agreement, timely investigation of
14/17

18-16439

S/2018/889

allegations of violations of the ceasefire and engagement at flashpoints to defuse
tensions and prevent escalation.
83. I note the number of female personnel in the MINURSO military component,
and I call on troop-contributing countries to support MINURSO in its efforts to
achieve greater gender balance.
84. I call for the full and sustained support of the parties to ensure the
implementation of technical improvements to the Mission’s ability to carry out its
mandate, following the independent review. I also invite the Security Council and
other Member States to encourage the parties to resume the UNHCR -led programme
of confidence-building measures.
85. As noted in paragraph 7 above regarding paragraph 9 of Security Council
resolution 2414 (2018), the two parties hold divergent views on questions related to
the ceasefire and related agreements, and neither has expressed an interest in making
adjustments.
86. MINURSO remains a core element of the United Nations effort to reach a just,
durable and mutually acceptable political solution to the conflict in Western Sahara
that will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara.
MINURSO has consistently proved to be an effective conflict pre vention tool since
its inception in 1991, a period that has seen no exchanges of fire between the parties.
The Mission’s mediation efforts have proved to be successful in de -escalating serious
tensions, in resolving potential violations of the military agr eements and in
maintaining the parties’ confidence in the ceasefire arrangements. Notwithstanding
its constraints and limited resources, the Mission successfully keeps the Secretariat
and the Security Council informed of developments in and related to West ern Sahara
and supports regional stability. The role of MINURSO has been critical to allow for
my Personal Envoy, through intensive efforts over the past six months, to make
notable progress towards a political solution to the question of Western Sahara. I
therefore recommend that the Council extend the mandate of MINURSO for one year,
until 31 October 2019, to give my Personal Envoy the space and time for his efforts
to create the conditions necessary for the political process to move ahead.
87. I once again note with great concern the lack of funding for humanitarian
assistance despite increasing needs. I therefore call upon the international community
to continue its support for humanitarian programming.
88. A lack of communication between the people living on both sides of the berm
and misperceptions regarding the reality of life on the other side were apparent during
the mission of my Personal Envoy. I therefore encourage the people living in Western
Sahara to open communication channels with their relatives on different sides of the
berm, to build confidence and develop ideas for a peaceful future.
89. I urge the parties to respect and promote human rights, including in addressing
outstanding human rights issues and enhancing cooperation with OHCHR and the
United Nations human rights mechanisms, and to facilitate their follow -up missions.
Independent, impartial, comprehensive and sustained monitoring of the human rights
situation is necessary to ensure the protection of all people in Western Sahara.
90. I thank my Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, Horst Koehler, for his
continuing efforts. I also thank my Special Representative for Western Sahara and
Head of MINURSO, Colin Stewart, and Major General Wang Xiaojun for their
dedicated leadership of MINURSO. Finally, I thank the men and women of
MINURSO for their continued commitment, under difficult and challenging
circumstances, to fulfilling the Mission’s mandate.

18-16439

15/17

S/2018/889

Annex I
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
Contributions as at 5 September 2018
Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Argentina

2

–

–

2

Austria

5

–

–

5

Bangladesh

8

20

–

28

Brazil

10

–

–

10

Bhutan

2

–

–

2

China

12

–

–

12

Croatia

7

–

–

7

Djibouti

2

–

–

2

Ecuador

4

–

–

4

Egypt

17

–

–

17

El Salvador

1

–

–

1

France

2

–

–

2

Germany

3

–

–

3

Ghana

8

7

–

15

Guinea

5

–

–

5

Honduras

12

–

–

12

Hungary

6

–

–

6

India

3

–

–

3

Indonesia

3

–

–

3

Ireland

3

–

–

3

Italy

2

–

–

2

Jordan

2

–

–

2

Kazakhstan

5

–

–

5

Malawi

3

–

–

3

Malaysia

5

–

–

5

Mexico

4

–

–

4

Mongolia

1

–

–

1

Montenegro

2

–

–

2

Nepal

5

–

–

5

Nigeria

6

–

–

6

Pakistan

14

–

–

14

Poland

2

–

–

2

Portugal

–

–

1

1

Republic of Korea

5

–

–

5

Russian Federation

15

–

–

15

Sri Lanka

4

–

–

4

Sweden

2

–

–

2

Switzerland

2

–

–

2

Togo

2

–

–

2

196

27

1

224 c

Country

Total
a

Authorized strength is 246, including the Force Commander.
Authorized strength is 12.
c
Actual strength on the ground, for military and civilian police, including the Force Commander.

b

16/17

18-16439

S/2018/889

Annex II
Map

18-16439

17/17
