S/PV.9204

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9204

th meeting
Tuesday, 29 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ríos Sánchez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-71284 (E)
*2271284*

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

The Secretary-General has called for all parties
to exercise maximum restraint and avoid escalation,
whether in the air or on the ground. Let me stress that
Türkiye, the armed opposition and the SDF should
de-escalate now.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: In repeated briefings, I have
warned of the dangers of military escalation in Syria.
I am here in person today to tell the Security Council
that escalatory dynamics are taking place, and that is
worrisome and dangerous.
For many months, we have seen a slow increase
in mutual strikes between the Syrian Democratic
Forces (SDF), on one side, and Türkiye and armed
opposition groups, on the other, across northern Syria
and with violence spilling over into Turkish territory.
On 20 November, a week after the terrible bombing in
Istanbul, which Türkiye attributed to “the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units” (PKK/
YPG) — a claim that the SDF denied — Türkiye
launched what it called the Claw-Sword Operation.
Turkish airstrikes immediately hit a large number
of what they say were “YPG/PKK” targets across
northern Syria and Iraq. The SDF and its affiliates say
that some of those strikes hit civilian infrastructure
and resulted in civilian casualties. There were also
reports of SDF strikes on Turkish forces and armed
opposition-controlled areas and inside of Turkish
territory, with some reportedly hitting civilian
infrastructure and resulting in civilian casualties.
2/21

29/11/2022

That call for restraint and de-escalation is relevant
for all other areas in Syria too.
Idlib has seen very concerning incidents,
including rounds of pro-Government air and groundbased strikes. Some of those hit camps for internally
displaced persons, killing and injuring civilians,
destroying tents and displacing hundreds of families,
while others damaged health-care infrastructure. There
were reported attacks by Security Council-listed group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham on Government forces and
Government-controlled areas, with civilian casualties.
Strikes attributed to Israel hit Damascus, Homs,
Hama and Latakia, prompting Syrian Government
anti-aircraft fire in response. There were reports of
airstrikes on the border between Syria and Iraq. The
US said that rockets hit US-led coalition forces in
Al-Shaddadi.
Dara’a, in the south, has seen a continuation of
security incidents and tensions, as well as fresh military
clashes between local factions and Syrian Government
forces, amid a reported anti-Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant operation by former opposition fighters, as
well as security incidents on the border, which Amman
related to drug smuggling.
The horrific rape and murder of two Egyptian girls
reminds us that the situation in Al-Hol camp remains of
grave concern.
The trend lines are deeply worrisome and carry
real dangers of further escalation. Let me warn the
Security Council of the scenario where large-scale
military operations by one actor then have knockon effects across all other theatres, unravelling the
strategic stalemate that has brought about a measure of
relative calm for almost three years. Such an escalation
would not only compound the devastating harm already
meted out to Syrian civilians, but it would also further
endanger regional stability. And listed terrorist groups
that are subdued but not defeated would immediately
take advantage of any fresh instability.
Let me therefore call loudly and clearly on all actors
to restrain themselves and engage in serious efforts
to reinstate the calm and move towards a nationwide
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

ceasefire and a cooperative approach to counter
terrorism in line with international humanitarian law.
The protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure is absolutely essential. Syria needs
less military activity and more focus on the political
process and on the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). That was the message we have been relaying
to members of the ceasefire task force in Geneva and
that last week I brought to Astana, where I met with
senior representatives of Iran, Russia and Türkiye, as
well as Government and opposition representatives and
representatives of Jordan, Iraq and Lebanon.
I want to remind the Council that Syrian civilians
continue to experience terrible suffering in myriad
ways, beyond the effects of violent conflict. Members
know that 6.8 million have been forced to flee and
remain internally displaced. Another 6.8 million are
refugees. Some 14.6 million Syrians need humanitarian
assistance, and I am sure Mr. Griffiths will say more
about that. Those needs have grown in recent years
in lockstep with catastrophic economic conditions
resulting from more than a decade of war and conflict,
corruption, mismanagement, the Lebanese financial
crisis, the coronavirus disease, sanctions and the war
in Ukraine. Only this week we saw the Syrian pound
reach record lows. It is clear that steps from both
the Government and outsiders are needed to halt the
economic crisis. Let me remind members that any
humanitarian effects of sanctions that could exacerbate
the plight of ordinary Syrians must be avoided and
mitigated, particularly in terms of overcompliance.
Let me also remind the Council that untold
numbers of Syrians continue to see their human rights
violated. I once again raised the issue of arbitrary
detentions, forced disappearances and missing persons
with all the key interlocutors whom I met in Astana last
week, including senior representatives of the Syrian
Government. Transparency, clear data and monitoring
mechanisms remain core to the credibility of any
release initiatives. My team also participated in the
Astana Working Group on the Release of Detainees/
Abductees, Handover of Bodies and Identification
of Missing Persons. We reiterated our call for more
substantive and frequent engagement in that area if
some measure of concrete progress is to be achieved.
We continue to hold humanitarian task force
meetings in Geneva and call for increased and unfettered
humanitarian access to all people in need throughout

S/PV.9204

Syria via all modalities. Resolution 2642 (2022) is
enabling cross-border access while highlighting the
need for enhanced cross-line access, as well as early
recovery, and I understand that progress has indeed
been made in that area. It is important that the Council
continue supporting that framework, not least as we see
a cholera crisis unfolding in Syria.
We continue to engage the wider spectrum of
Syrian stakeholders, among other things via the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board and Civil Society Support
Room, while seeking active advice on implementing
resolution 2254 (2015). As always, I appreciated
meeting members of the Syrian Women’s Advisory
Board when they met recently in Geneva and conveyed
their concern about the fact that the political process
seemed to be at an impasse.
In the light of the realities on the ground and in the
political context, I will continue to work closely with
all stakeholders on step-for-step confidence-building
measures to help build trust and confidence among
all players and advance resolution 2254 (2015). I can
see many areas where stakeholders could take mutual,
reciprocal and verifiable steps that would begin to
address legitimate concerns and, most importantly, the
needs of Syrian civilians by alleviating suffering and
contributing to a safe, calm and neutral environment,
which is an essential element of the political process. I
appreciate the increased interest in that approach from
many players, including the members of the Security
Council, several of whom have deepened the dialogue
with me in sketching out steps that they could take. I
look forward to further engagement with the Syrian
Government on the issue when I visit Damascus next
week, and of course to discussions on the full range of
issues outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), as I will shortly
also engage with the Syrian Negotiations Commission.
In that regard, I am concerned that the Syrian
Constitutional Committee has not met for six months,
as it is the only process in which Syrians nominated by
the Government, the opposition and civil society meet
and discuss aspects of their common future. The longer
it lies dormant, the harder it will be to resume, and the
absence of a credible political process can only promote
further conflict and instability. The Russian Federation
raised issues about the venue of the Constitutional
Committee meetings that were comprehensively
addressed, and I thank the Swiss authorities for their
receptivity. A further issue has now been raised that
is not in Swiss hands. In any case, if the will exists to

22-712843/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

prioritize the importance of seeing the Syrians resume
their work, I believe that there is a clear way forward
that would enable the process to resume in Geneva. In
Astana I appealed to the guarantors to support my call
for the Constitutional Committee to meet in Geneva
in January. If and when the Committee reconvenes, it
will be important to ensure that there is some forward
movement on the substance. I have specifically
appealed to the Government co-Chair of the Committee
to respond constructively to ideas that were shared in
June and discussed in various contexts with him in
order to expedite the work of the Committee. As the
terms of reference stated, we must work expeditiously
and continuously to produce results and make steady
progress. That is essential if the Syrian people are to
see the Constitutional Committee as a credible process.
I feel that we are at something of a fork in the
road. I am troubled by the thought of a major military
operation being resumed after three years of relative
calm. I fear what that would mean for Syrian civilians
and for wider regional security. I equally fear a
scenario where the situation escalates, in part because
today there are no serious efforts to resolve the conflict
politically. However, in my opinion, there is a clear
way forward. The steps we must take in the weeks
ahead are eminently possible. Let me highlight a few of
them. We should step back from escalation and restore
relative calm on the ground, renew the framework
in the Security Council on the humanitarian front,
resume and make more substantive the Constitutional
Committee meetings in Geneva, prioritize work on
the detained, disappeared and missing and deepen our
work on identifying and implementing initial step-forstep confidence-building measures.
Through that approach, incremental progress
would be achievable and would help create a dynamic
and set us on the path to a more ambitious goal — a
comprehensive political solution, in line with resolution
2254 (2015), that meets the legitimate aspirations of all
Syrians and restores Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. The alternative is deeper
suffering and more violence and instability. I appeal
to all the parties to reject that path and find ways of
cooperating on a more constructive way forward.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
4/21

29/11/2022

Mr. Griffiths: I want to say that the force of
Mr. Pedersen’s words absolutely gives us a context for
today’s discussion. I am very grateful to him for that.
The Council has heard me or my Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator in the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Joyce Msuya, brief members
on the humanitarian situation in Syria for the past year
at least once a month. My statements are completely
predictable. I tend to speak about numbers — the number
of trucks crossing lines, the number of early-recovery
projects implemented and where they are situated and
how many jobs are created. Those are technical details.
Everyone has heard our responses to the questions
in last week’s informal interactive dialogue, and of
course I will not repeat them today. We need to focus
our attention back on the people of Syria and re-evaluate
how effectively we meet even the most basic of their
needs, while taking into account the alarming concerns
that Mr. Pedersen shared with us today.
The trend is clear: more people need our support
each year to survive. The slight ray of hope that emerged
in 2017, when the number of people in need started
to decline, has quickly been erased since 2020. We
expect to see a surge in the number of people needing
humanitarian assistance — from 14.6 million this year
to more than 15 million in 2023. In other words, almost
12 years since the conflict in Syria started, 80 per cent
of the country’s population depend on aid. And as I
have said in this Chamber many times, we continue
to fail them in that respect each month, each year, a
little bit more, as the gap between needs and funding
continues to grow.
Communities in Syria are caught in the middle
of extremes. They have lived through a cataclysm.
They are struggling to survive. Earlier this month, as
Mr. Pedersen so clearly outlined, shelling, air strikes
and clashes in the vicinity of Idlib city destroyed the
homes of hundreds of displaced families in three camps
supported by humanitarian organizations. At least nine
civilians were killed and 75 were injured, including
children. More than 400 families were displaced in that
attack alone. Only last week, air strikes struck close to
a clinic of the Bab Al-Hawa hospital, causing damage
and leading to the evacuation of at least 90 patients
who were receiving care in that hospital, as well as
aid and health workers and other civilians. The recent
hostilities in the north-west and north-east of Syria, as
Mr. Pedersen noted, have had a detrimental impact on
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

civilian lives and critical civilian infrastructure, which
is of course protected in principle by international
humanitarian law. Civilians have fled their homes in
both Aleppo and Al-Hasakah governorates. Some
humanitarian services had to be temporarily suspended.
I repeat, as I always do, that all parties must take care
to spare civilians and civilian objects throughout their
military operations, please. Like Mr. Pedersen — I will
not repeat what he said — I am equally horrified by the
death of two girls, 12 and 15 years old, in Al-Hol camp.
Life there is a misery, but their death is a tragedy.
Insufficient rainfall and severe droughtlike conditions combined with low water levels
in the Euphrates River, as well as damaged water
infrastructure, continue to deprive millions of people
of safe drinking water — that is as good an example
as one will get anywhere of the consequences of
conflict and climate change coming together. We
have consistently alerted the Security Council to the
water crisis in northern Syria and have discussed it
in this Chamber. The current rapid spread of cholera,
a waterborne disease, should therefore come as no
surprise, and neither should the fact that cholera has
also seeped into Lebanon. As we know only too well,
disease knows no borders.
People in Syria struggle a little bit more every
day to put food on the table. Skyrocketing global
food prices have hit them particularly hard, since the
country is highly dependent on the import of essential
commodities — a supply chain now imperilled by
events elsewhere. Supply chain disruptions for key
staples, such as wheat and vegetable oil, as well as high
inflation rates, have further contributed to the surge
in food prices, which have also been affected by the
increase in transport costs due to energy price increases.
And the price of the World Food Programme’s standard
food basket has increased fourfold in the past two
years. Prices for most commodities in it climbed by no
less than 40 per cent this year alone — I repeat, a 40 per
cent increase in staples this year alone. Another harsh
winter, which is soon to be with us, will soon bring
snowstorms, cold weather, strong winds, rains and
flooding to millions of families who live in tents, who
have lived there for years, who know what is coming
but have no way to avoid it.
We could go on with more examples, but that is
not the purpose of this briefing. Today we are exactly
six weeks away from yet another expiration of the
authorization by the Security Council of cross-border

S/PV.9204

assistance, for which we are grateful. As I have said
before each time, cross-line deliveries can — and should
and must and will — be an important complement to
cross-border operations, and we hope to see further
progress in those operations as well. Cross-border
operations remain essential nonetheless for the lives
of the more than 4 million people who now live in the
north-west.
I return, in conclusion, to the points made by my
colleague and friend Special Envoy Geir Pedersen.
What the people of Syria want is to see me go and
him to arrive, to see the need for aid to disappear and
the arrival of peace to be celebrated among them and
shared by them. That is the principal task and the raison
d’être of the Security Council, and we must hope that
we will soon see those things happen.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I deliver this statement on
behalf of the co-penholders on the Syria humanitarian
file, namely, Ireland and Norway.
Let me first thank Special Envoy Pedersen for
his sobering briefing, and Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths for his candid statement to the
Security Council today. The humanitarian situation in
Syria is dire, and we appreciate the clear message to the
Council with regard to humanitarian access.
We are alarmed by the continued escalation
of hostilities in Syria. People are being killed and
maimed, families are again being displaced and
separated, many persons are still missing from
previous fighting and infrastructure is once again
being destroyed. International humanitarian law must
be respected, and civilians must be protected. The
cold winter will place a heavy additional burden on
people who are struggling to survive and already face
growing food insecurity, prevailing water shortages, a
widespread cholera outbreak and scarcity of fuel and
energy. We are particularly concerned by the danger
and desperation experienced by children in camps
and detention facilities in Syria. With the multitude of
crises, life-saving aid and protection must continue to
be delivered. People need food, water, medicine and
warm, safe and dignified shelter.
It is also important to continue to build resilience
through
humanitarian
early-recovery
projects,

22-712845/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

including those involving electricity, in order to restore
access to basic services. We commend the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations for their efforts
in that regard. The vast humanitarian needs in Syria
are a clear example of how the destruction of civilian
infrastructure affects civilians for years. Syria has also
reportedly recorded the highest number of landmine
casualties anywhere in the world. The efficient
clearance of mines and other explosive remnants of war
is important to protect civilians from the protracted
harm caused by more than a decade of conflict. Mine
clearance brings children back to schools, enables the
scaling up of food production and livelihoods and is
critical for humanitarian access.
As co-penholders, Ireland and Norway have been
vocal in their support for the use of all modalities for
the delivery of humanitarian aid. Humanitarian access
must not be denied. Humanitarian organizations must
be able to use the most effective access modalities to
reach the many who need humanitarian assistance and
protection. We commend the progress made with crossline deliveries to all parts of Syria, including to the
north-west, the north-east and recently to Ras Al-Ayn.
This must continue.
The humanitarian cross-border mechanism remains
the critical lifeline for the delivery of the humanitarian
response to the north-west. There is currently no
substitute that could replace the scale and volume of
the transparent and well-monitored humanitarian
cross-border mechanism. With the onset of a cold and
harsh winter, humanitarian needs will again rise. It is
therefore imperative that the Council remain committed
to following up on resolution 2642 (2022) in good faith
by confirming the extension of the humanitarian crossborder mechanism. This is a matter of life and death for
millions. The Security Council must not fail them. We
must give them hope for a better future.
I will now make this statement in my national
capacity on the political situation in Syria.
Like the Special Envoy, we are deeply worried
by the continued escalation of hostilities in Syria,
which may further destabilize the region. We call on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and abide
by their obligations to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Attacks against civilians are simply
unacceptable and only serve to exacerbate an already
dire humanitarian situation. We urge all parties involved
to take positive steps to contribute to lowering tensions.
6/21

29/11/2022

There are no military solutions to the conflict in
Syria. Syria needs a nationwide ceasefire. For this,
the parties must sit down together at the negotiation
table. I would like to reiterate Norway’s full support
for the work of the Special Envoy and his step-for-step
approach, and I would underline the importance of
implementation of all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015).
We are disappointed by the continued lack of
progress on the political track, namely, the stalled
process in the Constitutional Committee. Let me
reiterate that progress towards finding a sustainable
end to the conflict must be a priority for us all. We
welcome the recent Astana talks and continue to urge
all parties to cooperate constructively with Special
Envoy Pedersen.
We were pleased to note the convening earlier in
November of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board in
Geneva, whose participation and advice on the political
process is essential to addressing the concerns of
those most affected by the conflict. Similarly, we urge
continued focus on the important issue of missing and
arbitrarily detained persons in Syria. Accountability
and justice will serve as the building blocks for lasting
peace in Syria.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by
acknowledging and thanking Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen
and
Under-Secretary-General
Martin
Griffiths for their briefings.
India supports Secretary-General’s call on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint and avoid any
further escalation. We attach utmost importance to
maintaining the ceasefire agreed between the various
parties in March 2020 and also reiterate the utmost
respect for Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We are gravely concerned about reports of the
impact of increasing hostilities against civilians,
including in internally displaced person camps in Idlib.
We emphasize that civilians and civilian infrastructure
must continue to be protected in accordance with
international law. Such acts of violence by neighbouring
States set us back on the pursuit of a nationwide
ceasefire, as mandated by resolution 2254 (2015), which
was unanimously adopted by the Security Council in
2015 (see S/PV.7588).
India continues to support the Special Envoy’s stepfor-step approach, for, in our view, his efforts towards
making incremental progress by engaging with all
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

parties is the only way to end this protracted conflict,
which is now in its twelfth year. To this end, we support
the Special Envoy’s engagements with Damascus and
the Astana guarantors as well as with other regional
partners, namely, the United Arab Emirates, Lebanon
and Jordan. We need to continue to build bridges of
trust between all sides.
On the humanitarian side, as Syria is staring at a
long and hard winter, the outbreak of cholera has further
added to the woes of Syrian people. We continue to urge
for greater donor support for the humanitarian resource
plan for Syria, which remains chronically underfunded
and woefully inadequate to meet the humanitarian
needs of over 15 million Syrians. We continue to call
on the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) to further increase the focus on earlyrecovery projects, including power, water and health
services, which are also meant to generate livelihood
opportunities and support for the most vulnerable
sections of the Syrian population, including the
elderly, women and children. We must not politicize
humanitarian development. We also look forward to
the discussion on the Secretary-General’s report on
humanitarian assistance to Syria due in December.
While it is true that all modalities of aid delivery
must be explored for delivering aid to Syria, we continue
to believe that the cross-border aid mechanism cannot
be allowed to become an end in itself. We call upon
OCHA and other United Nations agencies to continue
to hold a constructive engagement with Damascus for
ensuring greater efficacy for cross-line aid operations.
I would also add that, as the Chair of the Security
Council Counter-Terrorism Committee, we continue to
be concerned by reports of resurgence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in the region and continue
to call on all sides to tackle the menace of terrorism
with utmost seriousness.
Finally, let me conclude with a brief report on
the recent successful visit to India by Syria’s Foreign
Minister. During the visit, discussions focused on the
reconstruction of Syria, including through extending
humanitarian assistance and development support,
capacity-building for Syrian youth and collaboration
in such sectors as renewable energy, information
technology and pharmaceuticals. India already
established a next-generation centre for information
technology in Damascus last October and provided
more than 1,500 individual scholarships, including
approximately200 scholarships this year, for Syrian

S/PV.9204

students to continue their studies in India in diverse
streams. We have recently organized, in Damascus,
artificial-limb fitment camps, known as the Jaipur Foot,
for the benefit of the Syrian population. India has also
offered lines of credit worth $280 million for building a
power plant and a steel plant in the country.
In conclusion, we stand ready to do more in future
to help our Syrian brothers and sisters in their hour of
need. India’s continued support to Syria in its endeavour
to seek lasting peace and stability remains steadfast
and unwavering.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Martin Griffiths for their
briefings on the political and humanitarian situation
in Syria.
What we heard today confirms that the overall
situation in Syria remains tense. The terrorist threat
on the ground remains, alongside an ongoing unlawful
foreign military presence in the north, north-east and
south of Syria, while the humanitarian, social and
economic situation is deteriorating. The suffocating
unilateral sanctions are having a deleterious effect, and
the results of that are compounded by the plundering
of the country’s natural resources and insufficient
international assistance, mainly in the sphere of
early recovery.
Against the backdrop of another military escalation
along the northern borders, cells of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant have been activated, mainly in the
Afrin region. Terrorist activity also remains high in the
south of the country, using the cover of the so-called
security area established arbitrarily by Washington
near Al-Tanf.
Regarding the political track of a Syrian settlement,
we have consistently supported the promotion of
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned United Nationsfacilitated political process within the framework
established by resolution 2254 (2015). We note the
efforts of Geir Pedersen to resume and improve of
the Constitutional Committee. At the same time, we
believe that fundamental decisions on the modalities
for holding further rounds of inter-Syrian dialogue in
the context of the Committee should be taken by the
Syrians themselves without external interference. In
that regard, we support the Special Envoy’s contacts
with Damascus and representatives of the opposition,

22-712847/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

which, unlike the step-for-step initiative, is his
explicit mandate.
Together with our partners in the Astana format,
Iran and Türkiye, we held the nineteenth international
meeting on Syria in Astana on 22 and 23 November,
which resulted in a joint statement. We intend to continue
to contribute to achieving long-term normalization in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Rukban and Al-Hol refugee camps continue to
be breeding grounds for terrorism and illegal activities.
In the latter, attacks on residents have become a cruel
routine. The recent incident of the beheading of two
young girls is deeply shocking. The responsibility for
what happens in those camps lies entirely with the State
that occupies the trans-Euphrates area and Al-Tanf. We
urge Washington to take concrete measures to ensure
that the United States occupying forces in Syria comply
with international humanitarian law, rather than calling
for compliance with it.
Long-term and lasting peace and security on the
ground can be achieved only by fully restoring Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, while eradicating
the terrorist hotbeds of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in Idlib
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in the
trans-Euphrates region.
Under those conditions, and given the deteriorating
humanitarian situation, Syrians continue to struggle for
survival. The evidence is clear: there has been a massive
outbreak of cholera in all the country’s provinces,
compounded by hepatitis. The main cause is acute
water shortages, primarily because of the limited flow
of the Euphrates River and the destruction of water and
electricity infrastructure.
Food shortages hit another record high, with
12 million people already affected and another
2 million at risk of facing the same situation. The
main problems are unilateral sanctions and the chronic
underfunding of the United Nations humanitarian
plan for Syria, under which, at the behest of Western
donors, the vast majority of funding for early-recovery
projects goes to areas outside the control of Damascus,
which are inhabited by less than a third of the country’s
population. At the same time, so-called fighters against
terrorism continue to plunder Syria’s natural resources.
Just last month, more than 160 truckloads of oil and
wheat were transported from Syria to Iraq with the
help of the United States military. Yet, year after
year for more than a decade, the United Nations has
8/21

29/11/2022

managed to collect at best half of the funds requested
for the implementation of a humanitarian plan for the
country, with only 44 per cent of the funds received as
of late November.
A topic that our former Western partners are trying
to avoid discussing at all costs deserves particular
consideration. I am referring to unilateral sanctions.
During her recent visit to Syria, the Special Rapporteur
on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures
on the enjoyment of human rights, Ms. Douhan, collected
an extensive body of evidence regarding not only the
damage caused by such illegal restrictions, including
to United Nations humanitarian operations, but also the
futility of the so-called humanitarian exemptions. Her
report is readily available on the Internet. We believe
that the lack of any mention in the Secretary-General’s
December special report of the problem of sanctions
and ways to resolve it would be a great omission on the
part of the United Nations Secretariat. In addition, we
request the newly appointed United Nations Resident
Coordinator in Damascus, Mr. El-Mostafa Benlamlih,
to expedite the work on a separate relevant case study,
which we have been hearing about for a year.
After the issuance of the Secretary-General’s
special report, we hope to hold a final round of
informal interactive talks to substantively discuss the
progress on the Syrian humanitarian track over the
past six months. During the discussion, we particularly
expect to hear from the new United Nations Head of
Office in Gaziantep, Türkiye, Mr. Justin Brady. In that
way, we want to obtain the information that we need to
make an informed decision on the future of resolution
2642 (2022). We look forward to an engaged and
constructive approach to this aspect by our Security
Council colleagues.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for their briefings.
Today I would like to focus my remarks on four
pressing challenges in Syria: the stalled effort to reach
a political solution, the need for a nationwide ceasefire,
the acute humanitarian crisis and the urgency of
renewing the cross-border mandate.
First, we note Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to
reconvene the Constitutional Committee. It is long past
due to achieve a political solution to the conflict, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015). One would hope that
our Russian colleagues would share that goal, but their
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

actions suggest otherwise. Russia continues to obstruct
progress by protesting arbitrary details, and those
complaints give cover to the Al-Assad regime, which
seems all too happy to maintain the status quo. The
people of Syria, who have endured far too much pain
and violence, deserve better. They deserve peace. We
call on the Al-Assad regime to commit to engaging in
the Constitutional Committee meetings in good faith.
Secondly, we reiterate our call for the cessation
of violence in north-west Syria. The incidents, so far
sporadic, between rival factions risk spiralling into
widespread fighting. It is incumbent upon all sides to
agree to, and implement, a comprehensive, nationwide
ceasefire that protects civilians from violence. The
United States urges an immediate de-escalation in
northern Syria. We are deeply concerned by the recent
military actions, which destabilize the region, threaten
our shared goal to fight the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) and endanger civilians and United
States personnel.
As we work towards a sustained peace, we must
address the situation at the Al-Hol and Al-Roj camps,
homes to thousands of third-country nationals, and in
detention centres in north-east Syria. As we just heard
reported by the Special Envoy, those camps are plagued
by violence, and thousands of vulnerable children are
growing up without access to education and other basic
services. We also know that the camps and detention
facilities are targets for ISIS, underscoring the urgency
to facilitate voluntary, safe and dignified returns and
repatriation, which we call on all States to support.
Thirdly, the Council has a solemn responsibility
to address the humanitarian crisis in Syria, which,
11 years into the conflict, has never been more dire,
and which has been exacerbated by the intensification
of violence across the country, the growing cholera
outbreak and the onset of winter. We know that crossborder and cross-line aid and early-recovery efforts
are critical to meeting the needs on the ground. We
welcome reports from United Nations humanitarian
officials that the cross-border delivery of humanitarian
assistance is reaching the most vulnerable and that
cross-line deliveries have increased in both frequency
and scale. We also welcome reports of the nationwide
implementation of early-recovery projects designed to
more efficiently increase vulnerable Syrians’ access to
basic services.

S/PV.9204

The United States has delivered on its commitment
to funding early-recovery activities, including through
contributions to the United Nations pooled fund.
Between January and September of this year, the United
Nations worked to programme more than $500 million
towards 374 early-recovery projects. Those projects
were in all 14 governorates of Syria — all 14. There is
no denying that that represents real progress in early
recovery. More than 2.4 million Syrians have directly
benefited from that work. Unfounded claims attributing
the humanitarian crisis to sanctions, allegedly lacklustre
Western funding and supposed shortcomings in earlyrecovery programmes are deliberate misinformation,
malicious in intent and nothing but a dangerous
distraction designed to steer the conversation away
from the real issue at hand, which is renewing the
cross-border mechanism in Syria.
Finally, as the cholera outbreak spreads and the
cold winter sets in, the cross-border mechanism has
never been more vital. If we come together and do the
right thing, we will save lives — plain and simple.
We must ensure the continued, transparent, efficient
and apolitical delivery of humanitarian assistance
to millions of Syrians in dire need. That is not a
political decision. It is a decision based on the needs
on the ground. We have heard time and again from the
experts inside and outside Syria that the cross-border
operation is the difference between life and death. Its
continuation is a moral imperative, as the SecretaryGeneral rightly told the Council this summer (see
S/PV.9068). We cannot allow attempts to make noise on
issues unrelated to the delivery of humanitarian aid to
cloud the clarity of this choice. The Council will need
to act in the next six weeks to continue the mechanism
in accordance with resolution 2642 (2022).
The four challenges that I have laid out today
will not be resolved overnight, but as members of the
Council we have a responsibility to do everything in
our power to make forward progress and build a more
just, peaceful and secure future for the Syrian people.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Griffiths for their
comprehensive and informative briefings, which reveal
even more clearly the serious situation facing Syria and
the Syrian people. I also welcome the delegations of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Türkiye to this meeting.

22-712849/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

Brazil is alarmed by the upsurge in fighting and
violence in Syria. We condemn the attacks that are
affecting densely populated camps for internally
displaced persons such as those in rural Idlib in northwestern Syria, and which have caused further deaths,
injuries and displacement. Once again, civilians are
suffering as a result of the tragic consequences of
continuing hostilities. All attacks on civilians must
cease immediately. International humanitarian law
must be upheld, and that applies to counter-terrorism
activities as well. We join the Secretary-General in his
repeated calls to all the parties to exercise maximum
restraint, maintain the ceasefires agreed on and respect
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Brazil welcomes the conclusion of the nineteenth
round of Astana talks in Kazakhstan, which reaffirmed
commitments to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria, as well as to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which should be universally respected and
complied with. Resolution 2254 (2015) established
a basis for the political process aimed at solving the
Syrian conflict by peaceful means and negotiations.
We thank the Special Envoy for his commitment to
the implementation of all the applicable Security
Council resolutions and for his continuing engagement
with a wide array of stakeholders, working to foster
confidence among the parties while dealing with
crucial issues such as that of missing persons. The
Constitutional Committee must resume its work so that
we can move forward. And we agree with Mr. Pedersen
that a decision on the venue will lead nowhere if the
parties do not agree to return to the negotiation table
with a renewed commitment to concrete results.
According to the World Food Programme, conflict,
food, energy prices and drought-constrained agriculture
are crippling people’s ability to counter food insecurity,
not only in Syria but in many countries of the region. And
after long years of conflict, countries have obviously
become more vulnerable to disease outbreaks, including
those that can be prevented by ensuring access to
clean water, basic sanitation and appropriate housing.
In Syria we are now seeing outbreaks of cholera and
leishmaniasis. We hope that the ongoing early-recovery
actions, together with the tireless work being done
by the Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), the World Health Organization and
other United Nations agencies on the ground, can
help alleviate the suffering of people in Syria. As
10/21

29/11/2022

the challenges and crises mount, humanitarian funds
grow increasingly scarce. With the arrival of winter,
we are once again faced with the precarious situation
of people, most of them women and children, living in
makeshift tents. According to OCHA, 6 million people
are in need of winter assistance. Significant funding
gaps persist, and the precarious humanitarian situation
clearly exacerbates security problems, as we have seen
in Al-Hol camp, for instance.
Let me assure the Council that Brazil remains
committed to a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process
as a means to ensure a political resolution of the
conflict. Our credentials for playing a constructive role
in that regard are reinforced by the historical ties that
bind Brazilians and Syrians through our humanitarian
cooperation, including our national policy on Syrian
refugees, as well as by our continuing diplomatic
presence in Damascus during even the most acute
phases of the conflict. Soon the Security Council will
once more have to take action related to the expiration
of the authorization of cross-border humanitarian
assistance. Brazil will continue to support the need
for humanitarian assistance across Syria through all
modalities, and we sincerely hope that the Council
can find common ground through a process that is as
smooth as possible. We look forward to the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General and to any additional
information on how we can work to alleviate the impact
of sanctions for the benefit of the Syrian people.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
their briefings.
Every time we meet here to discuss the situation in
Syria, we look for a thread of good news. Unfortunately,
we end up lamenting how the situation is going
from bad to worse, with little or no clear prospect of
progress in sight. And this time is no different. The
humanitarian crisis continues to deteriorate. Innocent
civilians continue to be killed, and the political
process, despite the tremendous and much-appreciated
efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen, exists in name only.
We remain deeply distressed by the continued wanton
killing and widespread destruction in Syria, including
the shelling of civilian infrastructure and the recent
air strikes and indiscriminate shelling in Idlib that
killed nine civilians, including women and children,
and injured 75 others. The deliberate destruction of
basic civilian infrastructure continues to create further
obstacles to the delivery of aid, forcing more people to
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

become displaced. There are also reports of the use of
cluster munitions.
Humanitarian needs, as described by UnderSecretary-General Griffiths, remain dire and
reflect the overall bleak and desperate situation in
the country. Winter and the cold weather will only
worsen the situation for millions in need, including
the deteriorating situation in the Al-Hol and Rukban
displacement camps. We greatly value the work of the
United Nations and all countries that contribute to its
programmes in their efforts to alleviate suffering. We
support all modalities for delivering aid to those in
need and support the full implementation of resolution
2642 (2022). The cross-border delivery of aid is and
remains an indispensable part of the operation by the
United Nations and its partners to reach all people in
need. Cross-line operations can complement crossborder access, but they are not and cannot be an
alternative to it. Therefore, the extension of the crossborder mechanism in January 2023 — a few weeks
from now — is vital, and we expect all members of the
Council to be united in delivering for the Syrian people.
We should do everything to avoid the politicization of
basic humanitarian aid and call on all actors to refrain
from using humanitarian access as an object of undue
political games.
From day one, the situation in Syria has been and
remains a disastrous humanmade catastrophe that
continues to worsen. We have reiterated many times
that the political process is vital to begin to address the
daunting challenges. Sadly, nothing has changed on that
front. We used to count successive meetings, despite
the lack of results — now they are not even being held
at all. We know why and who is responsible: the Syrian
regime and its backers continue to frustrate and block
all meaningful steps towards a political transition. The
Syrian regime continues to inflict pain and suffering on
its people, whom it claims to represent. It continues to
kill, arbitrarily detain and forcibly disappear civilians.
Inflicting untold pain on civilians is the true trademark
of the Syrian regime — there is no other way to describe
it. It continues to keep nearly every single family in
the dark with regard to the whereabouts of the more
than 130,000 persons who are missing without a trace.
Such despicable behaviour cannot be tolerated and
must be condemned by all, including those present in
the Council.
We welcome the proposal to set up a mechanism to
address the issue of missing persons and stand ready to

S/PV.9204

work together with all countries of goodwill to make
it a reality. We reiterate our call for the immediate
release of those arbitrarily detained, for the fate and
whereabouts of all those forcibly disappeared to be
revealed and for access to be provided to all places of
detention. We support the efforts of the Special Envoy
to shed light on that tragedy and provide closure for the
aggrieved. We deplore all crimes committed in Syria
and reiterate our call for those responsible to be held
fully accountable. Syrians need all the help they can
get. The situation will not change overnight, but for the
Syrian people to advance towards a free and democratic
country, impunity must be defeated and a genuine
political process must be put in place in good faith.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their clear briefings and their
commitment to Syria.
The key to ending the conflict is through the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). We welcome
Special Envoy Pedersen’s untiring efforts to facilitate a
sustainable resolution to the conflict and the clear steps
he set out this morning. Reconvening the Constitutional
Committee in Geneva is the step we particularly need
to see, and Russia must stop standing in the way of
that. Political progress is desperately needed. While
the conflict drags on, we continue to receive reports
of torture and killings in detention centres across
Syria, in particular at Sednaya prison. United Nations
States Members have been clear in condemning those
systematic violations of human rights, and this month
the Third Committee adopted a draft resolution on
human rights in Syria (A/C.3/77/L.36/Rev.1). We
condemn those violations and again call for the release
of detainees.
In that context, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate. This is clearly not about sanctions, which
are strictly enforced against the entities involved in
repressing the civilian population and include specific
humanitarian provisions and exemptions. Let us
therefore be clear about the facts: 14.6 million Syrians
are in desperate need of humanitarian aid, which is a
huge increase since three other border crossings were
unnecessarily closed in 2020. The United Nations has
repeatedly told us that the cross-border mechanism is
a lifeline for 4.1 million people. On average, 20 trucks
of food and life-saving medicines passing through
Bab Al-Hawa reach people in need every day. Nothing
can replace the scope or scale of that cross-border

22-7128411/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian operation, which must continue. The fate
of that mandate is the fate of 4.1 million people who
rely on its assistance. Those who are concerned with the
humanitarian situation will not delay or compromise
that lifeline.
The current cholera outbreak highlights the
importance of an effective and predictable United
Nations response, including in early recovery; 30 per
cent of the United Kingdom’s funding to Syria in 2022
will go to such projects, most of which are focused
on water and health care. We also welcome progress
on cross-line efforts, but that is slowed by the Syrian
regime’s insistence on new approvals for each convoy,
as well as the ongoing fighting. It is simply impossible
to replicate with cross-line assistance what is being
delivered through the cross-border operation. As winter
approaches, the Council should do everything it can to
respond to the needs of the Syrian people.
Mr. Ríos Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
I also welcome the presence of the delegations of Syria,
Iran and Türkiye.
Mexico has taken note with great concern of the
report of the Special Envoy, to whom we reiterate our
full support. The increase in violence in the northeast and north-west of Syria is cause for alarm. We
also acknowledge the consultations he held with key
international partners in recent weeks, including
in the Astana format, as well as his meetings with
civil society, in particular with the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board. As the Special Envoy mentioned, we
once again highlight the need to resume the work of
the Constitutional Committee, which has not met for
six months.
Economic reconstruction, the safe and voluntary
return of refugees and the fight against terrorism are
complex issues that can be resolved only with the
political will of the parties. In that regard, we insist
that any action in the fight against terrorism must
comply with international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Once again, we express our alarm at the abuse of
invocations of Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which are supposedly justified in the name
of the fight against terrorism. We call for full respect
for Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as the
Secretary-General has underscored. There is an urgent
12/21

29/11/2022

need to put an end to hostilities, which aggravate the
humanitarian situation.
As we heard, the civilian population in various
regions of Syria continues to lack access to basic services
and lives in precarious conditions, which particularly
impacts vulnerable groups, including children. Again
this month, several densely populated areas, including
displaced persons camps in Idlib, have come under
attack. We again condemn the violence in Al-Hol
camp, in particular the killing of two girls this month.
We reiterate our call for the countries of origin of the
foreigners in that camp to take the necessary steps for
their repatriation. Mexico considers that the demands
for justice and accountability for arbitrary detentions,
forced disappearances and human rights violations
must be met in order to open the way to reconciliation
in Syria.
Regarding the implementation of resolution 2642
(2022), we welcome the continued efforts to expand
cross-line deliveries, which have become more
predictable, benefiting a greater number of people. We
also take note of the various early-recovery projects
under way. However, given the food crisis, the cholera
epidemic and winter needs, it is clear that we must have
a channel for the distribution of humanitarian aid. It is
therefore vital that the Council renew the authorization
of the Bab Al-Hawa cross-border mechanism.
Resolution 2254 (2015), adopted unanimously
by the Council, is the road map to guide the political
process towards sustainable peace. We renew our
call for all parties to commit to its implementation
and to avoid any unilateral action that contributes to
prolonging the suffering of the Syrian people.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Griffiths for their briefings.
The situation in Syria remains a regional
destabilizing factor. The war in Syria is not over, and
too many civilians continue to pay the price every day.
The recent escalation in the north of the country is
a cause for concern. We are deeply concerned by the
announcements of a possible ground intervention by
Türkiye in north-eastern Syria. We call for restraint
and avoidance of any initiative that would threaten
the stability of the region and the security of its
inhabitants, at a time when the threat posed by Da’esh
remains strong.
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The regime continues to play the waiting game,
to the detriment of the Syrian people The status quo
is in no one’s interest. The Syrian people aspire to
peace. However, the regime systematically refuses
any political negotiation within the framework of the
road map set out in resolution 2254 (2015). The work
of the Constitutional Committee is at a standstill. The
regime refuses to engage in the step-for-step approach
promoted by the Special Envoy, which we support.
Syrians inside and outside Syria are demanding
justice. More than 100,000 Syrians are still missing.
All United Nations reports give a detailed account
of the crimes committed by the regime. France will
continue to fight relentlessly against the impunity that
the regime still enjoys today — without justice, there
can be no lasting peace.
The suffering of Syrians is the result of the brutality
of the regime, and the regime bears full responsibility
for this situation. The destruction of the country and
its infrastructure is the result of the bombings carried
out by the regime and its allies, which did not hesitate
to use chemical weapons. That brutality has allowed
Da’esh and other terrorist groups to flourish.
In the absence of any progress on the political
process in Syria, French and European positions on the
lifting of sanctions, normalization and reconstruction
will remain unchanged. Contrary to the spurious
accusations of Russia and the regime, those sanctions
are targeted. They aim to limit the room for manoeuvre
of those responsible for these war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
Finally, as winter arrives, the civilian population
continues to suffer the consequences of war. It
is essential that the cross-border mechanism be
maintained. With an eighth convoy, progress on crossline access continues, but it is not a substitute for crossborder operations, which continue to be important to
the 6 million people who will need assistance in the
north-west — 30 per cent more than in 2021, according
to the United Nations.
Furthermore, the regime’s lack of respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights
prevents Syrian refugees hosted by neighbouring
countries from being able to return safely to their
country. No lasting solution can be found without the
commitment of the Syrian regime.

S/PV.9204

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings. In the light of the
evolving situation on the ground, I would like to make
the following points.
First, we must stand firm in preserving the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Syria. For
some time now, the security situation in Syria has
been volatile. Türkiye launched air strikes against
Syria and announced it would conduct ground military
operations against Syria. Israeli air strikes on Syria
have also continued. All of those acts grossly violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and could
lead to the escalation and spread of the Syrian conflict.
China expresses its grave concern in that connection.
Foreign military intervention is one of the major
factors contributing to the complicated, intractable
and protracted crisis in Syria. We call on Türkiye and
Israel to immediately stop cross-border attacks, avoid
any action that could escalate the situation and rely on
dialogue and consultation alone to resolve the relevant
issues. The unlawful presence of foreign forces in Syria
also must end.
Secondly, we must combat terrorism with a zerotolerance stance. Terrorist activities remain rampant
in Syria. Da’esh and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham continue
to wreak havoc. The Monitoring Team of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, has
issued many reports that indicate that the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement, or Turkestan Islamic Party for
short, is also active in Idlib governorate, carrying out
recruitment, terrorist financing and terrorist activity.
Terrorism is the common enemy of the international
community. We must work together to combat all
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council
in Syria, in equal measure, completely cut off their
sources of weapons, personnel and funding and stop
condoning, harbouring or politically exploiting those
terrorist forces. Counter-terrorism cooperation will
also help all parties concerned to build mutual trust
on the Syrian issue and create enabling conditions for
progress in the political process.
Thirdly, we must continue to promote a Syrian-led
and -owned political process. We support Special Envoy
Pedersen’s continued engagement with all parties in

22-7128413/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

order to address roadblocks so that the Constitutional
Committee can hold meetings and, by way of the stepfor-step approach, build up conditions for a broader
political process. Since its inception, the Astana format
has played a constructive role in coordinating efforts
to de-escalate the conflict in Syria and bring an end to
the hostilities. The recently concluded Astana meeting
sent an important signal of support for the political
process in Syria. China welcomes that development and
looks forward to the process playing a larger role in the
comprehensive settlement of the Syrian issue.
China also welcomes the communiqué of the
thirty-first summit of the League of Arab States, which
expresses support for Syria resuming its rightful place
in the Arab world and in the international community,
as that is conducive to building synergy at the regional
level towards peace efforts.
Fourthly, we must implement resolution 2642
(2022) in a comprehensive and balanced manner. The
cross-border modality is a temporary arrangement
made under special circumstances. The transition to
cross-line humanitarian aid to citizens needs to be
accelerated. We note with regret that in the past month,
there was no new cross-line delivery to north-western
Syria. Members of the international community should
dedicate the same level of effort to promoting crossline deliveries as they do to promoting cross-border
operations and strive to provide the entire population
in Syria with access to humanitarian resources,
without discrimination.
China welcomes the continued improvement in
the funding of early-recovery projects. As we speak,
Syria is facing crises in public health, water resources
and electricity supplies. The United Nations should
prioritize the implementation of projects in those
areas in order to meet the most pressing needs of the
Syrian people. Explosive remnants of war have taken
a heavy toll on regular economic production and life
in Syria. China expects that work in the relevant areas
will be included in the scope of early recovery as soon
as possible. The ongoing cholera epidemic in Syria
and its spread into neighbouring countries is of deep
concern to China. We welcome the extension of the
United Nations cholera response plan and call on the
international community to continue to support Syria
in fighting the epidemic.
Ms. Alena Douhan, the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of the unilateral
14/21

29/11/2022

coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights,
recently issued a report clearly stating that unilateral
sanctions and their excessive implementation have
exacerbated the Syrian humanitarian crisis. China once
again calls on the countries concerned to immediately
lift all unilateral sanctions not authorized by the
Security Council.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their very stark briefings today. I will
focus on the political situation in my statement, as my
Norwegian colleague has spoken on behalf of Ireland
on humanitarian issues.
Let me begin by reiterating Ireland’s serious
concern about the continuing hostilities on the ground
in Syria, particularly given the worrisome escalation of
hostilities in the north and north-west of the country.
Ireland condemns the series of strikes conducted by
pro-Government forces earlier this month in Idlib and
its environs, which hit several civilian areas and camps
that hosted internally displaced persons. The attacks
resulted in the deaths of at least 10 people, including
children, and injured at least 27 others. At least 400
families face being newly displaced, which is simply
unacceptable. We offer our sincere condolences to the
families of the victims. All parties to the conflict are
obliged under international law to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure. Indiscriminate attacks
are unlawful and must cease. Such violations must be
investigated without delay in order for the perpetrators
to be held accountable. We reiterate the urgent need
for a nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). We call on all the parties to exercise maximum
restraint and maintain previously agreed ceasefires.
We underscore our condemnation of the killing
of two young girls in the Al-Hol camp earlier this
month. The utter barbarity and cruelty inflicted on
the victims serve as a stark reminder of the severe
protection challenges in the camp, particularly for
women and children. The perpetrators of those heinous
crimes must be brought to justice. Ireland also remains
greatly concerned about the plight of those detained
and missing in Syria. Tens of thousands of families
are being forced to suffer in painful limbo without
any knowledge of the fate of their loved ones, which
will continue to traumatize generations of Syrians
to come. Ireland therefore supports, in principle, the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to establish
a new international body aimed at providing support
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

to families in desperate need of answers about their
missing loves ones.
Finally, we thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his
continued efforts on step-for-step confidence-building
measures. It is regrettable that Damascus and its allies
refuse to meaningfully engage in the process and that
the ninth session of the Constitutional Committee has
been prevented from proceeding in Geneva in line
with the agreed terms of reference. As we highlighted
in January, Ireland and the European Union Foreign
Ministers fully support confidence-building measures,
and we are here to assist Mr. Pedersen. We reiterate that
only a political solution can bring stability and security
to the Syrian people. All efforts must be fully inclusive
and ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women. In that regard, we welcome the recent
convening of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and
encourage efforts to facilitate the continued involvement
of Syrian women in securing a lasting peace.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Griffiths for
their valuable briefings.
As the years have passed, the Syrian crisis has
become more complex and fractured, and has come
to encompass issues that include refugees, internally
displaced persons, foreign interventions, terrorism and
economic collapse. This year has seen more unsettling
developments, especially at the geopolitical level.
Against the backdrop of these intractable issues, we
stress the importance of prioritizing the needs of the
Syrian people. Their interests must prevail above all
other considerations, particularly with the upcoming
renewal of the cross-border mechanism for the delivery
of humanitarian aid into Syria, which, as a humanitarian
instrument, should not be politicized.
With regard to the political dossier, and in the
context of recent developments in Syria, we stress
the need to adhere to dialogue, the principle of good
neighbourliness and de-escalation in the entire region.
We also reaffirm our rejection of foreign intervention
in Syrian affairs and demand an end to them with a
view to safeguarding Syria’s sovereignty, unity, and
territorial integrity. It is unfortunate that the political
stalemate has continued on a matter that requires
increased diplomatic efforts at various levels in support
of a peaceful solution, which remains the only way to
end the Syrian crisis. It is also important to move the
Constitutional Committee beyond the paralysis that

S/PV.9204

has afflicted it in the past few months by convening
meetings again. We appreciate the efforts of the Special
Envoy for Syria and reaffirm that the Committee
is currently the only platform for conducting a
constructive national dialogue among Syrians, under
Syrian leadership and ownership, without external
interference or geopolitical complications and aimed
at advancing the constitutional process. That should
include not only logistical matters but also a clear time
frame and an agreed plan for the next steps.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, we stress the
importance of early-recovery projects that contribute to
building Syrian society and restoring its infrastructure,
including through the delivery of electricity to many
Syrians, which in turn can enable access to other basic
services. In that regard, we are pleased that 158 of 374
early-recovery projects in the humanitarian response
plan have helped to provide electricity to homes,
hospitals and schools, in addition to supporting sources
of renewable energy. Regarding the alarming spread
of the cholera outbreak in Syria, we thank the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for its tireless efforts in responding urgently to
that issue, especially in recent months. That includes
extending the response plan to the outbreak for a period
of six months, owing to the enormous and continuing
needs in all of Syria’s governorates. On a larger scale,
we stress the importance of delivering humanitarian aid
to all regions in Syria, both across borders and across
conflict lines. In that regard, we welcome the delivery
of aid to the Ras Al-Ayn area and the crossing of an
eighth convoy into north-west Syria, which included
more humanitarian aid than previous convoys.
The camps in Syria are witnessing an increase
in the level of violence, particularly Al-Hol camp in
north-east Syria, where the number of murder cases
reached 42 this year alone, including the gruesome
killing of two girls in the camp earlier this month. That
situation requires greater international efforts to ensure
the protection of the thousands of women and children
in those camps.
In conclusion, we underscore the urgent need to
end the Syrian crisis and its worsening humanitarian
consequences by breaking the current stalemate on the
political track, which will support the establishment of
security and stability in Syria and the region.

22-7128415/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

29/11/2022

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members of
the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya (A3).

make an effort to seek sustainable solutions to address
the multiple challenges, including the heightened
insecurity, political instability and economic meltdown.

We thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for their briefings and
updates on the political and humanitarian situation. We
also welcome the participation in today’s meeting of the
representatives of Syria, Iran and Türkiye.

Resolution 2254 (2015) remains the foremost road
map for achieving the desired political solution that
takes into account the widest spectrum of Syrians,
including the voices of women and civil society. In that
regard, we hope that the Special Envoy’s upcoming
visit to Damascus will be fruitful, not only in breaking
the current deadlock but also in securing a muchneeded momentum in the implementation of that
important resolution.

Despite our deliberations every month, the situation
in Syria remains unchanged. It presents a profound test
to multilateralism and the ability of the United Nations
and the Charter of the United Nations to deliver on
its promise to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. The unrelenting violent conflict
continues to take a toll on millions of lives. It has
resulted in a colossal refugee and internal displacement
dilemma. The worsening humanitarian situation and
the impoverished state of the entire population remains
greatly concerning. The resumption of military
operations and the escalation of kinetic activity on the
front lines, characterized by air and ground strikes as
well as terrorist attacks, push Syria into deeper levels
of instability.
We condemn the targeting of innocent civilians and
civilian infrastructure, and we remind all parties that
they are obliged to adhere to the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and international humanitarian
law. The A3 also reminds the parties to the conflict
that an escalation of violence will only jeopardize and
undermine peace efforts and further dampen hopes for
peace for the people of Syria. We therefore call on all
parties, State and non-State actors alike, to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid escalation and honour
all ceasefire understandings and agreements. They
should bear in mind that military options will not yield
sustainable solutions and must refrain from threatening
regional peace and security, while protecting Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Given the escalation of violence, the need for a
political solution to the conflict is ever more urgent.
The parties in Syria must therefore commit to the
political process, including by cooperating in breaking
the current deadlock in the Syrian-led, Syrianowned, United Nations-facilitated Small Body of the
Constitutional Committee. The Syrian people look to
them to mobilize the necessary political will, focus
on the greater good of the country and collectively
16/21

Addressing the situation of detainees, including by
facilitating the release of detained vulnerable groups,
such as the elderly and women and children, as well
as by clarifying the status of missing persons, would
be a significant confidence-building measure. Progress
in that area would also contribute positively to the
Special Envoy’s step-for-step approach to creating an
environment that is conducive to political progress,
which must be in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
rising levels of violence, coupled with the economic
slump, have afflicted millions of Syrians, including
refugees and the internally displaced, with a worsening
food insecurity environment and a lack of reliable
access to safe water and malnutrition, among other
challenges. The dire situation has pushed some of the
needy to resort to unacceptable coping mechanisms,
such as early marriage and recruitment into armed and
terrorist groups. Clearly, we must all work together in
support of humanitarian action for the people who are
suffering in Syria.
The cross-border aid mechanism and cross-line
deliveries remain a crucial avenue for humanitarian
assistance and must be sustained in the interest of the
people. We also commend efforts to expand cross-line
deliveries across north-western Syria and encourage
more progress in that regard. As the expiration of
the mandate contained in resolution 2642 (2022)
approaches, we urge all members of the Council to
constructively engage with a view to ensuring the
renewal of the cross-border mechanism in order to
guarantee life-saving assistance for millions of Syrians,
especially in the wake of the concerning cholera
outbreak and the arrival of the winter months and the
increasing needs that it brings.
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Furthermore, in order to ease the colossal
humanitarian burden in camps, we call on States
to repatriate their citizens, especially women and
children, from camps in Syria, such as Al-Hol, which
have been subjected to severe insecurity, in a safe
and dignified manner, in line with the standards of
international humanitarian law. There is also need for
concerted international action to address the plight of
Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries, particularly
those in Lebanon, in view of the current challenges
faced by that host country. It is imperative that future
international humanitarian assistance to Syria also
incorporate an element of support in order to deal
with the needs of Syrians who fled the conflict to
neighbouring countries.
The A3 also encourages support for the activities
of the early-recovery and livelihoods programme under
the United Nations humanitarian response, which is
fundamental for assisting Syrians in getting back to
their normal lives. The recent informal interactive
dialogue shed light on the progress and implementation
of early-recovery projects and programmes. We
welcome those opportunities and are fully convinced
that they will gradually reduce the humanitarian
burden if they are prioritized. It is imperative that
those programmes be sufficiently supported with the
flexibility that is given to non-earmarked funds so
that they can meet their intended goal and also build
resilience and support livelihoods.
In conclusion, the A3 reiterates that progress on
the political track is a critical lifeline for the people of
Syria. We urge the Council and each of its members to
demonstrate through unified action that the multilateral
system can be an effective mediator of global peace and
security. The A3 stands in solidarity with the people of
Syria in their quest for peace, which can be delivered
only by a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process,
with the support of the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Dandy (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Security Council once again meets to
discuss the political and humanitarian situations and
other issues in the Syrian Arab Republic. Up to four
meetings on those issues are held every month. It
appears that some members of the Council wish to
waste the Council’s time and resources, as they continue
to ignore the fundamental challenges facing Syria,

S/PV.9204

namely, terrorism, the continued violations of Syrian
sovereignty and the catastrophic suffering of the Syrian
people as a result of unilateral coercive measures.
A week ago forces of the Turkish regime and its
terrorist mercenaries launched a series of military
attacks targeting northern Syria. They claimed the
lives of a number of civilians and military personnel
and seriously damaged service facilities and civilian
infrastructure in those areas, in flagrant violation of
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Charter of the United Nations. The Syrian Arab
Republic condemns the Turkish attacks in the strongest
possible terms. The pretexts that the Turkish regime
uses to justify those attacks have been exposed and no
longer fool anyone, especially since the Turkish regime
has continued to support terrorist groups and sponsor
Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front to this very day. Syria
calls on the Security Council to compel the Turkish
regime to end its illegal military presence on Syrian
territories immediately. Nor should the Council ignore
the continued illegal presence of United States forces
on Syrian land in support of militias in north-eastern
Syria. That is another violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and of Syria’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity. My country once again demands
an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of United
States forces from Syrian territory.
The Security Council has remained silent while
Israel’s occupation of the Syrian Golan and its
wrongful practices against our people in the Golan have
persisted, in a similar way to the subversive role that
the United States and Türkiye have played on Syrian
territory. The Council’s silence has emboldened Israel
to escalate its attacks on Syrian territory based on
flimsy justifications. Israel has also attacked civilian
infrastructure, leading to casualties among civilians
and military personnel and to a dangerous escalation
in the region.
In parallel with its efforts to counter terrorism, the
Syrian State has been pursuing local settlements and
national reconciliation. We have taken a number of
important measures, including the President’s issuance
of amnesty decrees, most recently Legislative Decree
No. 7 of 2022, which is comprehensive in its scope and
in the way it treats terrorist crimes. These measures
have been taken to ensure a return to normalcy and
enhance national unity, and have enabled many Syrians
to return to their normal lives. Despite all those efforts,
it is surprising that some still insist on ignoring the

22-7128417/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

achievements of the Syrian State in this area. We have
been engaging positively with initiatives to settle the
crisis that are Syrian-led and -owned, and with no
foreign interference. In that regard, Syria emphasizes
that the Special Envoy needs to continue to play his role
as facilitator, as stipulated in his mandate.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, the Syrian
Arab Republic is doing its utmost to provide assistance
to all Syrians without discrimination and to improve
their living conditions while providing them with basic
services, and is cooperating with the United Nations
and its humanitarian agencies in Syria to that end. My
delegation stresses the importance of supporting the
efforts of the Syrian State in that regard. We call on
Western States to stop politicizing humanitarian work
in Syria, uphold the guiding principles of humanitarian
action and honour their pledges to provide the
necessary funding to the humanitarian response plan
in Syria. In particular, they should support and expand
early-recovery projects, as stipulated in resolution 2642
(2022). Less than 42 per cent of the necessary funding
has been provided so far, and we are approaching the
new year.
Mines and unexploded ordnance planted by terrorist
groups have claimed the lives of hundreds of women,
children and farmers. We need to focus on clearing
Syrian territories of such explosives and provide the
necessary funding for the clearance, which would help
to ensure the return of the displaced and refugees to
their villages, homes and lands and their ability to take
up their normal lives again.
My delegation was outraged at the refusal of
some Western States on the Security Council to
invite Ms. Alena Douhan, the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, to
participate in the informal interactive dialogue held on
21 November. We consider that an attempt to obfuscate
the Special Rapporteur’s recommendations and
conclusions and to hide those States’ true intentions,
thereby exposing their false claims for the unilateral
coercive measures that the United States and the
European Union have imposed on the Syrian people.
Those measures have led to the deaths of innocent
Syrians and of innocent people in every country where
they have been imposed. In that regard, I want to point
to the Special Rapporteur’s statement that they are
inconsistent with international rules and are there to
put pressure on Syria. They worsen the Syrian people’s
18/21

29/11/2022

suffering and hinder early-recovery efforts. They have
also caused severe shortages of medicine and specialized
medical equipment needed to treat rare and chronic
diseases, as well as hindering access to food, water,
electricity, fuel, transport and health care, all of which
have grave repercussions for public health and food
security. That is why the Special Rapporteur stressed
the importance of lifting those measures immediately.
With regard to the various aspects of humanitarian
suffering in Syria, we should also address the United
States occupation forces’ continued systematic
plundering of Syria’s resources, such as oil, wheat and
other agricultural produce, as well as the behaviour of
the Turkish regime and its mercenaries, who are using
water as a weapon against civilians by halting the
operation of the Allouk water station and depriving a
million Syrians in Al-Hasakah and its surroundings of
water. They are manipulating the water levels of the
Euphrates River, increasing the likelihood of thirst
and dangerous pandemics and diseases, especially the
spread of cholera. The Syrian Arab Republic condemns
the Western States, most recently France and the
Netherlands, that continue to send delegations to northeastern Syria and infiltrate Syrian territories illegally.
We emphasize that such practices constitute a violation
of Syrian sovereignty and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
In conclusion, the delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic stresses that Council meetings on the situation
in Syria will continue to be fruitless if the fundamental
challenges are not addressed. They include fighting
terrorism, halting the support and financing of
terrorism, ending the illegal United States and Turkish
military presences and the Israeli attacks on Syrian
territory and immediately lifting the unilateral coercive
measures on Syria, which can only be described as
inhumane and immoral.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings.
Syria’s humanitarian situation is dire, and the
country’s continued economic difficulties have
had a widespread impact. The frightening spike in
suspected cholera cases reported across the country
has aggravated the already precarious humanitarian
situation. We commend the efforts of the United Nations
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

and its agencies to provide humanitarian relief to those
in need, as well as their cooperation in implementing
resolution 2642 (2022).
The ongoing unilateral coercive measures imposed
by Western countries have exacerbated the humanitarian
situation despite the efforts of the United Nations. In
particular, they present substantial difficulties to public
health and food security. The United Nations and its
humanitarian organizations’ work in Syria is also
affected by these illegal actions. Meanwhile, donor
countries remain hesitant to contribute the necessary
funding for Syria’s humanitarian response plan,
which, according to the United Nations report, has not
exceeded 42 per cent of the total funding required.
We support the eighth cross-line delivery of
humanitarian aid. However, a lack of visible progress
in the cross-line delivery, as well as inequitable and
discriminatory distribution of early-recovery projects,
remain challenging and must be improved based
on resolution 2642 (2022). We further emphasize
the importance of the cross-border mechanism. We
believe that for the subsequent time of extension,
the mechanism’s shortcomings and the Syrian Arab
Republic’s associated legitimate concerns must
be addressed.
On the political process, Iran supports convening
the next meeting of the Constitutional Committee, as
the Committee’s ongoing work is critical to reaching
a political solution. The cessation of the occupation
and the full restoration of respect for the national
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic are prerequisites to any political solution.
In the meantime, the Astana format will continue
its efforts aimed at bringing the crisis to an end and
alleviating the sufferings of the Syrian people.
In support of these efforts, during the two-day
meeting that was held in Astana on 22 and 23 November,
the senior representatives of the Astana-format
guarantors emphasized the Constitutional Committee’s
critical role and reaffirmed their willingness to support
ongoing interactions between their members and the
Special Envoy as a facilitator, in order to ensure the longterm stability and effective work of the next sessions
of the Committee. They also expressed deep concern
about the humanitarian situation emphasizing the need
to remove impediments and increase humanitarian
assistance to all Syrians across the country without
discrimination or preconditions.

S/PV.9204

The security and stability in the north of Syria can
only be achieved by preserving and fully respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country. We
once again condemn the theft of the Syrian people’s
natural resources, particularly oil products, in areas
occupied by foreign forces. This criminal act is an
obvious violation of Syrian territorial sovereignty,
relevant Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations Charter.
The Security Council must strongly condemn
ongoing aggressions and terrorist attacks by the Israeli
regime against Syria. The Israeli regime’s repeated
violations of Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as its systematic and intentional
targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
particularly the attacks on commercial airports and
humanitarian shipments, are a flagrant violation of
international law, international humanitarian law and
the United Nations Charter. We acknowledge that the
Charter and international law provide the Syrian Arab
Republic with a legitimate right to self-defence.
We support Syria’s standing in the region and
its improved bilateral relations. The international
community must support the Syrian Government’s
ability to achieve economic and social stability and
to improve the living conditions of the Syrian people.
A secure, stable, and prosperous Syria benefits the
Syrian people and is in the interests of the region and
of the international community. It can also facilitate
the safe, dignified and voluntary return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their places of origin in
Syria, upholding their right to return. Iran continues
to support the people and the Government of Syria in
their efforts to restore the unity and territorial integrity
of their country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): First, let me thank
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for their briefings.
For more than a decade now — 11 years — the
conflict in Syria has been the primary breeding ground
for one of the worst humanitarian catastrophes globally.
Türkiye is taking all the necessary measures to facilitate
United Nations cross-border aid and cross-line convoys.
Since the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022), there have
been regular cross-line deliveries to north-west Syria,
and, through the single border crossing of Bab Al-Hawa,

22-7128419/21

S/PV.9204

The situation in the Middle East

cross-border humanitarian aid has reached millions of
Syrians every month in the north-west of the country.
Among those in the region are 2.8 million internally
displaced persons; heartbreakingly, a majority of them
are women, children and the elderly.
The attacks earlier in November, which saw three
different internally displaced persons camps in Idlib
being targeted, resulted in the killing of 9 civilians
and the wounding of 70. We are concerned that the
strengthened shelters constructed by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and located
in the same area have also sustained serious damage.
These attacks had a further adverse impact on the dire
humanitarian situation. We invite all relevant parties
to abide by the existing memorandums and end attacks
on civilians once and for all. Syrians are not and never
will be a target.
It is crucial that all regions in Syria benefit fairly
from early-recovery and resilience efforts. These
projects should be implemented throughout the country
based on the needs assessment of the United Nations.
In this context, we expect that the needs communicated
by the Syrian interim Government are also duly
integrated in early-recovery and resilience planning of
the United Nations. The Syrian interim Government
has long been requesting that the Ras Al-Ayn and
Tel Abyad regions also benefit from United Nations
humanitarian assistance. After three years of persistent
appeals, UNICEF and the World Health Organization
finally delivered medicines for leishmaniasis and
cholera through cross-line assistance to these regions
in October. It is crucial that this not be relegated to
being a one-time aid delivery but that it continues in
accordance with humanitarian needs in these regions.
It is also crucial to approach the electricity and water
problems in northern Syria in a holistic, comprehensive
and durable manner, including through addressing the
water shortages in Al-Bab and the electricity shortages
in the Ras Al-Ayn and Tel Abyad regions. Significantly,
the cholera outbreak has raised the need for the supply
of water and electricity in these areas to new heights.
We are now weeks away from the renewal of
the United Nations cross-border aid operation. Let
me be clear: cross-border assistance is a moral and
humanitarian imperative. It is not a political issue. It is
about sending food, blankets, diapers, personal-hygiene
products, medicines and vaccines to the people who
depend on them for their survival. It is not up to the
20/21

29/11/2022

Security Council to decide who in Syria can receive
humanitarian aid and who cannot. Rather, the onus is
on the Council to support this highly scrutinized and
meticulous United Nations humanitarian operation in
order to save lives. We renew our call on all members
to be guided solely by humanitarian considerations. We
cannot afford to politicize this issue. Doing so would
condemn civilians to death.
Türkiye is committed to ending the Syrian
conflict through a viable and sustainable political
process facilitated by the United Nations, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). We hope that the ninth round
of the Constitutional Committee takes place as soon as
possible under the auspices of and hosted by the United
Nations. We support United Nations efforts to this end.
The Syrian opposition has displayed a constructive
attitude since the beginning of the process. The regime
should abandon its intransigence and instead actively
engage in the political process.
The Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection
Units (PKK/YPG) terrorist organization, sheltering in
northern Syria, poses a significant threat to my country’s
national security. Our borders have repeatedly been
targeted in the past three years. The PKK/YPG and
its offshoot, the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces
(SDF), are now openly claiming responsibility for their
attacks against Türkiye, audaciously on their own social
media accounts. The terrorist attack that took place at
Taksim, the heart of Istanbul, on 13 November killed six
people, including children, and wounded more than 80
civilians. Last week, the PKK/YPG perpetrated further
attacks in Karkamis, a border district of Gaziantep,
after its ringleaders called for “revenge” on Türkiye,
targeting civilian areas, including three schools. Once
again, innocent people lost their lives, including a
22-year-old woman teacher and a 5-year-old boy. That
is totally unacceptable. We cannot abide that, just as no
member of the Council would.
The obligations stemming from the agreements
of October 2019, which we concluded with the United
States and the Russian Federation, have so far not been
fully implemented. That results in an increased terrorist
threat against our borders. No Member State can tolerate
deliberate attacks against its people or territory, neither
should they. We will continue to carry out counterterrorism operations to protect our people and ensure
our border security, in the exercise of our inherent right
of self-defence, as reflected in Article 51 of the Charter
22-71284

29/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East

of the United Nations and in accordance with Security
Council resolutions on the fight against terrorism.
The statements expressing concern that our
counter-terrorism operations against the PKK/YPG
may adversely affect the fight against Da’esh cannot be
further from the reality. The fact is that Da’esh above
all remains a threat to neighbouring countries due to
the wrongdoings and ill-advised strategies of those who
make those kinds of statements. On countless occasions,
we warned against the mistake of subcontracting the
fight against Da’esh to another terrorist organization,
namely, the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces, which
in reality are nothing but the PKK/YPG itself. One
can change the name of that terrorist organization as
many times as one wants, but there is no changing its
intent. One can even make a mockery of global counterterrorism efforts, rebranding them as “democratic”.
That is an affront to democracy. But one cannot change
the fact that it is a terrorist organization, which has the
blood of Turkish and Syrian civilians on its hands.
In that regard, adding insult to injury, today we
heard a reference to the so-called SDF claiming that

S/PV.9204

they deny the terrorist attack in Istanbul. Referring
to a terrorist organization’s statement in the Security
Council is completely unacceptable, and it is an insult
to our intelligence. The goal of the PKK/YPG and
the so-called SDF is not to end the threat of Da’esh in
Syria, but rather to maintain the support that it receives
from certain members of the international community
by keeping Da’esh on the agenda. The real fight against
Da’esh can be carried out only with legitimate actors.
Those making suggestions to us with regard to
preventing escalation and instability in the region should
review their own positions and demonstrate genuine
solidarity with us in the fight against terrorism, which
is, in itself, a major source of escalation, instability,
human rights violations and humanitarian suffering.
Türkiye will never stop pursuing what is right and just
in order to achieve peace and security, as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations.
As for the statement made by the representative of
the Syrian regime, I will not honour it with a response.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-7128421/21
