UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/8
17 February 1994
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3337th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 February 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The situation
concerning Rwanda", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council, which welcomed the conclusion of the Arusha
Peace Agreement and the political will demonstrated by the Rwandese parties
in implementing it, remains deeply concerned by the delays in establishing
the broad-based transitional government which is one of the key points in
the Agreement. The absence of such a government is an impediment to
progress under that Agreement and the functioning of institutions of the
State. Furthermore, it is having adverse effects on the humanitarian
situation in the country, the deterioration of which is of profound concern
to the international community. The speedy installation of a broad-based
transitional government would facilitate the provision of more effective
assistance to the populations in need.
"The Security Council, taking note of the fact that the President of
Rwanda has been sworn in as the interim Head of State, encourages him, in
the context of that responsibility, to continue his efforts for the speedy
installation of the other transitional institutions, in conformity with the
Arusha Peace Agreement.
"The Security Council calls on all the parties concerned to overcome
their differences and cooperate fully with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) in order to advance the process of national reconciliation. It
strongly urges the establishment, without delay, of the provisional
institutions provided for in the Arusha Peace Agreement.
"The Security Council is also deeply concerned at the deterioration in
the security situation, particularly in Kigali. In this connection, it
reminds the parties of their obligation to respect the weapon-free zone
established in and around the city.

94-08407 (E)

170294

/...

S/PRST/1994/8
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls the attention of the parties to the
consequences for them of non-compliance with that provision of the
Agreement. It notes that UNAMIR will be assured of consistent support only
if the parties implement the Arusha Peace Agreement fully and rapidly."

-----
