United Nations

A/RES/57/223

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 109 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/556/Add.2 and Corr.1-3)]

57/223. The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in particular,
the determination to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom, as well as to employ international mechanisms for the promotion of the
economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling that the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986, confirmed that the
right to development is an inalienable human right and that equality of opportunity
for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who make up
nations, and the individual as the central subject and beneficiary of development,
Recalling also all its previous resolutions and those of the Commission on
Human Rights on the right to development, in particular Commission resolution
1998/72 of 22 April 1998 on the urgent need to make further progress towards the
realization of the right to development as set out in the Declaration on the Right to
Development, 1
Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality for
everyone, as set out in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the
General Assembly on 8 September 2000, 2
Stressing the need for undertaking urgent measures to implement the goals and
targets set in all the major United Nations conferences, summits and special
sessions, including those of the United Nations Millennium Declaration, which are
paramount in the process of the realization of the right to development,
Stressing also that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 3
reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and inalienable right and an
integral part of all human rights, and the individual as the central subject and
beneficiary of development,
_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
See resolution 55/2.
3
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

02 55388

A/RES/57/223

Reaffirming the solemn commitment expressed at the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in
Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, to promote universal
respect for, and observance and protection of all human rights, including the right to
development, 4
Noting the outcomes of the fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization, held at Doha from 9 to 14 November 2001, 5 and the International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from 18 to
22 March 2002, 6
Taking note with appreciation of Commission on Human Rights resolution
2002/69 of 25 April 2002, 7 in which the Commission endorsed the agreed
conclusions of the Working Group on the Right to Development, adopted by
consensus during the Working Group’s session, held from 25 February to 8 March
2002, 8
1.
Endorses the agreed conclusions of the Working Group on the Right to
Development,8 as adopted by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution
2002/69, 7 which constitute a solid foundation for further initiatives towards the
promotion and the realization of the right to development;
2.
Takes note of the postponement of the session of the Working Group on
the Right to Development, owing to the non-availability of the report on the
international development issues, and calls upon the independent expert on the right
to development to submit this outstanding report in time for the next session of the
Working Group, scheduled to be held from 3 to 14 February 2003;
3.
Stresses the importance of the core principles, which underpin the
purpose of international human rights instruments, such as equality, equity,
non-discrimination, transparency, accountability, participation and international
cooperation, as critical to mainstreaming the right to development at the
international level;
4.
Underlines the importance of further research and analytical work
undertaken by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights on the above-mentioned core principles, and invites the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in consultation with the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the World Trade Organization and all
relevant international organizations and institutions, to submit a report on the
importance and application of the principle of equity as a matter of priority, at both
the national and international levels, taking fully into account the conclusions of the
Working Group on the Right to Development;
5.
Invites, in the above context, the High Commissioner to solicit the
support and cooperation of these organizations in the preparation of the requisite
report for submission to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-ninth session;

_______________
4

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1.
See A/C.2/56/7.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7).
7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
8
See E/CN.4/2002/28/Rev.1.
5

2

A/RES/57/223

6.
Reaffirms the commitments to implement the goals and targets set in all
the major United Nations conferences, summits and special sessions and those
undertaken at the Millennium Assembly, in particular, those relating to the
realization of the right to development;
7.
Recognizes that the realization of the right to development is critical to
achieving the objectives, goals and targets set in all the major United Nations
conferences, summits and special sessions, including those of the United Nations
Millennium Declaration;2
8.
Reaffirms the need for an international environment which is conducive
to the realization of the right to development;
9.
Reaffirms also that States have the primary responsibility for the creation
of national and international conditions favourable to the realization of the right to
development and that they are committed to cooperating with each other to that end;
10. Reaffirms further that the realization of the right to development is
essential to the implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action,3 which regards all human rights as universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated, and which also places the human person at the centre of development
and recognizes that, while development facilitates the enjoyment of all human
rights, the lack of development may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of
internationally recognized human rights;
11. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing obstacles
impeding the full realization of the right to development at both the national and
international levels, recognizes that the promotion and protection of human rights,
including the right to development, rests with States, as established in article 3 of
the Declaration on the Right to Development, and reaffirms the inextricable link
between the two;
12. Underlines the importance of the continuation of the discussion, within
the Working Group on the Right to Development, on the question of a suitable
permanent follow-up mechanism to monitor the realization of the right to
development;
13. Affirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and challenges,
the process of globalization remains deficient in achieving the objectives of
integrating all countries into a globalized world, and stresses the need for policies
and measures at the national and global levels to respond to the challenges and
opportunities of globalization if this process is to be made fully inclusive and
equitable;
14. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the
international community, the gap between developed and developing countries
remains unacceptably wide and that developing countries continue to face
difficulties in participating in the globalization process, and that many risk being
marginalized and effectively excluded from its benefits;
15. Reaffirms the commitment, and urges developed countries that have not
yet done so, to make concrete efforts towards meeting the targets of 0.7 per cent of
their gross national product for official development assistance to developing
countries and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of their gross national product to least developed
countries, and encourages developing countries to build on the progress achieved in
ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help meet
development goals and targets;
3

A/RES/57/223

16. Emphasizes the international economic and financial issues that deserve
particular attention by the Working Group on the Right to Development, such as
international trade, access to technology, good governance and equity at the
international level, and the debt burden, in order to consider and evaluate their
impact on the enjoyment of human rights and, in this context, looks forward to a
preliminary study, as requested by the Commission on Human Rights in its
resolution 2001/9 of 18 April 2001, 9 for consideration by the Working Group at its
next session;
17. Recognizes that historical injustices have undeniably contributed to the
poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization, social exclusion, economic disparities,
instability and insecurity that affect many people in different parts of the world, in
particular in developing countries;
18. Recognizes also the need to address market access for developing
countries, including in agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in
particular those of interest to developing countries;
19. Considers that a desirable pace of meaningful trade liberalization,
including in areas under negotiation; implementation of commitments on
implementation-related issues and concerns; review of special and
differential-treatment provisions, with a view to strengthening them and making
them more precise, effective and operational; avoidance of new forms of
protectionism; and capacity-building and technical assistance for developing
countries are important issues in making progress towards the effective
implementation of the right to development;
20. Recognizes that poverty eradication is one of the critical elements in the
promotion and realization of the right to development, stresses that poverty is a
multifaceted problem that requires a multifaceted approach in addressing economic,
political, social, environmental and institutional dimensions at all levels, especially
in the context of the United Nations Millennium development goal of halving, by
the year 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income is less than one
dollar a day and the proportion of people who suffer from hunger, underlines the
fact that the international community is far from meeting the target of halving the
number of people living in poverty by 2015, and emphasizes the principle of
international cooperation, including partnership and commitment, between
developed and developing countries;
21. Recognizes also the important link between the international economic,
commercial and financial spheres and the realization of the right to development
and, in this regard, stresses the need to broaden the base of decision-making at the
international level on issues of development concern and to fill organizational gaps,
as well as strengthen the United Nations system and other multilateral institutions,
and also stresses the need to broaden and strengthen the participation of developing
countries and economies in transition in international economic decision-making
and norm-setting;
22. Stresses that the basic responsibility for the realization of all human
rights lies with the State, and reaffirms that States have the primary responsibility
for their own economic and social development and that the role of national policies
and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
_______________
9
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

4

A/RES/57/223

23. Recognizes that good governance and the rule of law at the national level
assist all States in the promotion and protection of human rights, including the right
to development, and agrees on the value of the ongoing efforts being made by States
to identify and strengthen good governance practices, including transparent,
responsible, accountable and participatory government, that are responsive and
appropriate to their needs and aspirations, including in the context of agreed
partnership approaches to development, capacity-building and technical assistance;
24. Recognizes also the important role and the rights of women and the
application of a gender perspective as a cross-cutting issue in the process of
realizing the right to development, and notes in particular the positive relationship
between women’s education and their equal participation in the civil, political,
economic, social and cultural activities of the community, and the promotion of the
right to development;
25. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, boys and
girls alike, in all policies and programmes, and for ensuring protection and
promotion of those rights, especially in areas relating to health, education and the
full development of their capacities;
26. Recognizes that measures must be taken at the national and international
levels to fight the human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (HIV/AIDS) and other communicable diseases, taking into account
ongoing efforts and programmes;
27. Recognizes also the need at the national level for strong partnerships
with civil society organizations, including the private sector, in pursuit of poverty
eradication and development, as well as for good corporate governance;
28. Expresses deep concern and anxiety about growing corporate corruption,
in particular the recent disturbing incidents which have a negative impact on the full
enjoyment of human rights and undermine the process of the realization of the right
to development;
29. Emphasizes the urgent need for taking concrete measures, including the
repatriation of illegally acquired assets and funds to the countries of origin, to fight
against all forms of corruption at the national and international levels, and stresses
the importance of a genuine political commitment on the part of all Governments
through a firm legal framework;
30. Supports and appreciates the recently adopted New Partnership for
Africa’s Development 10 as a development framework and a practical example that
could be explored for the promotion of a rights-based approach to development;
31. Emphasizes the need to improve further the activities of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights towards the promotion and
realization of the right to development, including ensuring effective use of the
financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its mandate, and better servicing
of and support for the Working Group on the Right to Development;
32. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to assist effectively in
implementing the recommendations contained in the agreed conclusions of the
Working Group on the Right to Development, including in particular ensuring the
meaningful participation and contribution of all relevant international organizations
_______________
10

A/57/304, annex.

5

A/RES/57/223

and United Nations specialized agencies, programmes and funds in the next session
of the Working Group;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of Member States, United Nations organs and bodies, specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, international development and financial institutions, in
particular the Bretton Woods institutions and non-governmental organizations, and
to submit a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution to
the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-ninth session and to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session;
34. Decides to continue at its fifty-eighth session consideration of the issue
of the right to development, as a matter of priority.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

6
