S/2011/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 January 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 7 January 2011 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) and to Security Council resolution 1962 (2010) of 20 December 2010,
which extended the mandate of UNOCI until 30 June 2011. I would like to thank the
Security Council for the decisions it has taken to reinforce UNOCI during the first
and second rounds of the Ivorian presidential election, including through (a) the
temporary redeployment of three infantry companies and an aviation unit
comprising two military utility helicopters from the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) to UNOCI under inter-mission cooperation arrangements as
provided for in resolutions 1609 (2005) and 1938 (2010), and as authorized under
resolution 1951 (2010); and (b) the deployment of an additional 500 uniformed
personnel, consisting of 400 troops and 100 formed police personnel to augment
already existing UNOCI contingents, which was approved in resolution
1942 (2010).
I am also grateful to the Security Council for approving in resolution
1962 (2010) the further extension of the temporary transfer of the three infantry
companies and the aviation unit comprising two military utility helicopters from
UNMIL following the unforeseen crisis that emerged in the wake of the
announcement of the results of the second round of the presidential election.
The security situation has continued to deteriorate and new challenges have
emerged, as the stalemate remains unresolved. UNOCI is operating in an openly
hostile security environment with direct threats from regular and irregular forces
loyal to former President Gbagbo. The precarious security situation could quickly
degenerate into widespread conflict. The specific threats to the mission with regard
to logistics include denying customs clearance for vital life-support supplies at the
port; instructing vendors not to sell fuel and supplies to UNOCI and its personnel;
and obstructing the delivery of supplies to UNOCI personnel and sites through
roadblocks and other means.
In response, UNOCI and the Secretariat have been putting in place alternative
arrangements to ensure uninterrupted provision of supplies to the mission, including
beginning to establish an alternative logistics base in Bouaké and opening up an
alternative supply route by road and by air from Ghana and Burkina Faso. However,
this alternative arrangement relies upon helicopter flights within Côte d’Ivoire to
airlift fuel and other supplies from Bouaké to Abidjan and other areas. This

11-20417 (E) 120111

*1120417*

S/2011/5

arrangement remains vulnerable to disruption and therefore requires appropriate
protection arrangements.
Furthermore, the media, particularly the State broadcasting corporation
Radiodiffusion télévision ivoirienne (RTI), are being used to incite hostility and
violence against particular Ivorian ethnic, religious and political groups and against
the mission, including by propagating hate messages and disseminating false
information.
As a result, crowds of Young Patriots and other elements loyal to former
President Gbagbo such as the Republican Guard, the Centre de commandement des
opérations de sécurité (CECOS) and the maritime component of the Ivorian security
and defence forces are physically obstructing UNOCI patrols and civilian personnel.
With the aim of provoking peacekeepers into using force, they are also attacking
patrols, leading to injury and destruction of United Nations property. The Young
Patriots have also announced that they intend to attack the Golf Hotel, which is the
temporary seat of the legitimate Government of Côte d’Ivoire and is still surrounded
by regular and irregular forces loyal to former President Gbagbo. These elements
are constricting the free movement of UNOCI and civilians into and out of the hotel,
and have positioned mortars and other heavy weapons in the environs, targeting the
hotel.
Furthermore, serious human rights violations have been reported, both in
Abidjan and in other areas, particularly in the west. There has also been in recent
days an increase of inter-ethnic tensions, particularly in the west. The situation in
Abidjan may also further deteriorate abruptly. However, the restrictions on the
freedom of movement of UNOCI severely impede its ability to carry out its mandate
with respect to the protection of civilians and the promotion of human rights. Access
to the affected areas is essential both to prevent the reported violations to the extent
possible, and to conduct investigations so that those responsible can be held
accountable. However, a mixture of forces loyal to former President Gbagbo and
crowds of Young Patriots are organized to block access by the mission to locations
where serious human rights violations have been reported, including alleged sites of
mass graves in Abidjan as well as near Daloa in the west. The UNOCI human rights
teams investigating reported human rights violations therefore require reinforced
security arrangements.
As a first measure, efforts have been undertaken within UNOCI to reinforce its
troops and police in Abidjan by redeploying more troops and police from the north
and east of the country. For instance, the mission’s Quick Reaction Force/Force
Reserve (one battalion), which was previously stationed in Yamoussoukro, is now
dedicated to providing full-time protection to the Golf Hotel, as are seven platoons
of formed police units. This leaves the mission unable to rapidly respond to any
deterioration in the security situation in other areas, particularly in the west.
Therefore, it is important to replace this critical capacity on an urgent basis.
When the mission was established in 2003, the troop level of UNOCI was
predicated on the understanding that the French Licorne forces would provide the
requisite quick reaction force capability for UNOCI. However, since then, Licorne
has downsized its presence on the ground to the current level of 900 troops, and has
indicated to UNOCI that it is only able to provide such quick reaction capability for
UNOCI in Abidjan. The Security Council may also recall that in early 2009, as the
peace process progressed and the parties had agreed to hold elections, UNOCI

2

11-20417

S/2011/5

repatriated one battalion following an anticipated reduction in tasks to be carried out
by the mission. Therefore, in the current challenging circumstances, the mission
requires additional capacity. In particular, the assets already deployed from UNMIL
to UNOCI referenced above remain essential.
I therefore wish to recommend that the Security Council authorize the
following measures in order to provide the mission with adequate capacity to meet
the current security challenges on the ground in terms of protecting United Nations
personnel and installations, protecting the delivery of vital life supplies, deterring
the threats referred to above, enhancing the mission’s ability to address the
obstruction and denial of access it is currently encountering, and enabling the
mission to make credible efforts to protect civilians:
(a) Deployment of one battalion consisting of 850 troops to replace the
mission’s Quick Reaction Force/Reserve Force;
(b) Deployment of up to one battalion (850 troops) to replace the three
Pakistani infantry companies borrowed from UNMIL when they return to UNMIL.
The deployment of this battalion would partially cover the capacity lost when the
Bangladeshi battalion was repatriated in early 2009;
(c) Deployment of a level-II hospital, consisting of 100 personnel, in view of
the deteriorating security situation and reduced access by UNOCI personnel to
national medical facilities;
(d) Deployment, on a temporary basis, of three MI-24 armed helicopters
with crews (approximately 200 personnel) from UNMIL to UNOCI to provide
escorts for helicopter supply flights, as well as deterrence and protection in light of
the hostile environment that has emerged. Should the Secretariat be unable to secure
the consent of the troop-contributing country for the transfer from UNMIL, we are
exploring options with other troop-contributing countries, and will revert to the
Security Council in this regard;
(e) Within the overall authorized police strength, replacement of 60
individual police officers currently relocated and who will be repatriated, with 60
formed police unit personnel to meet threats posed by unarmed crowds to the free
movement of United Nations personnel and to United Nations installations;
(f) In the event that the crisis continues, it will be necessary to extend
beyond the end of January 2011 the temporary transfer of the aviation unit
comprising two military utility helicopters from UNMIL authorized in resolution
1951 (2010); and to extend beyond March 2011 the deployment of the additional
500 uniformed personnel (consisting of 400 troops and 100 formed police
personnel) authorized in resolution 1942 (2010).
In total, the above proposals entail an increase in the overall authorized
strength of military personnel, through the end of the mandate period, of 2,000 in
addition to the temporary military and police capabilities mentioned in subparagraph
(f) above.
I would be grateful if you could bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-20417

3
