S/PV.9352

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9352nd meeting

Tuesday, 20 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab/Ms. Shaheen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 26 May 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/383)
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2023/442)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-17768 (E)
*2317768*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

the Security Council for the month of June, and I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, for
presiding over this meeting.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 26 May 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/383)
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2023/442)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Rwanda
to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Executive Director of UNWomen; His Excellency Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security; and Mr. Rhosyns Ngatondang, Head of
Association, Jeunesse en Marche pour le Développement
en Centrafrique.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/383, which contains the text of a
letter dated 26 May 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2023/442, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rugwabiza.
Ms. Rugwabiza: I would like to congratulate the
United Arab Emirates on assuming the presidency of
2/33

20/06/2023

I am honoured to join Council members today to
present the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/442) on the Central African Republic and
update them on recent developments in the country.
I will underscore the positive steps taken by the
Government to advance the peace process, as well as
the concerning security and humanitarian situation at
Central African borders with the Sudan and Chad.
First, the good news is that important progress was
made in the implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic and the joint road map for peace of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in
a harmonized manner, including at the local level. On
24 March, the Prime Minister convened a conference,
in which all Central African prefects participated, to
kick-start the decentralization of the implementation of
the peace process, including by reactivating prefectural
implementation mechanisms. I am also pleased to report
that 28 April marked a significant development in the
peace process, with the dissolution of two additional
armed groups, which are signatories to the Political
Agreement, and of factions of three other signatory
armed groups, following active engagement by the
Government of the Central African Republic with
leaders of those armed groups. However, the residual
combatants affiliated with the wings of those armed
groups must be quickly disarmed and reintegrated for
that dissolution to have a meaningful impact.
I would like to take this opportunity to urge the
partners of the Central African Republic to provide
additional support to the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme, as
required for the effective reintegration of disarmed
and demobilized armed elements. I would also like
to welcome the Peacebuilding Fund’s approval of
$5 million to support the socioeconomic reintegration
of ex-combatants in the Central African Republic
through a project that will be jointly implemented with
by United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
and UN-Women. I further welcome the Peacebuilding
Fund’s approval of an additional $3 million project last
week in support of social cohesion between returnees
and host communities, which will be implemented
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

by IOM and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
On 30 May, the President of the Central African
Republic announced a referendum on a new constitution,
scheduled for 30 July, with a campaign from 15 to
28 July. Subsequently, the National Elections Authority
announced the temporary suspension of preparations
for the local elections. Against that backdrop, I
encourage the Government to provide clarification on
its new calendar and timetable for local elections. The
convening of local elections in the Central African
Republic continues to represent a unique opportunity to
help address the root causes of the conflict by advancing
decentralization, promoting citizen-centred governance
and consolidating the extension of State authority.
Local elections would also broaden the political space,
which is a priority of the Political Agreement. For
local elections to have the required impact, they must
be inclusive. I have therefore continued to encourage
dialogue between the Government and the leaders of
opposition political parties.
The reporting period also saw the extension of
State authority to some of the most remote parts of the
Central African Republic. A key milestone was in the
area of Sam Ouandja, near the Sudan border, which had
been under the control of armed groups for decades.
Joint and integrated interventions by the national
defence and internal security forces, in coordination
with the uniformed and civilian components of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), allowed the resumption of humanitarian
and development support in the area, thereby bringing
tangible peace dividends to the local population.
Following the securing of the area and the
re-establishment of State authority, the Prime Minister
of the Central African Republic and myself led a joint
visit to Sam Ouandja with a delegation composed of
several ministers, United Nations country team agencies
and bilateral and regional partners. During the visit, a
number of transformative and people-centred projects
were launched in the areas of health, education and
community violence reduction, in addition to the launch
of the UNDP stabilization programme in the Central
African Republic. The ongoing transformation in Sam
Ouandja shows that it is possible to break decades-long
cycles of violence and conflict and re-establish State
authority, even in regions known to have limited or no
State presence.

S/PV.9352

However, that requires coordinated and concomitant
interventions by the Government of the Central
African Republic, MINUSCA and humanitarian and
development partners. While the humanitarian needs
of the Central African Republic remain significant and
pressing, it is also necessary to support the Government
to rebuild social cohesion and invest in the resilience
and recovery of local communities. The Government’s
mobilization of the support of those partners to build the
institutional, logistical and operational capabilities and
capacities of the national defence and internal security
forces also remains essential to sustain security gains.
The security situation, however, remains concerning
in some parts of the country. The increasing tensions and
rapidly deteriorating security conditions at the Central
African Republic’s borders with Chad, the Sudan and
South Sudan since April, including throughout most
of May, represent renewed security and humanitarian
challenges. Those new threats have impacted the
already complex security environment, requiring
MINUSCA to maintain flexibility and mobility. In that
context, MINUSCA requires sufficient and adequate
aviation capabilities to maintain our preventive and
robust posture. I also encourage the Government
of the Central African Republic to take a holistic
and coordinated approach to border management. I
therefore welcome the Government’s recent approval of
a national policy on the management of border areas,
and I urge the Government and neighbouring countries
to continue addressing border management through the
reactivation of their respective bilateral commissions.
Explosive ordnance devices continue to pose
a significant threat to civilians, peacekeepers and
humanitarian actors. MINUSCA continues its
support to mitigate that threat in order to create a
security environment that is conducive to effective
humanitarian delivery in the country. I would like
to express my appreciation to MINUSCA’s troopand police contributing countries, whose personnel
continue to serve even in the face of hostile action, as
shown last week by the injuring of two peacekeepers
by hostile fire.
The humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic remains concerning. Following the outbreak
of the conflict in the Sudan, the country is facing an
influx of refugees and returnees in urgent need of
protection and assistance. I thank donors for their
generous support to the 2023 humanitarian response
plan. However, as of June, the plan is funded only to

23-177683/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

28 per cent. I appeal for further support, including for
the revised humanitarian response plan, to address the
most urgent needs of people in distress.
There is another unfolding humanitarian crisis
at the border between the Central African Republic
and Chad. Since May, tens of thousands of people,
mostly women and children, have crossed the border
from Chad into the Central African Republic, fleeing
violence in the neighbouring Chadian region of Logone
Oriental. On 8 June, the Prime Minister and myself
visited Paoua and went to the nearby area of Bedaka,
which is two kilometres from the border with Chad, in
the Lim-Pendé prefecture, to assess the humanitarian
and security situations. The visit highlighted the acute
humanitarian needs in Bedaka and was an opportunity
to provide an immediate and urgent humanitarian
response and to mobilize support for both the displaced
Chadians and the host communities. The joint
commitment by the Government of the Central African
Republic, MINUSCA and humanitarian partners to
providing a strong and coordinated humanitarian
response reassured local authorities, host communities
and the displaced Chadians.
The prevailing economic conditions and situation
in the country remain concerning. Commodity
prices continue to rise, even doubling or tripling
in areas that were dependent on imports from the
Sudan. In that context, we welcome the approval of
the International Monetary Fund’s Extended Credit
Facility arrangement. And the President has declared
priorities, which will help the Central African Republic
avoid default and provide services for its people. We
encourage the Government to implement the reforms
needed to improve the collection of internal resources
and to enhance the transparency and controls in budget
management that will enable international partners to
resume direct budgetary support.
Human rights violations remain a concern in the
Central African Republic. The Mission continues
to work with the Government and encourage it to
initiate independent and transparent investigations
into human rights violations and abuses, as well as
breaches of international humanitarian law by all
parties to the conflict. The national authorities must be
encouraged to continue to advance those investigations
and finalize the pending cases for future trials. On a
positive note, the conviction of five individuals for
the murder of a Burundian peacekeeper in Grimari
in March 2020 was a welcome development in the
4/33

20/06/2023

efforts to ensure accountability for crimes committed
against peacekeepers.
On 8 June, the United Nations decided to repatriate
a unit of 60 military personnel and their commander
from MINUSCA based on serious allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse by some members of the unit.
The allegations were reported by one of our local
prevention-and-response-network
partners.
Local
networks are a key pillar of MINUSCA’s strategy for
preventing and responding to sexual exploitation and
abuse. The Mission took immediate action to strictly
apply the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy
for all allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
MINUSCA will spare no effort in preventing new
cases and ensuring that all uniformed and civilian
personnel honour the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy, including by enhancing preventive
and response measures. I also want to call on troopand police-contributing countries to continue to
enhance their role in ensuring zero tolerance for sexual
exploitation and abuse. The Mission will be working
with Headquarters to explore specific prevention and
monitoring measures for contingents at risk.
Lastly, I welcome the continued constructive
cooperation between the Government and MINUSCA.
MINUSCA will continue to support the Central
African Republic in creating a political and security
environment that is conducive to lasting peace, stability
and sustainable development, which can be achieved
only through the concerted efforts of all partners.
The President: I thank Ms. Rugwabiza for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
Ms. Bahous: At the outset, I would like to recognize
World Refugee Day today, as well as all who are forced
to flee their homes as a result of conflict, instability
and climate change, especially women and girls, who
are disproportionately affected. We honour all refugees
today. We honour their courage, strength and resilience.
One of the most repeated phrases in this Chamber
in recent years has been “women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation”. I want to focus on that today
in the context of the Central African Republic, ahead
of the constitutional referendum and the first local
elections since 1988. Women in the Central African
Republic have had a parity law and a 35 per cent quota
in all decision-making bodies since 2016, and that
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

remains in effect until 2027. The Government’s first
national action plan on women and peace and security
was adopted in 2014, and it is working on the third
iteration of that plan. Those are remarkable efforts that
should be applauded and recognized.
I also commend the Council’s efforts to ensure
that its resolutions on the Central African Republic
encompass clear directives on women and peace and
security, including for the mandates of both the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic. And
yet women continue to be extremely marginalized in
decision-making in general and in peace processes in
particular. As in many other countries on the Security
Council’s agenda, there is no lack of norms or plans.
It is their inadequate implementation, enforcement
and funding that is failing the women of the Central
African Republic.
When the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic was
signed in 2019, only eight of the 78 delegates representing
the different parties were women, and only one of the
14 signatories. All 11 of the facilitators designated by
the African Union were men. There are currently no
women in the monitoring mechanism of the Luanda
road map. The numbers are not much better in national
dialogues. In the Bangui Forum in 2015, women
constituted only 20 per cent of the 800 participants.
In the 2022 republican dialogue, only 17 per cent of
the 450 participants were women. Perhaps the most
positive example of women’s representation is the Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation Commission,
with five women among its 11 members, including the
President. However, two years after its launch, it still
lacks the financial resources to get off the ground. And
in several of the key committees dealing with peace and
security issues, such as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security-sector reform, women’s
representation is marginal or non-existent.
In the 2021 elections, in spite of the parity law,
the percentage of women in the National Assembly
increased only modestly, from 8 to 12 per cent. There
are clear indications why that is so. Of the more than
1,500 candidates, only 15 per cent were women. Party
lists were validated and accepted, despite the fact
that they failed to meet the quota. In a study that UNWomen conducted last year, we found that 43 per cent

S/PV.9352

of women candidates were victims of physical violence
during their campaigns. They were threatened by armed
groups or even kidnapped. Women voters were refused
entry into voting centres or turned back because they
lacked birth certificates. Some mechanisms did make a
difference, though. The United Nations set up hotlines
and situation rooms for women across the country. In
one case, a woman candidate who was being threatened
by armed men called the hotline to relay her location
with the sound of gunfire in the background. The
peacekeepers closest to her location were swiftly
mobilized, and the armed men left. Today she is a
member of Parliament. Let us all applaud her.
As in many other countries, women in the Central
African Republic are very active in the work of
building peace, mediating conflicts at the local level
and protecting their communities, often at their own
risk and expense. In many cases, they overcome sexual
violence, conflict-related psychological trauma or the
loss of a husband to care for the growing numbers of
orphans and take on new roles as breadwinners, amid
acute food insecurity. Nearly one in two households
in the Central African Republic is now headed by
a woman.
On the whole, we are falling short of our
commitments and of the aspirations of women in the
Central African Republic. Several of the women invited
here from civil society have told the Council that women
are often engaged only in consultations in the margins
or when missions from external actors visit the country.
They are rarely invited to provide meaningful input in
decision-making processes, and initiatives targeting
women rarely feed into the formal peace process.
There is a vibrant civil society in the Central
African Republic, yet women report that for them
the civic space is closing. The conflict and the
humanitarian emergency have exacerbated many issues
that disproportionately affect women and girls and
that have a direct bearing on their ability to participate
fully, equally and meaningfully in their communities.
We need their voices and their agency, yet they risk
harassment, including from armed groups, if they
speak up or collaborate with the Government or the
United Nations.
More broadly, gender-based violence is on the
rise, strongly correlated with arms proliferation. Just
one third of rape survivors are able to access clinical
management within 72 hours, and the list goes on. The

23-177685/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

many brave women who want to shape the future of
their country must be given the space and the resources
to do so. We must all do our part to create that space.
We are at a critical juncture for women’s
participation, with a constitutional referendum and
elections that could result in instability and violence
again. While much can be said about the resurgence of
attacks by armed groups, ethnic conflict, the spillover
effects of the crisis in the Sudan and the regional
and global dynamics at play in the Central African
Republic, the extreme underrepresentation of women in
all decision-making is rarely mentioned or addressed.
And yet it is one of the reasons we keep going through
cycles of violence and instability, and addressing it is
one of our best hopes for a future for the country.
In the coming months, the constitutional referendum
and the local elections are more likely to be peaceful
under the following four conditions — that women
activists can speak their mind freely, that women’s
organizations have the resources to build peace and
social cohesion in their communities and mitigate
tensions, that women candidates can run for office
without threats and harassment and that international
partners work together with the Government and
civil society in the country in order to ensure that
upcoming milestones contribute to peace rather than
risk further instability.
I urge one and all to reinforce this message, both
in the Security Council and as partners of the Central
African Republic.
The President: I thank Ms. Bahous for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.

20/06/2023

social cohesion. It is, however, imperative that all
stakeholders in the Central African Republic put the
overall and supreme interest of the country first by
transcending their current disagreements to reach
a national consensus that reflects the interests of the
good people of the Central African Republic.
It is even more imperative, in the light of the
upcoming local elections to be held this year, that
this democratic step should lead to consolidating the
gains in the implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. In particular, the deepening of its social
contract between the citizens and their elected leaders
will achieve the necessary peace dividends that we all
crave in the Central African Republic.
Furthermore, the dynamic of the peace process
comes with a positive development as a strong
demonstration of the commitment of the authorities to
implement the Political Agreement and the Luanda joint
road map for peace in the Central African Republic.
The African Union is glad to note that, in December
2022 and April 2023, the successful dismantling of the
armed groups was equally a testament to the sustained
commitment of the good intentions of the Government
of His Excellency President Touadera. We must join
the Central African Government in reaffirming that
dialogue, not violence, is the main vehicle to resolving
the differences in the Central African Republic. We
therefore strongly believe that, in that context, the
ongoing disarmament, rehabilitation and reintegration
should remain critical to fostering comprehensive
peace dividends in the Central African Republic.

Mr. Adeoye: The political, security and
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic
remains of critical concern to the African Union. Just
last week, in its consideration of the situation in the
Central African Republic, the African Union Peace and
Security Council expressed grave concern about the
deterioration of the security situation in the country,
exacerbated by the spillover of the conflict from
neighbouring countries, particularly the Sudan. That
includes the proliferation of illegal weapons and the
exploitation of the country’s natural resources.

The African Union is also pleased to note that
the pooling of the Luanda joint road map with
the Political Agreement will lead to important
achievements regarding mediation, cross-border issues
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
which are critical to promoting durable peace and
reconciliation. Nonetheless, we must acknowledge
that a number of challenges remain related to security,
financial stability and the dire humanitarian situation,
which the head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic also reported.

Moreover, the political situation remains fragile.
Recently, the announcement of a constitutional reform
process, with the referendum scheduled for the end
of July, is also a determining factor for stability and

It is essential to note that the crisis in the Sudan has
further aggravated the security situation in the Central
African Republic. We therefore wish to emphasize the
need to ensure the full implementation of the 2020

6/33

23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

Yaoundé Declaration, and I call on the Security Council
and the international community to continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to people in need, especially
women and children.
In conclusion, permit me to underscore several key
messages to the Security Council.
First, the African Union wishes to stress that the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic remains the most
viable instrument and the recognized framework for
addressing the crisis in the Central African Republic.
In that regard, we once again emphasize that in order
to strengthen the ongoing efforts it is vital to achieve
synergies between the Political Agreement and the
Luanda joint road map.
Secondly, it is equally important that the
Government and all political and social actors take the
necessary steps to ensure that the local elections are
held as scheduled, in 2023, and in a transparent, free,
credible, inclusive and fair manner.
In the light of the legitimate concerns that the
Central African Republic may be affected by the
instability and infighting in the Sudan, we would
also like to emphasize that cross-border movements
of displaced persons should continue to be facilitated
while armed groups’ small arms and light weapons are
curtailed, so as to assure that the smuggling of weapons
across the border will not become a multiplying factor
for the crisis in the two countries. The Council must
examine the situation with the determination to agree
on a comprehensive support package for the Central
African people.
Thirdly, in view of the tense security situation, it is
imperative that the institutional capacity of the Armed
Forces of the Central African Republic be strengthened.
Accordingly, the African Union wishes to strongly
reiterate its call for the complete lifting of the arms
embargo imposed on the Central African Republic.
For us, this lifting will enable the Armed Forces to
effectively carry out their constitutional mandate of
defending and protecting the country and its citizens,
particularly given the potential spillover of the crisis
from the Sudan into Central African Republic.
Finally, on behalf of the African Union, I reaffirm the
continued support of our Union to the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic. We call on
the Security Council to show equally strong support for

S/PV.9352

the operations of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. It is also important that the countries of the
region continue to enjoy the tireless support of the
Council in fostering comprehensive peace, stability and
prosperity in the Central African Republic.
The President: I thank Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ngatondang.
Mr. Ngatondang (spoke in French): On behalf of
the people of the Central African Republic, united in
their ethnic and cultural diversity, indivisible, peaceful
and hospitable, I have the honour of addressing the
Security Council in a few very significant words out
of a need to bear true witness to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and its
efforts to contribute to the strengthening of the peace
process and the protection of civilian populations in my
country, the Central African Republic.
I speak as a national expert on the prevention of
hate speech likely to lead to conflict, and as President
and Country Coordinator of the non-governmental
organization, Jeunesse en Marche pour le Développement
en Centrafrique, which aims to promote a peaceful,
democratic and equitable Central African community
in which all people are protected in strict compliance
with human rights. My experience and knowledge of
the Central African terrain are fundamental to this
unconditional commitment to maintaining peace and
the protection of civilians in my country.
Indeed, despite the misinformation and rumours
about MINUSCA’s presence and actions in the Central
African Republic, Council members should not be
surprised if my briefing today calls into question
what they have no doubt learned about this important
United Nations mission deployed in the Central African
Republic, which has been truly instrumental in restoring
peace, social cohesion and reconciliation to Central
Africans. Yes, for such a large mission, unintentional
blunders are inevitable, as it is of course impossible
for human work to be perfect. But aware and above all
patriotic, the people of the Central African Republic still
recognize the unconditional importance of this great
United Nations mission, not only for the protection of
civilians, but above all for protecting and safeguarding
the Central African peace that is still being built, with
many challenges still to be met by MINUSCA. At
the same time, the political, security and economic

23-177687/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

situation in the Central African Republic continues to
encourage its citizens to renew their special confidence
in MINUSCA for a new, strengthened mandate for the
protection of civilians, security and peacekeeping in
the Central African Republic.
That is why, through me, the people of the Central
African Republic, who remain vulnerable and exposed
to a high risk of human rights violations, request the
Security Council to renew MINUSCA’s mandate as an
unconditional guarantee of the protection of civilians
and for the safety of populations in the face of enemies
of universal peace. This request to the Security Council
is a heartfelt cry from the vulnerable and disadvantaged
populations of the Central African Republic for
assurances that there will no longer be any gratuitous
victims of human rights violations habitually caused
by armed groups and/or unidentified armed persons
throughout the territory of the Central African Republic,
that the presence of armed groups in the Central African
Republic will be eliminated, that MINUSCA’s quickimpact projects will be reoriented towards helping the
revival of the agropastoral, income-generating and
entrepreneurial activities of young people — farmers
and herders, as well as victims of recurrent armed
conflicts in the Central African Republic — and that all
local actions to combat misinformation and hate speech
likely to lead to interreligious and community conflicts
will be taken into account in developing the Mission’s
rapid-impact projects strategy, so as to accelerate the
process of transforming the minds and actions of all
Central Africans towards the maintenance of peace,
interreligious and social cohesion and integrated local
development ideal for the possible stabilization in the
Central African Republic.
Allow me to conclude my remarks by inviting
the Security Council to believe in the Central
Africans — who no longer want war, but are committed
to a definitive return to peace, to living together and
to integrated development in their country, the Central
African Republic. Long live the respected Central
African people. Long live Central African peace.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Ngatondang for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the Special Representative
for her comprehensive briefing. I would also like to
8/33

20/06/2023

thank Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Mr. Bankole Adeoye and
Mr. Rhosyns Ngatondang for their briefings. I would
also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Central African Republic to today’s meeting.
Significant progress has been made in the Central
African Republic in recent months. Thanks to the
good offices of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the decentralization of the peace
process has continued, and the authority of the State
has gradually been extended. Two more armed groups
have laid down their arms, confirming the progress
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration programme. This momentum must now
be maintained with other armed groups.
Thanks in particular to the positive role played
by Angola, the dialogue between the Central African
Republic and Chad has advanced and enabled the
implementation of concrete cooperation, including at
the military level. We encourage the Central African
authorities to continue their efforts to ensure that the
progress achieved is sustainable. The African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the countries in the region must remain key actors
in relaunching the peace process in the Central African
Republic. We also welcome the growing cooperation
of the Central African authorities and MINUSCA and
hope that this dynamic will continue. We also welcome
the measures taken by the Mission in line with the
Secretary-General’s commitment to a policy of zero
tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains fragile. Armed groups continue to commit
violence against civilians and the Central African
forces. The humanitarian situation, which is already
very precarious, is deteriorating owing to the impact
of the crisis in the Sudan, which has led to the influx
of almost 15,000 refugees into the north-east of the
country. France has mobilized more than €40 million
to address the humanitarian crisis in the Sudan and its
impact on neighbouring countries.
On the political front, we note the temporary
suspension of the organization of local elections and
the announcement of a constitutional referendum. And
we call for those elections to be held in an inclusive,
free, transparent, credible and peaceful manner so that
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

all voices, including those of young people and women,
can be heard.
Finally, France remains very concerned about the
human rights violations committed by all parties and in
particular by the members of the Wagner Group, who
are committing acts of violence against the civilian
population. Those violations must not go unpunished.
The Wagner Group’s presence reflects a predatory
approach to the country’s natural resources. It is
not intended to bring lasting stability to the Central
African Republic.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
full support for Special Representative Valentine
Rugwabiza and commend her resolute action at the
head of MINUSCA.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
statement and her valuable daily work on the ground.
I also would like to take the opportunity to thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women; the African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security; and the Head of Association of the Jeunesse
en Marche pour le Développement en Centrafrique for
their statements. I would like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic and
the representatives of the States of the region.
There can be no doubt that women are indispensable
actors in the struggle for lasting peace in Central Africa
and elsewhere. Yet, as a representative of Central
African civil society shared during the visit of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic earlier this month,
“Central African women are pillars of peace, but
they are too often sidelined.”
We therefore welcome your call, Madam President, to
pay particular attention to the women and peace and
security agenda in our deliberations today. It is vital
that Council members include and support women’s
commitment to peace.

S/PV.9352

note the Central African Government’s announcement
of a constitutional referendum, a direct democracy
tool which is dear to Switzerland. We therefore call on
the Central African authorities to guarantee an open,
transparent, free and fair process — a process that
ensures the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women. The same applies to the upcoming local
elections, where women candidates must be able to
present themselves free of all threats and reprisals. In
that regard, we encourage the Government to redouble
its efforts to implement the gender parity law, which
requires at least 35 per cent of political posts to be held
by women.
Secondly, despite an improvement in the security
situation in certain regions, armed groups continue
to operate, as we heard today from the Special
Representative. Indeed, on the borders with the Sudan
and Chad, illicit arms trafficking, illegal taxation and
attacks on the civilian population are increasing. That
makes humanitarian access even more difficult. And
yet again the greatest impact is on women. Traditionally
engaged in field work, they are more exposed not only to
the presence of armed actors, but also to the improvised
explosive devices which are scattered throughout
certain rural areas. We call on the Central African
authorities to ensure the protection of the civilian
population and their rights. In that regard, we welcome
the initiatives undertaken by the Government to help
some 13,000 refugees and returnees from the Sudan.
Thirdly, the fight against impunity must be stepped
up. Women victims of sexual violence continue to
be stigmatized, and those violations are often settled
outside the formal justice system. For that to end, the
regular justice system must be strengthened, and public
confidence in it must be increased. As the Minister of
State for Justice, Human Rights Promotion and Good
Governance stressed last week,
“Justice is a prerequisite for
strengthening the rule of law.”

building

and

I will therefore focus on the women and peace
and security agenda for three points that I would like
to raise.

Nevertheless, the Special Criminal Court still lacks
resources, and the Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation Commission is facing major delays.
We therefore encourage the Government and the
international community to support those institutions,
which can lay the foundations for reconciliation and
lasting peace in the country.

First, for peace to take root and endure, women
must be at the forefront of all political processes. We

Finally, Switzerland remains concerned by the
serious allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse

23-177689/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

committed by certain peacekeepers of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. We welcome
the strong commitment of the Secretary-General and
especially his Special Representative to ensuring zero
tolerance of such incidents.
We cannot consolidate peace as long as daily
violence continues to affect half the population. The
response to the country’s insecurity lies in inclusive
political processes, based on international law,
guaranteeing women’s rights and creating a safe and
respectful environment for their participation. In that
context, we also support the four principles proposed
by the Executive Director of UN-Women. In the future,
let us work together to ensure that women are no longer
invisible victims, but recognized actors in peace and
security in the Central African Republic.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council (A3),
namely, Ghana, Mozambique and, my country, Gabon.
We thank Special Representative Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza for her enlightening briefing, as well as the
Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Bahous,
and the African Union Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security, Mr. Bankole Adeoye. We
listened attentively to Mr. Rhosyns Ngatondang. We
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central African Republic, Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, in this meeting.
The report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2023/442) and the
consequences for peace and stability provide us with
an opportunity to reiterate the support of the A3 for
the restoration of peace and security in the Central
African Republic.
Our statement will focus on the political, security
and humanitarian situation in the country.
First, with regard to the political situation, the A3
welcomes the holding of the first ordinary session of
the National Assembly from 1 March to 31 May. We
note the ongoing efforts to mutualize the Luanda
joint road map and the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
under the aegis of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and also welcome the
Government’s efforts to decentralize that peace process,
10/33

20/06/2023

notably through the organization of a conference
involving all prefectures and local players with a view
to fostering local ownership of the peace process.
We take note of the announcement of the temporary
suspension of preparations for local elections by the
President of the National Electoral Authority and of the
announcement of the organization of the constitutional
referendum scheduled for 30 July. We call on the
Government to continue to engage constructively
with all political parties, including the opposition
and civil society, to ensure the inclusive participation
of all Central Africans in those elections. We call
on the country’s authorities to pursue their efforts to
strengthen social cohesion, tolerance and dialogue with
all segments of society in the Central African Republic,
especially the country’s women and young people. The
recent election of four women to the National Assembly
is an encouraging sign of women’s inclusion in the
political process, which warrants our acknowledgement.
We welcome the commitment of President João
Manuel Gonçalves of Angola to help strengthen dialogue
and cooperation between President Faustin Archange
Touadera of the Central African Republic and President
Mahamat Idriss Déby Itno of the Chadian Transition by
convening the Luanda meeting on 8 February, which
enabled discussing mutual security concerns of the
Central African Republic and Chad, with a view to
shoring up border security and regional relations. We
also welcome the visit by the Panel of the Wise of the
African Union to the Central African Republic from
5 to 11 March, which was aimed at engaging with local
and international actors to discuss political processes in
order to prevent the resurgence of conflict and promote
a peaceful, secure and stable society in the Central
African Republic. In that regard, the A3 welcomes
the continued commitment of the African Union, the
ICGLR and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) to ensure the stabilization of
the Central African Republic.
With regard to the security situation, Ghana,
Mozambique and Gabon recall that the Central African
Republic is facing many complex security challenges,
such as cross-border insecurity, illicit trafficking in
natural resources and small arms and light weapons,
an increase in the use of explosive devices by armed
groups and an increase in the latter’s activities
directed against the defence and security forces and
the civilian population of the Central African Republic
and humanitarian workers. We note that the security
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

of the Central African Republic is linked to that of
its neighbouring countries. It is therefore critical to
undertake coordinated actions at the regional level in
order to effectively combat armed groups operating in
border areas. In that regard, we encourage conducting
joint military operations between the Central African
Republic and Chad to combat cross-border insecurity.
We are deeply concerned by the use of increasingly
sophisticated weaponry by local and foreign armed
groups in the Central African Republic, despite the arms
embargo against them. Furthermore, we note the threats
to security posed by the large-scale displacement of
populations in the Central African Republic against the
backdrop of the crisis in the Sudan. Ghana, Mozambique
and Gabon condemn in the strongest terms the repeated
attacks by armed groups against civilian populations,
humanitarian workers, MINUSCA and the members of
the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic, who
are fighting daily to safeguard the country’s territorial
integrity. The perpetrators of those heinous crimes
must be brought before justice and held to account. We
extend our deepest condolences to all families whose
mourning has been the result armed groups’ violence.
The continued predatory exploitation of natural
resources by armed groups will continue to propitiate
the cycle of violence against civilian populations as
long as the buyers’ demand meets the traffickers’ illegal
supply. We underscore that protecting populations also
requires the certification and traceability of minerals
and the securing of borders in order to dry up funding
sources for armed groups. To that end, we welcome the
efforts of the Central African Republic to implement
the operational framework for the resumption of rough
diamond exports under the Kimberly Process and call
on the Kimberley Process review mission to visit the
Central African Republic to assess the Government’s
request to extend compliant zones to the subprefectures
concerned. The A3 recalls that, in the Central African
Republic, diamond mining remains a major sector and
source of income for the populations in the production
areas. The lifting of sanctions on the proposed zones
will enable improving the living conditions of artisanal
miners and their families.
We stress that achieving lasting peace will be
possible only if the authorities of the Central African
Republic have the means necessary to fulfil their
sovereign duty of ensuring the security the people
and territory of the Central African Republic. The
A3 reiterates the need to strengthen the operational

S/PV.9352

capabilities of the Armed Forces of the Central African
Republic so that they are commensurate with the
new threats seen on the ground, including in the area
of human rights. In that regard, we must support the
efforts of the Central African Republic in attaining
the material resources and operational capabilities
necessary for the Armed Forces of the Central African
Republic to sustainably secure the country.
We encourage MINUSCA and international
partners to pursue their training of the Armed Forces
of the Central African Republic, and we align ourselves
with the call by the African Union Peace and Security
Council in its 13 June communiqué, which was
supported by the ICGLR and ECCAS, for the total
lifting of the arms embargo imposed on the Central
African Republic and of the notification system so
that the national defence and security forces of the
Central African Republic can carry out unhindered
their constitutional mandate to defend and protect the
country and its citizens, including its natural resources.
Those requests were reiterated by Ambassador Adeoye
and formerly made by the authorities of the Central
African Republic during the country visit by the
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013), concerning the Central African Republic,
from 6 to 9 June.
There can be no peace without inclusive political
dialogue. We urge all armed groups to lay down
their weapons immediately, recommit to the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, without conditions, and participate
in the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration (DDRR) programmes, whose successful
implementation we commend, while demobilizing
more than 5,000 out of its initial target of 7,000 people.
We are encouraged by the dissolution during the period
under review of five armed groups that signed the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, thereby bringing the total
number of dissolved armed groups to nine. In order
to implement DDRR programmes, the authorities of
the Central African Republic must have the financial
means necessary to provide alternatives to former
combatants, which requires ongoing financial support
from the international community.
The increase in violence is eroding respect
for the rule of law. Violations of human rights and
humanitarian law committed by armed groups are
increasing at an alarming rate. Given the many abuses

23-1776811/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

faced by civilians, having a solid judicial system in
place is imperative. We welcome the progress made
by the Central African authorities in strengthening the
presence of judicial personnel throughout the country,
the Government’s decision to increase the budget of
the national judicial oversight mechanism by 80 per
for 2023 from, as compared to the previous year, and
the criminal proceedings at the Special Criminal Court
that resulted in the conviction of the murderer of a
Burundian peacekeeper in 2020. With regard to the
number of human rights violations allegedly perpetrated
by State actors, we recall that they mainly concern
detention-related violations, in particular arbitrary
arrests and detentions resulting from operations carried
out by the defence forces in response to the growing
number of attacks, ambushes and civilian abductions
perpetrated by armed groups. We reiterate that the
methodology used for this assessment does not reflect
the actual efforts of the authorities of the Central
African Republic in that matter. The methodology
needs to be reviewed and improved in order to take
a constructive approach. We welcome MINUSCA’s
support to the Central African Republic’s penitentiary
system, and in view of the immense needs, we call for
the mobilization of all partners. We have also taken
note of the measures taken by the Secretary-General
to address the allegations involving United Nations
personnel on the ground, and we hope those isolated
cases will not tarnish the Mission’s image in the eyes of
the population.
We cannot discuss the multidimensional challenges
facing the Central African Republic without shining a
light on the country’s worsening economic crisis. The
coronavirus disease pandemic, rising oil and commodity
prices and the liquidity crisis are undermining the
economic fabric of the Central African Republic, already
under the strain created by the country’s instability. We
welcome the credit facility granted by the International
Monetary Fund and call for strengthening that support
in the light of the impact that the crisis in the Sudan is
having on the Central African market.
The humanitarian crisis in the Central African
Republic is affecting 3.4 million people, which means
that 56 per cent of the population is in need of assistance
and protection. The situation is steadily worsening
against the backdrop of a surge in violence against
civilians by armed groups and the influx of refugees
and returnees from the Sudan. It is therefore vital to
support the financing of the humanitarian response
12/33

20/06/2023

plan, which is funded only to 28 per cent. We salute
the commitment of the humanitarians on the ground,
despite the known security risks. Ghana, Mozambique
and Gabon underscore that the vulnerability of the
country’s populations is being exacerbated by the
effects of climate change, which are ruining the
livelihoods of several million people and worsening
community tensions.
In conclusion, Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon
reaffirm their solidarity with the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic and their
commitment to respecting the country’s independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We reiterate our
support for Special Representative Rugwabiza and her
team for their tireless efforts on the ground.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Ms. Rugwabiza, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Bahous, the Executive Director of UNWomen, African Union Commissioner Adeoye and
Mr. Ngatondang for their insightful remarks. I would
also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Central African Republic to this meeting.
At the outset, I want to express our sympathy to the
Burundian peacekeepers who were injured in an attack
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) on 13 June.
We reaffirm our commitment to the sovereignty,
independence and ownership of the Central African
Republic in defining political priorities. Nevertheless,
we are concerned about the recent decisions to
suspend local elections and to call for a constitutional
referendum to be held on 30 July. It is crucial for the
people of the Central African Republic to be provided
with the information they need to guide their opinions,
with sufficient time and in an open and inclusive
civic space. We condemn the violence in the country
and urge all armed groups to lay down their weapons
unconditionally. We also deplore the presence of
foreign armed groups and militias. At the same time,
we encourage the authorities to continue investing in
a holistic manner by prioritizing political dialogue and
the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic over
military action and keeping permanent demobilization
at the forefront of their work. We also commend the
ongoing efforts to address bilateral issues with Chad
through sustained dialogue.
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

The impact of military operations on local
communities is often intolerable, and military
gains should be accompanied by progress in good
governance, accountability and the strengthening of
the judicial system. The conflict in the Sudan has had
severe spillover effects in the Central African Republic,
and we express our solidarity with the authorities as
they continue to welcome refugees and returnees.
Greater support from the international community and
humanitarian partners is clearly necessary.
We are alarmed by the figures for abductions and the
recruitment and use of children in the Central African
Republic, an area where the movement of armed groups
has led to increasing numbers of grave violations.
Sustainable financing, especially for projects such
as vocational training centres, is crucial to returning
children to society following their release from armed
groups. Malta calls on Member States to ensure proper
financing for child protection efforts through the Fifth
Committee and MINUSCA.
We also welcome today’s focus on women and peace
and security in the Central African Republic. Gendersensitive conflict analysis has been largely absent from
the reporting in this area, particularly on women’s role
in political security, peace and humanitarian efforts and
on the barriers related to that. In a week when we are
marking the International Day for Women in Diplomacy,
we emphasize the importance of ensuring that women
are respected, consulted and included in every process
of policy- and decision-making. Incitement, violence
and intimidation directed at women human rights
defenders and peacebuilders and women’s civil-society
groups must cease if we are to see a safe environment
that ensures women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation. The establishment of gender-responsive
legal frameworks and the decree on the implementation
of the parity law, as well as a revision of the law on
political parties and the electoral code, must be given
priority. We commend MINUSCA and Ms. Rugwabiza’s
leadership in their renewed efforts to coordinate
with the authorities and extend State authority in the
country. We deplore the allegations of sexual abuse by
a contingent from the Mission and fully support the
decision to repatriate the peacekeepers concerned. We
strongly encourage MINUSCA to take every possible
measure to assist and support the victims.
In conclusion, we continue to believe that
addressing the root causes of conflict while investing
in the protection and promotion of the fundamental

S/PV.9352

rights of the people of the Central African Republic,
especially women and children, is key to unlocking
peace and security in the region. It is only by cultivating
an inclusive public space and extending State authority
that a peaceful and promising future for the country
can be advanced.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I welcome Foreign Minister Baipo Temon of
the Central African Republic to today’s meeting.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Rugwabiza, Executive Director Bahous and
Commissioner Adeoye for their briefings. I also listened
carefully to Mr. Ngatondang’s statement. In connection
with the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/442), I
would like to make the following points.
First, there has been important progress on the
peace process in the Central African Republic. China
commends the Government of the Central African
Republic for honouring the commitments in the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, accelerating the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration process
and advancing local-level peace processes. China is
pleased to see that a number of armed groups in the
Central African Republic have recently announced
their disarmament, and we call on those that have not
yet disarmed to cease hostilities and join the peace
process as soon as possible so that all the parties can
jointly uphold the hard-won gains of peace.
China appreciates and supports the continuing
constructive role played by the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Economic Community of Central African States,
among others, and expects the international community
to provide financial and technical support for the Central
African Republic’s peace process, local elections
and disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration process. The constitutional referendum
to be held next month is a major step in the political
process. China encourages all the parties to enhance
mutual trust through dialogue and to resolve possible
differences. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) can provide necessary support
for the conduct of the referendum in the light of the
country’s needs.
Secondly, China supports the efforts of the
Government of the Central African Republic in

23-1776813/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

maintaining security and protecting civilians. At the
moment armed groups are still carrying out violent
activities in regions outside Bangui, the capital,
threatening local stability. An attack took place in
March in the town of Bambari, resulting in casualties
of 11 Chinese citizens. China strongly condemns it
and requests an in-depth investigation and severe
punishments for the perpetrators. We are grateful
to MINUSCA for providing enhanced protection of
Chinese citizens on the ground and for the necessary
assistance offered to the Chinese Embassy.
The security and humanitarian situation in
the Central African Republic’s border areas with
neighbouring countries such as Chad and the Sudan
needs major attention. The international community,
in a targeted manner, should help the Central African
armed forces enhance security capacity-building and
guard against the threat of armed groups. We must
support the Central African Republic in bolstering
border control with its neighbours and in safeguarding
common security. As mandated by the Security Council,
MINUSCA should support the security forces of the
Central African Republic in enhancing deployment and
protecting civilians.
Thirdly, on multiple occasions, the Government of
the Central African Republic has made strong requests
for the Security Council to completely lift the arms
embargo. Those requests have received a positive
response from countries of the region. On 13 June, the
African Union Peace and Security Council reiterated
the request for lifting the arms embargo on the Central
African Republic. The Security Council should heed the
legitimate aspirations of the Central African Republic
and countries of the region by adjusting, without delay,
the ill-fitting sanctions measures and completely lifting
the embargo as soon as possible.
Under the leadership of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Rugwabiza, MINUSCA has
enhanced coordination with the Government of the
Central African Republic and worked extensively in
responding to the threat of armed groups, protecting
civilians and supporting local elections, among
other things. Incidents of status-of-forces agreement
violations have seen a marked decline, which fully
demonstrates that establishing mutual trust with the
country concerned and engaging in cooperation are
prerequisites for the successful mandate delivery of any
peacekeeping operation. China supports MINUSCA
and the Special Representative of the Secretary14/33

20/06/2023

General in playing a greater role in the peace process of
the Central African Republic.
Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior (Brazil): My
delegation would like to thank the briefers for their
insights and welcome the Foreign Minister of the
Central African Republic to today’s meeting.
With regard to the most recent developments on
the ground, my delegation wishes to highlight the
following points.
First, Brazil remains worried about the humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic. We note with
concern the security vacuum created by the withdrawal
of the Central African Republic-Chad-Sudan tripartite
joint force from the border area and its potential
implications, particularly in relation to the protection
of civilians and the already dire humanitarian situation.
The influx of Sudanese refugees and returnees since
April has also had a serious impact on the humanitarian
situation, adding an extra challenge to the provision
of humanitarian assistance. Furthermore, we find
alarming the recurrent use of explosive devices, which
hampers humanitarian access. Their impact on civilians,
humanitarian actors and peacekeepers is a distressing
trend. We salute the work done by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to mitigate
that threat.
Secondly, we wish to underscore the key role played
by the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes in the implementation of the 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and commend the Central
African authorities for the progress in dissolving armed
groups. In order to complement those DDR activities,
the Government has also been working with MINUSCA
to put in place violence reduction programmes in local
communities. We want to encourage the Government
to persevere not just in that partnership but also in
its ongoing work to reintegrate ex-combatants into
the national defence and internal security forces.
Nevertheless, we remain concerned about reports of
continued violence, as well as by the emergence of
armed self-defence groups.
Thirdly, we believe that it is crucial to strengthen
the presence of State authority across the country
and thereby enforce the rule of law, especially in the
light of the reports of human rights and international
humanitarian law violations. In that vein, we would
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

like to reiterate our support for the efforts of the local
authorities to deliver justice, in particular through the
Special Criminal Court, and to the work of MINUSCA
to assist in the operationalization of the Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation Commission. We would
like to congratulate the Government of the Central
African Republic on its efforts to decentralize the
peace process.
My fourth and last point relates to the contribution
of regional organizations to the peace process in the
Central African Republic. In that regard, it is particularly
encouraging to see the renewed engagement of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
in favour of the implementation of the September
2021 road map. We thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Rugwabiza for her active
participation in the process and hope that the technical
support and leadership provided by Angola, as well as
the monitoring mechanisms agreed, will continue to
bear fruit.
Before I conclude, let me welcome the final report
(see S/2023/360) of the Panel of Experts on the Central
African Republic and express our sincere appreciation
for its efforts to provide input to enable us to have
a broader, clearer picture of the situation and its
respective challenges.
Finally, I wish to reiterate Brazil’s commitment to
collaborating with other Council members to support
the fulfilment of MINUSCA’s mandate.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Valentine Rugwabiza, UNWomen Executive Director Sima Bahous and African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security Bankole Adeoye for their briefings.
We listened attentively to the statement made by
Mr. Rhosyns Ngatondang.
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic, Francophonie and Central Africans
abroad, Ms. Sylvie Baipo-Temon; the Secretary of
State for External Relations of Angola, Esmeralda
Mendonça; and the representatives of Rwanda,
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Equatorial Guinea.
We are closely following the situation in the
Central African Republic. We note with satisfaction

S/PV.9352

that, overall, the situation is under the control of the
Government forces. With the support of partners,
including Russia, the authorities of the Central African
Republic have managed to overcome the most difficult
phase in the fight against those who have attempted
to effect an unconstitutional change of power through
armed force. However, security threats have not been
fully eliminated. The Coalition of Patriots for Change,
the largest and most combat-ready faction, has not
given up the armed struggle against the Government.
Militants are especially active in the border areas
with Chad, the Sudan, Cameroon and the Democratic
Republic on the Congo. The porosity of borders and
lack of financial resources for border control do not
allow Central African authorities to effectively counter
the cross-border movement of illegal armed groups and
their weapons supply. Increased coordination between
Bangui and neighbouring countries is required, and
we are seeing progress in that regard, including in
the military sphere. Targeted donor assistance is
also crucial.
Although it has been eased, the current arms
embargo reduces the effectiveness of the armed forces
of the Central African Republic, markedly constraining
Bangui’s ability to impose order in the country and
curbing threats from militants, who refuse to engage in
the national reconciliation process.
A letter (S/2023/383) from the Secretary-General
circulated to Security Council members in May cites
the progress by the Government of the Central African
Republic in meeting benchmarks for reviewing
the sanctions regime. According to United Nations
officials, the authorities have conducted considerable
work on arms control, disarmament and the social
reintegration of ex-combatants. The current situation
therefore requires the complete lifting of the arms
embargo on Bangui in order to strengthen the capacity
of the national armed forces and law enforcement
units. Such an approach is fully in the interest of
sustainable settlement and reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
Both the African Union and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, as well as
the African members of the Security Council, are
unequivocally in favour of lifting the restrictions. The
Central Africans themselves are constantly talking
about it. It is obvious that long-term stabilization and
progress in the political process are impossible without

23-1776815/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

effective support for the Central African Republic in
enhancing the military capabilities of national armed
forces and law enforcement units.
Nevertheless, we believe that the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which was signed in Bangui on
6 February 2019, remains the basis for achieving
stability and security in the country. We welcome the
practical steps taken by Bangui to advance the political
process, with a view to normalizing the situation in the
Central African Republic. The illegal armed groups
that have not signed the Luanda road map, under
which the parties committed to ending hostilities and
beginning the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, must join
the process. Militant leaders must abandon violent
methods of struggle. They need to begin full-fledged
dialogue with Bangui since there is no alternative to
the political and diplomatic settlement in the Central
African Republic. We note with satisfaction the
announcement of the dissolution of five illegal armed
groups in late April. To date, nine of the 14 signatory
groups to the Political Agreement have been disbanded.
This is a milestone in the process of implementing
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. However, for further progress, Bangui
must continue to receive appropriate financial support.
We welcome the efforts of the Central African
Republic authorities to establish a State presence,
strengthen administrative structures, pursue security
sector reform, develop the judiciary and prepare for the
first local elections since 1988. We wish Bangui every
success in organizing the constitutional referendum in
late July. We believe that issues of internal reforms are
the sovereign prerogative of the people of the Central
African Republic, who have the inalienable right to
determine their own development path.
The dire socioeconomic situation of the country is
threatening to reverse the achievements of recent years
in the field of national reconciliation. Developments
in neighbouring Sudan are further aggravating the
humanitarian situation in the country and increasing
the burden on the State budget. About 14,000 refugees
have already reached the country. In that regard, we
believe that the Central African Republic should receive
all possible assistance through international financial
institutions and the United Nations. We consider
it unacceptable to politicize the provision of donor
16/33

20/06/2023

assistance, since it is primarily the civilian population
that suffers from such actions.
An important factor in building Bangui’s capacity
to mount an effective humanitarian response and, in
general, to improve the socioeconomic situation in the
Central African Republic is the ability to make further
progress in ensuring the full participation of the country
in the Kimberley Process. It is important that a review
mission of the Process be sent to the Central African
Republic so that specialists can see for themselves
that all the conditions for change on the ground have
been met.
We continue to help the Central African Republic
build its military capabilities. With the knowledge of the
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013), more than one batch of military equipment
were delivered to the country. Russian instructors are
working successfully in the Central African Republic,
where they were sent in response to a request from the
legitimate authorities. The campaign to discredit them
and, in general, attempts to lay the blame for human
rights violations on the Central African Republic armed
forces and bilateral partners are tailor-made and are not
substantiated by established facts.
We consider it important that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic continues to render
effective support to the authorities. We thank the
countries contributing troops who risk their lives every
day in doing their duty. The United Nations Mission
plays an important role in ensuring security and
safety in the country. On the whole, we believe that it
is important for the Mission to focus resources, first
and foremost, on helping the authorities establish State
control, counter armed groups and protect civilians.
We are also convinced that the full implementation
of the mandate is possible only through continued
constructive cooperation with the authorities of the
Central African Republic.
Clearly, only a comprehensive normalization of
the security situation will enable Bangui to focus on
creating a constructive domestic agenda for the benefit
of citizens and the State. In July, the Security Council
should do everything possible to facilitate this process,
including lifting the remaining sanctions restrictions
against the legitimate Government.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Ms. Rugwabiza, Special Representative of the
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
Executive Director Bahous, Commissioner Adeoye
and Mr. Ngatondang for their briefings. I welcome the
participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Republic in this meeting.
I will make four points in response to what we
have heard.
First, the United Kingdom reiterates the continued
importance of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. It
remains the only viable option to end protracted conflict.
We call on the Central African Republic authorities
to build on political progress and ensure meaningful
engagement with all political actors in the country.
We commend the work of Special Representative
Rugwabiza and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), along with strong regional
engagement in supporting those efforts.
Secondly, the United Kingdom highlights the need
for transparent democratic processes in the Central
African Republic. President Touadera’s plans to
overhaul the Central African Republic’s Constitution
risk unravelling years of the hard work to strengthen
the country’s democratic system. The referendum
serves as a distraction from the main issues facing the
country, including the dire humanitarian, economic
and security situation.
Plans for the constitutional referendum have
delayed local elections that are part of the democratic
restructuring of the Central African Republic and are
integral to its peace process. The United Kingdom
hopes to see peaceful and credible local elections take
place as quickly as possible.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the increasing
disregard for human rights in the Central African
Republic. The Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2023/442) noted that State actors, including the
Russian mercenary Wagner Group, perpetrated the
highest number of human rights violations during the
reporting period. As in other contexts, the Wagner
Group continues to play a destabilizing role in the
country. We again call on the Government of the Central
African Republic to coordinate fully with all security
actors operating in the country in order to ensure that
they abide by applicable international humanitarian
law and international human rights law and that all
perpetrators of violations or abuses are held to account.

S/PV.9352

Finally, the recent allegations of acts of sexual
exploitation and abuse by some MINUSCA personnel
are deeply concerning. We support the measures
taken by the Special Representative in repatriating
the contingent of troops, and we urge a thorough
investigation of all such allegations.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador): I thank Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic, for her
briefing. I also thank Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Executive
Director of UN-Women; Mr. Bankole Adeoye,
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security; and Mr. Rhosyns Ngatondang,
Head of Association, Jeunesse en Marche pour le
Développement en Centrafrique, for their briefings. I
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic to this meeting.
The Central African Republic shares vast borders
with five countries that are no strangers to political
instability and violence. With that in mind, we
recognize the challenges the country faces as it receives
flows of migrants that are overwhelming humanitarian
contingents. Porous borders provide corridors that
enable organized crime to threaten the stability of the
Central African Republic. The country’s heritage of
natural resources continues to be spoils fought over by
transnational armed groups.
On the political front, we urge the Government to
continue to promote dialogue so that the constitutional
referendum can be held on 30 July in a civil manner
and, above all, in a climate of peace. Democratic
processes, particularly local elections, are vital for
achieving decentralization. We hope that preparations
for municipal elections slated for July will resume in
September. We must more aid to the basket fund in
order to ensure the holding of those elections.
Ecuador will continue championing greater and
more significant participation of women in national
political life. We urge continued efforts to reach the
quota of 35 per cent participation of women in political
office — a quota set in 2016.
Efforts to advance the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, with progress on
the joint road map for peace in the Central African
Republic of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Luanda road map process, as
well as the active contacts the Government pursues

23-1776817/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

with neighbouring countries and the prefectures, in
addition to broadening the process internally with
the support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) — all show significant strides
towards peace.
In terms of security, territorial control is
essential, both for strengthening the rule of law and
for institution-building and decentralization. For this
reason, the progress made in the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and the recent announcement
of the disbanding of two armed groups are encouraging.
We commend the work of the Government and
MINUSCA in strengthening the presence of the State
in some areas following six years of absence, as well as
in initiating community efforts aimed at restoring the
social fabric.
We see with concern that the indiscriminate use
of explosives and mines has increased. The population
continues to be victimized by these dangers, as well as
by extortion and the imposition of illegal taxes, which
is why we call for the continuation of MINUSCA’s
joint efforts to clear these devices and protect civilians.
We urge the Central African Republic’s neighbouring
countries to cooperate in the fight against the illegal
trafficking of arms and explosives.
On the humanitarian situation, the report of the
Secretary General (S/2023/442) indicates that due to
the conflict in the Sudan, the number of people crossing
into the Central African Republic is increasing.
Humanitarian access to the displaced will worsen with
the onset of the rainy season. It is estimated that 56 per
cent of the Central African population will require
humanitarian assistance. Efforts should be made to
assist this population through voluntary contributions,
and a support system is needed to open up financial
flows that would enable the State to provide basic
services for their development.
We continue to receive information on violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
We deplore gender-based violence and the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war, as well as violations
perpetrated against ethnic and religious minorities.
We call for investigations into these violations, from
wherever they come. Combating impunity is essential to
ending cycles of violence and promoting reconciliation.
18/33

20/06/2023

We encourage the work carried out by the Special
Criminal Court for war crimes and crimes against
humanity, as well as the Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Reconciliation Commission. We hope that the
Central African Republic will continue to work with
the Peacebuilding Commission to strengthen the
judicial system.
Finally, Ecuador appreciates the work of MINUSCA
and its active cooperation with the Government of the
Central African Republic. We encourage continued
dialogue to provide better results for the population that
the Mission has the mandate and obligation to protect.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Rugwabiza, Executive Director
Bahous, African Union Commissioner Adeoye and
Mr. Ngatondang for their briefings. I also welcome the
presence of Her Excellency Foreign Minister BaipoTemon from Central African Republic, and other
representatives from the States of the region.
Let me first commend the continued dedication
demonstrated by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) in difficult conditions. The
consolidation of peace and stability in the Central
African Republic needs the effective implementation
of MINUSCA’s mandate. In that regard, we welcome
ongoing close communication between the Government
and the MINUSCA leadership.
However, it is deeply unsettling to hear of the serious
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by United Nations peacekeepers. Any allegations
should be thoroughly investigated, and a zero-tolerance
policy for those heinous acts strictly upheld.
The security situation across the Central African
Republic remains volatile due to continued military
confrontations with armed groups. Violence and
hostilities have compelled people to flee their homes,
and women and children are suffering the most. Our
already deep concerns are compounded by reports of
sexual violence, including as a tactic of war, as well as
the recruitment and use of children in conflict. We also
continuously apprehend the human rights violations
and abuses committed by armed groups, State agents
and other security personnel that were mentioned in
the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/442)
as allegedly responsible. To change course, the 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

Central African Republic must be fully implemented
by the signatories and with the highest priority. In that
regard, I would like to highlight the following points.
First of all, it remains essential to place primary
focus on inclusive dialogue and the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration (DDRR)
process to achieve sustainable peace in the country. We
commend the continuous efforts of the Government
of the Central African Republic to engage with armed
groups to seek a political solution, and we further
welcome the resulting dissolution of several armed
groups since the last briefing of the Security Council
on the Central African Republic (see S/PV.9265). The
ongoing offensive campaign should be accompanied
by renewed attempts to bring those still fighting,
though now on the defensive, back to the negotiating
table. Demonstrating the successful transition of excombatants is key to motivating fragmented armed
groups to participate in the national DDRR programme.
We commend the Government’s efforts made together
with international partners to reduce the gap between
demobilization and the start of the socioeconomic
reintegration process, and for a smooth transition.
Secondly, we need to further promote a regional
approach. The concentration of armed group
activities and illicit flows of weapons in border areas
clearly indicates the importance of more effective
border controls in the region. The joint commission
frameworks for cross-border issues with neighbouring
countries must be more extensively utilized. Those
frameworks should also contribute to strengthening
natural-resource management to prevent illegal
exploitation and trafficking of precious minerals.
The humanitarian situation around the borders is
another serious concern. It has been worsened by the
massive inflow of refugees due to the recent conflict
in the Sudan, despite the Central African Republic’s
efforts to host over 10,000 Sudanese refugees. We need
a coordinated approach by countries of the region to
address the severe humanitarian needs and prevent
any exploitation by armed groups. Japan has provided
emergency food assistance to alleviate the human
security crisis.
Lastly, the conduct of credible, peaceful and
inclusive local elections remains the key to further
extending State authority and promoting the rule of
law. Stable local governance needs legitimate leaders
supported by people’s confidence. In that context,

S/PV.9352

MINUSCA’s support role, in close coordination with
the Government, is crucial. Japan remains committed
to playing its part to assist in the betterment of the
people of the Central African Republic.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rugwabiza for her leadership and briefing today. The
United States appreciates her, her team’s and the troopand police-contributing countries’ commitment to peace
in the Central African Republic. I also wish to thank
Ms. Bahous, Ambassador Adeoye and Mr. Ngatondang
for their informative and comprehensive briefings. I
also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Republic to this meeting.
The United States is gravely concerned by
reports earlier this month alleging that Tanzanian
peacekeepers committed sexual exploitation and abuse.
We commend the Secretariat for its swift decision
following a preliminary investigation to repatriate the
unit in support of the Secretary-General’s policy of
zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse and
in line with resolution 2272 (2016). Such behaviour is
unacceptable, antithetical to the spirit of peacekeeping
and undermines the positive contributions of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
to the country. We call for accountability and the
full implementation of resolution 2272 (2016) when
addressing those acts.
Separately, we commend the Mission’s progress
in conducting joint and coordinated patrols with
Central African security forces, which have deterred
armed group attacks against civilians by proactively
addressing sources of instability.
MINUSCA has also played a key role in supporting
the Government’s preparations for upcoming local
elections, including by encouraging political dialogue
and providing logistical, security and technical support.
The Mission’s mandate is clear in scope: it is only
authorized to support the Central African Republic’s
2023 republican dialogue and local elections and no
other political processes.
The United States is concerned by the
announcement by the Central African Republic’s
Government that it is proceeding with efforts to amend
the country’s Constitution to end or extend term limits.
It is disappointing that historic local elections, which
are important for decentralization and increasing

23-1776819/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

political representation, have been deprioritized and
delayed in favour of a constitutional referendum that
risks destabilizing the country.
Let me be clear: the Central African Republic has
the right to amend its Constitution. But we urge the
Government to ensure the inclusion of diverse political
and civil society actors in any potential revisions of the
country’s foundational document. A transparent, free
and fair referendum process that reflects the will of
the Central African people is critical to lasting peace
and security.
Turning to the Central African Republic’s sanctions
regime, which the Security Council will soon negotiate,
I would like to underscore the important role that the
notification process plays in ensuring transparency.
The arms embargo does not prevent the Central African
Republic’s Government from securing the weapons it
needs to confront armed groups. In fact, as the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic explained during his visit to the Central
African Republic earlier this month, the Central African
Republic’s Government is able to obtain all types of
weapons and aircraft for the training of its armed forces.
What the embargo seeks to prevent is the transfer of
weapons to armed groups, which is something that has
clear implications for the security of the Central African
Republic. We look forward to engaging constructively
with fellow Council members and the Central African
Republic’s Government throughout negotiations on the
sanctions regime’s renewal.
Finally, as we have seen over the course of the
past dry season, there is no military-only solution to
the Central African Republic’s crisis. The only durable
solution is through political dialogue, including full
and inclusive implementation of the 2019 Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and the regionally brokered 2021
road map. Unfortunately, some predatory entities in
the Central African Republic continue to destabilize
the country, threaten the peace process and undermine
the Central African Republic’s sovereignty in order
to further exploit Central African wealth for their
own gain.
Reporting by the Panel of Experts on the Central
African Republic clearly indicates that Wagner Group
forces, referred to as “Russian instructors”, are not
only engaged in indiscriminate and brutal combat
20/33

20/06/2023

operations, but are expanding their control of the
Central African Republic’s natural resources, forcing
out legitimate businesses in the process. For example,
the Panel’s report issued in May (see S/2023/360)
notes that those so-called Russian instructors have
occupied the premises of a Central African diamondbuying company in Bria for over a year without the
company’s consent.
We also remain gravely concerned by the
Wagner Group and the Government forces preventing
MINUSCA’s unfettered freedom of movement to protect
civilians and investigate human rights violations.
Reporting over the past year by the Independent Expert
on the Central African Republic, Yao Agbetse, further
underscores the brutal human rights abuses that the
Wagner Group forces are inflicting on Central African
civilians and Government officials, including killings,
sexual violence and other physical abuse. Without
accountability for those heinous acts, the Central
African Republic will not be able to achieve the peace
that is necessary to unlock the country’s vast potential.
The United States remains committed to the
Central African people and to ensuring justice for the
crimes committed against them. We again call upon
all actors to lay down their weapons and choose the
path of dialogue in order to achieve a long-delayed
sustainable peace.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Rugwabiza
for her briefing. I also thank the UN-Women Executive
Director, the African Union Commissioner and the civil
society representative for their insights. I welcome the
participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Republic to this meeting.
Allow me to make three points.
First, Albania is gravely concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the country, which is
worsened by the Sudanese conflict and leading to
an increased number of refugees and returnees. We
are also disappointed to see that the challenges to
humanitarian access persist in combination with the
continuing threats to civilians, movement and safety
owing to the activities of armed groups. We encourage
the authorities to push towards increasing access to
justice for victims, including those of sexual violence,
so that they may come forward without fear and to
initiate swift and comprehensive investigations into
human rights violations.
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

As mentioned in the report of the Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic covering the most
recent reporting period (see S/2023/360), the Wagner
Group is responsible for grave human rights violations,
non-compliance with notifications requirements and
unilateral occupation of the premises of a private
diamond company.
Secondly, Albania is encouraged by the efforts
of the Government to revitalize the peace process
while harmonizing the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
and the Luanda road map. The decentralization of
the peace process is a step forward towards a muchneeded inclusive environment and the de-escalation
of the conflict through dialogue with emphasis on the
continuation of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.
Albania welcomes the electoral preparation and
the signing of the integrated elections security plan.
Nevertheless, we are concerned about the call for a
constitutional referendum and about the postponement
of the preparations of the local elections. We call on the
Government to ensure the inclusivity and transparency
of that process, thus engaging with opposition and civil
society, which would provide credibility and broad
consensus to the process. In addition, we echo the call
of the Secretary-General on political leaders to refrain
from actions, including hate speech and incitement
to violence, which could undermine progress and the
implementation of the Political Agreement.
Thirdly, Albania appreciates the continuous
engagement of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), its renewed cooperation with
the authorities and that dynamic response in bringing
stability. We hope that relationship will deepen and
include solutions to the challenges that MINUSCA is
facing, namely, maintaining respect for the status-offorces agreement and ensuring that the Mission can
make full use of its aerial capacities.
Lastly, we appreciate the quick response and
measures taken by the Mission on the latest case
of sexual exploitation and abuse, in line with the
commitment to zero tolerance of such incidents and
the resolution 2272 (2016). No one should be immune
to accountability.

S/PV.9352

The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
I would like to thank Special Representative
Rugwabiza and Commissioner Adeoye for their
comprehensive briefings. I would also like to thank
Executive Director Bahous for highlighting the
situation of women and girls in the Central African
Republic, as well as Mr. Rhosyns Ngatondang for
providing us with his first-hand insights. Additionally, I
welcome the participation of Ms. Baipo Temon, Foreign
Minister of the Central African Republic, as well as the
representatives of regional States in this meeting.
Today’s briefing reminds us of the important
gains achieved thus far, as well as the need to continue
support for the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic in order to sustain disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration efforts
and security sector reform programmes. In that context,
I would like to address three key points today.
First, we must ensure security if we are to see
lasting peace and stability in the Central African
Republic. The security situation there is of significant
concern. The proliferation of armed groups, the use of
explosive ordnance and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources all underline the need to redouble our efforts
and strengthen existing regional arrangements to help
de-escalate tensions, address instability and secure
peace. Tackling the problem of armed groups is a
prerequisite for sustaining political efforts. We reiterate
how important it is to have a ceasefire that is respected
by all parties, as well as strengthened bilateral and
multilateral mechanisms with neighbouring countries,
as the recent joint operation with Chad demonstrated.
The recent visit to the country by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic provided
Council members with an opportunity to better
understand the progress made across the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration efforts,
security-sector reform and other key areas, as well
as to appreciate first-hand the commendable work of
peacekeepers and other stakeholders on the ground.
Secondly, against that backdrop, there is an urgent
need to address the ongoing humanitarian challenges
in the country. Nearly three quarters of the population
of the Central African Republic face daunting

23-1776821/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

economic and humanitarian challenges, including
food insecurity. The situation of displaced persons
remains a pressing concern, especially in the light of
recent developments in neighbouring countries. We
encourage the Central African Republic, the region
and all humanitarian stakeholders to coordinate
collectively to facilitate humanitarian access and
ensure the safety of humanitarian actors. Likewise,
the manifestations of climate and ecological change,
among other overlapping factors, continue to aggravate
the humanitarian and security situation and further fuel
communal tensions. The reduced rainfall throughout the
region has brought changes in transhumance corridors,
which in turn fuel tensions and exacerbate violence. In
order to address the impact of those issues on security,
we encourage integrating a climate-sensitive approach
within the context of the Central African Republic that
enhances the incorporation of climate-related data
and information into risk mitigation and management
strategies. In that regard, we commend the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to increase its use of renewable energy
sources. The Council would also benefit from updates
on the impact of climate change on peace and security
in the Central African Republic.
Thirdly, we must safeguard the gains made in
cooperation with MINUSCA. We are encouraged
by the continued constructive cooperation between
the Central African Republic and the Mission. The
protection of civilians remains a fundamental priority,
and we value the crucial role of Ms. Rugwabiza and
MINUSCA in bolstering the country’s security
capabilities. Maintaining support for efforts to
strengthen institutions and sustain the extension of State
authority is key, including support for the preparation
of inclusive elections. We are also encouraged by the
efforts to incorporate gender-responsive approaches
and initiatives that are aimed at including women in
conflict management and working to reduce community
violence. In line with our commitment to the women
and peace and security agenda, we believe that there
is a need to continue supporting women’s economic
participation and leadership training to adequately
address the problem of conflict-related sexual violence
and strengthen their participation in the peace process.
We echo the Secretary-General in condemning any
form of sexual exploitation or abuse and reaffirm our
commitment to a zero-tolerance policy.
22/33

20/06/2023

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates continues
to support all steps aimed at helping the people of the
Central African Republic achieve their aspirations for
security, stability and prosperity. We must make every
effort possible to bolster those initiatives as the country
makes strides towards peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic.
Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): First of all, I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on the United Arab Emirates’
presidency of the Security Council and commend
you for your able leadership today. On behalf of the
Government and the people of the Central African
Republic, I would like to warmly greet everyone here
today and express our sincere thanks for their support
for the cause of the Central African Republic. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for her presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/442), the Executive Director
of UN-Women for her briefing on the situation of
women and girls in the Central African Republic,
the Head of Association Jeunesse en Marche pour le
Développement en Centrafrique for his call for peace
in Central African Republic and his Association’s
contribution to countering hate speech, and all the
Ambassadors and representatives here today who spoke
to express their support, solidarity, compassion and
encouragement, as well as their concerns.
As before, it is a moral duty and a true honour for
me to take the floor in this Chamber on behalf of my
country, the Central African Republic, as the Security
Council considers the report of the Secretary-General
on political and security developments in the Central
African Republic. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate to Secretary-General Guterres the gratitude of
my Government and people for his tireless commitment
to peace, stability and development in the world in
general and the Central African Republic in particular.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s report,
I would first like to say how pleased I am by the
acknowledgement of the significant efforts of the
Government of the Central African Republic. The report
is commendable. Even if it contains a few inaccuracies
and inconsistencies, unlike its predecessors it reflects
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

the progress that has been made. It is important to
note that since the return to constitutional order with
the accession to the executive of His Excellency
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President of the
Republic and Head of State, the Government has
continued to make every possible effort for a definitive
return to peace, strengthening the rule of law, restoring
State authority throughout the country, preserving
democratic gains and improving our co-existence,
with the goal of stabilizing the country so that we can
create the conditions necessary for its development.
Those efforts have been made with the support of the
international community through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), of
the African continent through the African Union,
of the subregion through organizations such as the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), and all the bilateral, technical
and financial partners of the Central African Republic.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the international community and MINUSCA for
their strong support, improved coordination and the
results achieved, and the African Union, especially
the three non-permanent members of the Security
Council — Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique — for
their outstanding efforts in championing the cause and
voice of their sister Central African Republic within
the Security Council, while effectively living up to
the founding principles of our continental African
community aimed at defending the interests of Africa
and its member States in the face of the strategic
challenges that we represent on the international
stage. My thanks also go to the AU Peace and Security
Council, for its communiqué in support of the Central
African Republic’s legitimate demands, as well as
the AU Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security, the AU Panel of the Wise and, as I said,
various subregional organizations such as the ICGLR
and ECCAS for their strong support for the political
process for peace in the Central African Republic.
On the security front — and excuse me,
Mr. President, for this lengthy statement — significant
progress has been made. The Government remains
committed to its decentralization policy, having
restored State authority to about 85 per cent of the
country’s territory. I am pleased to be able to say that
the security situation has improved. Nevertheless, it

S/PV.9352

remains volatile and therefore unpredictable owing to
the growing zeal of enemies of peace such as armed
groups and the various political actors or civilian
proxies who continue to use weapons, disinformation
and incitement to hatred and division in their refusal to
adhere to the political process for peace and stability in
the Central African Republic.
The improvement in the security situation should
be encouraged and commended. I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the combined work of the
Government, led by Mr. Félix Moloua, Prime Minister
and Head of Government, and guided by President
Touadera, with the support of MINUSCA, the Russian
Federation and Rwanda. Nor should I forget the technical
and financial partners who support us in our officertraining programmes and disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme, including,
to name only a few, the United States of America, the
World Bank and the European Union, in particular in
the context of its mission to advise our internal security
forces, the European Union Advisory Mission in the
Central African Republic.
The Central African Republic’s political and
security challenges are numerous and complex. First,
there are the negative consequences of the many military
and political crises the country has seen, which have
plunged it into a state of chronic instability fuelling
the precarious situation and the people’s poverty, both
easily manipulated in such conditions. The armed
groups carry out sporadic attacks and incursions and
use the profits from their illicit exploitation of the rich
resources in our soil to facilitate their crimes with
increasingly sophisticated weapons, all acquired with
the full knowledge of the international community
and in particular of the Security Council, which is
struggling to address the real problem in the Central
African Republic. That problem is the source providing
those weapons to the armed groups living in the bush.
Their supply channel for heavy and state-of-the-art
weapons, as well as anti-personnel mines, should be a
cause for concern in more ways than one. Considering
that no country bordering the Central African Republic
is an arms manufacturer, the supply network for the
weapons being used to massacre the people of the
Central African Republic should first and foremost be
a focus of investigation by the Council and the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. The
continued determination of armed groups stems from

23-1776823/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

the fact that they are able to freely ensure that supply
without hindrance.
In addition to the Central African Republic’s
internal challenges, the country is also landlocked,
leaving it vulnerable to cross-border challenges.
It should not be forgotten that the Central African
Republic shares borders with six States, in a subregion
that is prone to armed conflict and illicit arms
trafficking. The negative repercussions of crises outside
the Central African Republic are a real concern for
our Government, particularly the resurgence of armed
tensions in the Sudan, whose worrisome humanitarian
and security consequences are extremely alarming,
because the growing security challenges along our
borders, especially with Chad and the Sudan, encourage
the rebel activity in our country.
In the face of all those security challenges, the
Government is continuing its efforts to strengthen
bilateral and subregional cooperation, including
through joint initiatives and actions where necessary,
such as its recent action taken with Chad to disband
an armed movement seeking to use the Central African
Republic as a rear base to destabilize our brother nation
of Chad. The bilateral and subregional discussions that
we participate in are continuing. Given the scope of the
work to be carried out, we prefer direct discussions,
in the form of political consultations, to mixed
commissions, which are cumbersome to organize.
Besides that, the Government and MINUSCA should
continue their coordinated efforts, which are now
bearing fruit, in order to be even more effective in
restoring State authority throughout the country.
That is why it is important to remember that we
must work rigorously together, not to maintain a peace
that we have not yet established but to establish peace
through a policy that can consolidate our joint efforts
and stabilize the gains we have made. Overall, the aim
is to implement a comprehensive programme that takes
into account the needs relative to security and their
consolidation through the concomitant establishment
of basic services and an economic development
programme that promotes the potential of the regions
concerned. The efforts undertaken in Sam Ouandja must
therefore be pursued and supported so that — given the
vastness of the Central African Republic’s territory and
its needs in terms of road infrastructure development
and urbanization — we can provide the population with
concrete answers through coordinated, organized and
structured work.
24/33

20/06/2023

In the face of the ongoing assaults of the armed
groups, we need greater coordination in order to
avoid complaints of misunderstandings, including
those described in the Secretary-General’s report. The
Government is still waiting to hear more details in that
regard to enable it to address certain misunderstandings
that could be resolved by simple communication. Let
us not forget that it is the situation on the ground that
dictates events, and that the violations observed on both
sides can be improved only through full cooperation. I
would like to stress the need for the Council to support
the efforts undertaken by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General by ensuring that MINUSCA
has a truly robust mandate and more effective rules
of engagement.
On the political front, the Central African Republic
is continuing its efforts to take ownership of the shared
political process for peace and reconciliation. The
initiatives undertaken following the recognition of the
Luanda road map and the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic are
now being extended into rural areas and throughout the
country through an information and awareness-raising
campaign led by decentralized bodies and local players.
The Prime Minister continues to coordinate the various
components of the process. A national border security
policy has been approved. Technical subcommissions
have been set up and others are being organized. Major
joint commissions have been scheduled to review the
outcomes of the technical subcommissions’ activities.
The follow-up committee for the republican
dialogue is now operational, and the Government is
continuing to develop its useful existing frameworks
to foster a continuing dialogue aimed at resolving
differences among Central Africans. The disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration
programme, although underfunded, continues to make
significant progress. Nine disarmed and demobilized
armed groups have disbanded, thereby fulfilling the
terms of their commitment to the Political Agreement.
A process to define the criteria for identifying foreign
ex-combatants is under way. We are also making efforts
in terms of security-sector reform to support those
actions in line with the national defence plan, and it
is those outcomes that are reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, which recognizes the efforts made and
the results achieved. The alleged perpetrators of human
rights violations, including the officers concerned, are
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

being prosecuted by a military tribunal on the initiative
of the General Inspectorate of the Armed Forces.
The local elections scheduled for July have been
postponed until September. That is due to an inadequate
mobilization of funds, which has left a gap of more than
$14 million to be covered. In addition, in response to the
population’s desire for a new constitution, the President
of the Republic has announced that a referendum will
be held on 30 July. The political debates on the subject
are aimed at fomenting discord about one issue, the
third mandate, in order to make people forget that
the referendum is the expression par excellence of the
people’s sovereignty and therefore of democracy. What
we want to do is to consolidate the gains of our hardwon collective efforts through a solid fundamental law
for a future built on a foundation that ensures that the
aspirations and will of the Central African people will
be fulfilled. It is important to note that the referendum
process is completely separate from that of local
elections, which have most certainly not been cancelled
but postponed to a date that is now being set and that
the National Electoral Authority will announce soon.
In addition, it has been made clear that the process
is being led by the Central African Government and
that security is being provided by the Central African
armed forces, with the support of its bilateral partners
Russia and Rwanda. MINUSCA is not and will not be
involved in the process.
I would like to respond to an opinion expressed
today by making it clear that wanting to give people
legitimacy is in no way a distraction. What is a
distraction is wanting to legitimize armed groups so as
to keep an entire country and its population in a state
of dependence through a dialogue with its oppressors,
in accordance with which countries represented in this
Chamber have chosen firmness and justice without a
transitional phase.
With regard to human rights violations and the
fight against impunity, the Government remains
committed to combating impunity. The judicial system
has been strengthened. Rulings have been made and
criminal proceedings held. Sixty-six arrest warrants
have been issued by the Special Criminal Court. The
first judicial decisions concerning compensation for
victims have been handed down. Efforts are continuing
to address the issues of human rights violations and
sexual abuse. In addition, the Government has asked
MINUSCA to ensure coordination and collaboration
during expert fact-finding missions, especially in cases

S/PV.9352

of human rights violations. Similarly, the Government
would appreciate being informed of investigations into
allegations of human rights violations and sexual abuse
committed by MINUSCA personnel or contingents.
The Government is prepared to support MINUSCA
in its zero-tolerance policy in order to avoid tensions
such as those that followed the false allegations made
against the Gabonese contingent. Its withdrawal
without a temporary solution being put in place brought
prejudicial sentiment against the population, which was
attacked as soon as it withdrew.
The situation on the humanitarian front remains
alarming, due to the drop in the mobilization of
humanitarian assistance for the Central African
Republic, sporadic attacks by armed groups,
undermining the process of the return of displaced
persons and refugees to areas subject to frequent rebel
incursions, and new challenges linked to the fallout
from crises in neighbouring countries, in particular
the Sudan and Chad, which have brought a flood of
refugees into Central African border towns. With the
support of humanitarian partners, the Government
is meeting those new challenges in a spirit of human
and fraternal solidarity. There is an urgent need to
mobilize resources to respond to the new challenges
on the humanitarian front, and I therefore call on the
international community for support in meeting the
basic needs of vulnerable people.
On the economic and financial front, the country’s
economic situation remains difficult, which means that
the social situation is just as worrisome and difficult.
The recent approval by the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) is therefore to be welcomed, and is the reason why
the Government will continue to work with the IMF on
the necessary reforms and continue its efforts to create
the right conditions to launch the country’s economic
and social development. While welcoming the decision
to extend the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan,
the Government is working to define a new reference
framework for mobilizing resources. The paradox
represented by the difference between the country’s
wealth and the precariousness of its population is no
longer acceptable. We call on technical and financial
partners to work in accordance with the principles
of equality and respect for the sovereignty of States
without regard for geopolitical issues.
In addition to my points concerning developments
in the political and security situation, I am pleased to be
able to highlight the fact that the number of violations

23-1776825/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

of the terms of the status-of-forces agreement between
the Government and MINUSCA reflects the improved
collaboration between them, and I would like to
congratulate the Special Representative once again on
her efforts to improve the Mission’s coordination of its
work with the Government. I encourage MINUSCA to
maintain that coordination so that our combined efforts
and energies can help to secure and stabilize the Central
African Republic as soon as possible, considering that
the peacekeeping operation’s mission is approaching
its tenth anniversary. It has been 10 long years, during
which our enemies have perpetrated the most heinous
crimes and continue to do so. It is time for the fruits of
our labour to be seen and appreciated by a population
weary of the constant attacks by armed groups. In that
regard, the Central African Republic reiterates the need
to allocate to the Mission the necessary capacities to
reduce the lethal capacity of armed groups and restore
full authority to the Government so that it can lead the
way in the country’s reconstruction.
I want to clarify a few points and affirm the
excellent cooperation between MINUSCA and the
Government of the Central African Republic. The
report highlights the delays in processing visas, which
is one example of the need for coordinating our work.
After warnings about the quality of the documents made
available, a meeting between the Foreign Ministry and
MINUSCA’s legal department cleared up doubts that
MINUSCA had not provided key information that
would enable visas to be issued, specifically the dates
and duration for which the visas are requested. If I am
not mistaken, there are no longer any difficulties in that
regard, unless visa applications are submitted on the
day the applicant arrives.
It is also important to note that the Government is
continuing its efforts to fight disinformation and hate
speech. Nevertheless, the Central African Republic
calls on its partners to work to combat all forms of hate
speech and disinformation campaigns. In addition, I
invite partners to pay greater attention to the authorized
voices of the Central African Republic. The many
challenges the country faces are deliberately amplified
by harmful acts aimed at defaming, discrediting and
above all creating tensions with its partners. As we are
all victims of such disgusting campaigns, I urge that
we stay above the fray to avoid drowning in the sea of
social networks where anything and everything can be
found and where the truth struggles to emerge but with
time always will, in spite of it all.
26/33

20/06/2023

My last appeal is for respecting the dignity of the
Central African Republic, which it is still being denied
by the continuing unjust and unproductive sanctions,
including the arms embargo imposed on the Central
African Republic armed forces and the political
deadlock related to the Kimberley Process whereby
requests have been made to extend the zones that have
become compliant but where the mission for evaluating
the results achieved has been slow to be organized on
Central African territory. We realize that this refusal or
opposition to validating newly compliant areas so as to
enable the Government to start mining in those areas
is purely political, indeed geopolitical, and represents
yet another sanction on the Central African Republic.
Nonetheless, the country is willing to receive all
delegations of experts, who sometimes come looking
for problems where there are none.
It should be noted that all the sanctions that are
damaging to the Central African Republic are above
all damaging to women and young people. I followed
the Executive Director of UN-Women’s briefing with
interest, and I want to say that to achieve that ideal of
equality between men and women, we have to begin at
the beginning. In other words, we must work to provide
women with an appropriate and proper education. When
we provide women and young people with knowledge,
we will see a better Africa.
Building a country is not a simple matter; it requires
capable people. To that end, I would like to invite UNWomen to support the education of women and young
people and to support the Central African Republic’s
call to fight against the armed groups that continue to
annihilate thousands and millions of women and young
girls through rape and the murder of their husbands and
children. I invite UN-Women to exemplify the motto
“If you educate a man, you educate an individual. If you
educate a woman, you educate a nation”.
Finally, I call on the international community and
the Security Council and, in particular, the Republic of
France, to put an end to the suffering of a country and an
entire population left at the mercy of these executioners
by an embargo under the guise of notification, which is
hampering efforts to restructure the army of the Central
African Republic.
Together, let us respect the principle enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations — the equality of
nations and respect for their sovereignty. No country
present here would like to have to answer to anyone else,
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

and that is a fundamental right that we must respect,
without discrimination. The Central African Republic
is available and willing to work with the Council and to
make every effort to meet all the conditions, however
implausible they may be.
I call on Africa through the African Union, and on
our subregion through ECCAS and all its member States
present here today, and on the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, to stand alongside the
Central African Republic and call, on behalf of the
Central African Republic and on behalf of Africa, for
an end to a penitence that has lasted too long.
The Central African Republic’s inability, due to the
embargo, to equip itself and reform its security sector
without having to be under guardianship, is a handicap
for all of Africa and, first and foremost, Central Africa.
The first duty of a sovereign State is to ensure
the security of its population, a right that the Central
African Republic cannot fully enjoy because of the
unjust sanctions imposed on it. This much-decried
injustice prevents our defence and security forces from
equipping themselves to confidently carry out their
noble sovereign mission of defending the integrity of the
territory of the Central African Republic and protecting
its very resilient population that has been left to its own
devices for too long in the face of attacks and crimes
by terrorist rebels heavily equipped with sophisticated
military hardware.
That compelling observation compels the people
of the Central African Republic to consider whether,
in the end, the aim is to maintain the Central African
Republic in an absurd situation of neither peace nor
war, given that the groups operating in the Central
African Republic are not considered to be terrorists.
What is worse, these groups are legitimized by the calls
for victims to engage in dialogue with their torturers.
We also see the passivity of the Panel of Experts on the
Central African Republic with regard to the activities
of armed groups, particularly in terms of supplies. This
situation may perhaps satisfy the selfish interests of
this tiny group of armed and unarmed sponsors, both
national and international.
I wish to respond to the fact that the fear of arms
transfers to armed groups, in the context of the embargo,
is no longer an acceptable argument. In order to carry
out its sovereign mission, the armed forces of the
Central African Republic must move beyond the simple
objective of being trained — unless the goal is to leave

S/PV.9352

the Central African Republic in a chaotic situation and
at the mercy of militias operating by proxy.
I also wish to respond to a point raised here on
the Badica buying house, about which there was
disinformation during the visit of the delegation of the
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013). The Government of the Central African
Republic took the time to respond, but it is apparent
that the explanations were not heard. There was an
express request from the management of the Badica
buying house, which under threat from armed groups,
expressly requested the support of the Government of
the Central African Republic and bilateral partners
in order to ensure their safety. It was not an instance
of non-authorized or abusive use. It is important to
underscore that if the work of the Panel of Experts
had been effective, the situation would not have
deteriorated in 2020, thereby highlighting the limits of
the peacekeeping mission.
The Central African Republic will continue to
appeal to all its partners, in general, and to the United
Nations, in particular, in order to further consolidate
peace and stabilize the Central African Republic
by promoting a culture of dialogue for the benefit of
its people and by taking concrete actions to achieve
universal peace as a basis for the development and
prosperity of the Central African Republic.
In conclusion, we urge all our friendly and
brotherly countries to remain on the right side of
history — on the side of the 5 million men, women and
children of the Central African Republic, deprived of
education, protection and well-being, on the side of
the armed forces of the Central African Republic by
supporting the plea for the total and definitive lifting
of the arms embargo imposed on the regular forces of
the Central African Republic so that they can regain
their operational capacities and their dignity as peace
fighters and restore the confidence and pride of the
people of the Central African Republic.
May peace prevail in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Angola.
Ms. Mendonça (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
through you, the Government of the United Arab
Emirates, on your assumption of the presidency of the

23-1776827/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

Security Council in the month of June and to praise the
initiative of convening this important meeting on the
situation in the Central African Republic.
The Summit of Heads of State and Government
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), held on 16 September 2021, adopted
the joint road map for peace in the Central African
Republic, better known as the Luanda road map, whose
implementation by the country’s authorities created
a climate of greater political détente and promoted
the internal republican dialogue between all the
living forces of the nation. We therefore encourage
the Government of the Central African Republic and
all concerned parties to redouble their efforts in this
national process, namely by accelerating the security
sector reforms.
We are concerned, however, about the implications
of the crisis in the Sudan for stability in the Central
African Republic, namely the increase in armed group
movement and trafficking in arms and ammunition, as
well as the deterioration of the humanitarian situation
due to the flow of refugees — factors that pose serious
risks for the ongoing peace process in the country.
All States have the right to build institutional
capacity to defend themselves against internal and
external threats by equipping their defence and security
forces with personnel, weapons and equipment to
respond to their needs and challenges.
It was in that context that, during the Security
Council meeting held on 23 June 2021 (see S/PV.8802),
His Excellency Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço,
President of the Republic of Angola, in his capacity
as Chair of the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, requested the lifting of the arms
embargo against the Central African Republic in
force since 2013. Subsequently, the Council adopted
resolution 2648 (2022), which amended the exceptions
to the arms embargo, although the country was still
subject to a notification regime, which we consider to
be a requirement of little practical use, since it does
not contribute to combating the proliferation and
the illicit supply of weapons to armed groups that
threaten the peace process and stability in the Central
African Republic.
The Republic of Angola supports the total lifting
of the arms embargo imposed on the Central African
Republic, which is a position also supported by the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
28/33

20/06/2023

African States and the ICGLR, in order to allow the
defence and security forces to be properly equipped
to fully comply with their constitutional mandate to
defend and protect the country and its citizens. My
delegation hopes that the Council’s deliberations can
contribute to strengthening peace and stability in the
Central African Republic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Valentine Rugwabiza and the
other briefers for their comprehensive briefings. I also
welcome and thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Central African Republic for her detailed statement
and the Angolan Secretary of State for External
Relations and the members of the Security Council for
their statements.
The ongoing peace process and nation-building
efforts in the Central African Republic paint a picture
of optimism. Although challenges still lie ahead, we
firmly believe they are not insurmountable, especially
considering the hardships the country faced just a few
years ago. Rwanda sincerely thanks the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and all
the stakeholders involved, including the Government
of the Central African Republic, the national armed
forces, bilateral forces, regional organizations and
development partners, for their valuable contributions.
The protection of civilians against hostile armed
groups is the result of efficient coordination and
collaboration between stakeholders. However, this
achievement is not without its challenges. Recent
reports indicate a growing concern about armed
groups targeting isolated national defence posts
and ambushing peacekeeping patrols. The dynamic
evolution of militia tactics, the growing intricacies of
their activities and alliances, and the innovative use of
digital technology for improvised explosive ordinance
call for a strong and proactive response from our end.
More alarmingly, intelligence is pointing towards an
active market for lethal equipment within the region.
Meanwhile, the Government of the Central African
Republic is struggling against the constraints imposed
by the ongoing arms embargo.
The security challenges mentioned just now
pose a significant threat to the hard-earned progress
in implementing the road map to peace as well as
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

peacebuilding initiatives. It is therefore essential to lift
the arms embargo imposed on the Government of the
Central African Republic to allow it to reassert State
authority nationwide.
As a significant contributor to multilateral and
bilateral forces in the Central African Republic,
Rwanda maintains that the conditions that warranted
the arms embargo are no longer applicable. A lifting
of the embargo on the Government of the Central
African Republic would serve as a potent symbol of the
international community’s trust, solidarity and support,
which is what the Government of the Central African
Republic hopes to receive from the Security Council.
Investment in peace and security is not just
about arms and sanctions but also about nurturing
the nation’s socioeconomic fabric. If we consolidate
resources for investment in Central African Republic,
it will foster self-sufficiency and ensure sustainable
peace and security. Rwanda therefore extends a call
to action to the international community, international
financial institutions and development partners and
asks for their valuable support. Such partnerships
will enhance development in education, health care,
infrastructure and capacity-building, which will
contribute to the Central African Republic’s resilience
and economic development.
As I conclude, let me emphasize once again that
the circumstances that justified the imposition of the
arms embargo are no longer relevant, considering the
ongoing progress in the Central African Republic.
While sanctions may be needed in specific situations, it
is essential to continually assess their overall impact on
peace processes and carefully examine whether their
consequences outweigh their advantages.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to congratulate Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for her excellent work and for her briefing.
I am going to focus my brief statement on the
important need for the Security Council to declare the
lifting of the arms embargo that has weighed on the
Central African Republic since 2013. Indeed, there

S/PV.9352

have been and continue to be many voices calling for
this lifting: in January 2018, several tens of thousands
of people marched through Bangui to converge at the
martyrs’ monument calling for the end of the embargo;
on 26 September of that year, in his address to the
General Assembly, Central African President Faustin
Archange Touadera called for the end of the embargo
(see A/73/PV.9); in the final communiqué of the twentysecond ordinary session of the Conference of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), held in Kinshasa on
25 February 2023, the Heads of State and Government
expressed their solidarity with the Central African
Republic and pledged to continue their advocacy at the
Security Council to put an end to the arms embargo
imposed on it, which is the identical position to that
of the African Union, a regional organization of 54
member countries, of which 53 are States Members of
the United Nations; on 23 June 2021, in his statement
to the Security Council, Angolan President João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, in his capacity as Chair
of the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), called for the lifting of the arms
embargo imposed on the Central African Republic (see
S/PV.8802); and at that same meeting, Ambassador
Bankole Adeoye, African Union Commissioner for
Political Affairs, Peace and Security also made a
vibrant call for the lifting of the embargo.
What other voices must call for the lifting of the
embargo for that to occur? The Central African people
have called for it, the legitimate authorities of Central
African Republic have called for it, the Conference
of the Heads of States of ECCAS has called for it, the
Chair of the ICGLR has called for it, and African Union
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye has called for it.
In the face of so many legitimate requests for the
elimination of the embargo, we believe that it is time for
the Security Council to heed those voices and lift the
arms embargo, which weighs heavily on Central Africa,
so that the country can get weapons to train its armed
forces and defend itself from indiscriminate attacks
by armed groups using increasingly sophisticated
weapons, explosives and drones. It is evident that the
embargo does not affect the armed groups, which are
in contact with traffickers and criminal gangs that
supply them with those weapons. It is the Central
African Republic that is affected. As proof of that
and as indicated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in her statement, armed groups are

23-1776829/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

increasingly resorting to the use of explosives, drones
and sophisticated weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Sibomana (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation congratulates the United Arab
Emirates on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June and takes note
of the report of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations (S/2023/442).
My delegation thanks Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
for her briefing and the efforts made in the search
for a solution to the security crisis in the Central
African Republic. We also would like to thank the
briefers, namely, Commissioner Adeoye, Mr. Rhosyns
Ngatondang and the Executive Director of UN-Women,
and we welcome the presence of Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo
Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie
and Central Africans Abroad of the Central African
Republic, and of Ms. Esmeralda Mendoza, Secretary of
State for External Relations of Angola.
My delegation, which, like the other countries in
the region, is following developments in the security
and humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, would like to make a few observations, given
Burundi’s involvement in peacekeeping for several
years now, evidenced by the presence of a military
battalion on the ground.
The Burundian delegation is deeply concerned
by the increasing presence of armed groups and of
foreign mercenaries and criminals alongside them.
Indeed, based on the report of the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic (see S/2023/360), which
estimates the number of Chadian rebel groups, as well
as the Janjaweed from Darfur and the Misseriya from
the Sudan, to be 6,000, my delegation fully recognizes
the threat posed by the rise in power of those groups, in
terms of weapons and an increase in armed elements,
and their strengthened collaboration with other
armed groups.
In that regard, Burundi would like to strongly
denounce the terrorist acts perpetrated by the Coalition
of Patriots for Change, which, in applying its new
30/33

20/06/2023

modus operandi, is committing actions that constitute
serious violations of several principles of international
humanitarian law. Those new modi operandi, such as
the use of anti-personnel mines, the use of aircraft
and drones in violation of Central African airspace to
drop bombs on part of the territory, attacks on foreign
business sites, summary executions of foreign nationals
and hostage-taking for ransom, are well known to
all for the disproportionate impact that they have on
civilians and their contribution to the deterioration of
the political and security situation.
The Burundi delegation also would like to strongly
denounce the resurgence in attacks targeting United
Nations peacekeeping forces and Central African
defence and security force positions, as well as
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
and humanitarian actors. Such actions serve only
to dramatically increase the number of victims and
worsen the humanitarian situation in the country.
Burundi would like to remind the warring parties that
those actions constitute serious and flagrant violations
of international law. For that reason, we call on the
international community to reaffirm its support for
the Central African Republic in its fight against those
terrorist groups.
Burundi is following developments in the Sudan
crisis very closely and is deeply concerned about its
direct impact on the security situation in the Central
African Republic. Indeed, that crisis is further
facilitating the movement of armed combatants, as
well as the trafficking in arms and ammunition, which
is exacerbating the precarious security situation in
the country.
Burundi is equally concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation in the country, caused by the
imminent refugee crisis following the crisis in the
Sudan. Consequently, Burundi advocates financial
support for the humanitarian response plan for the
Central African Republic launched in February 2023,
and calls in particular for direct support for refugees
and local host communities.
Burundi welcomes the progress made in
implementing the Luanda process and the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, as well as the Central
African Government’s success in disbanding nine
armed groups in 2022 and 2023. It is essential for
the international community to further support those
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

strong political commitments through the continued
funding of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration (DDRR).
We take this opportunity to pay special tribute to
the enlightened leadership of His Excellency Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic, in the process of restoring peace, security,
stability and democracy in the country.
Furthermore, the Burundian delegation welcomes
the progress made by the Central African authorities in
implementing the benchmarks set out in the statement
by the President of the Security Council S/PRST/2019/3
of 9 April 2019. Burundi especially welcomes the
measures and initiatives taken by the Central African
Government to strengthen the arms and ammunition
management system, the operationalization of the
National Commission to Combat the Proliferation
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, the reform of the
security sector and the success of the DDRR process,
which has contributed to the demobilization of 5,000
individuals while reducing the reintegration timeline
by six months.
The Burundi delegation would like to underscore
the joint request made by the African Union Peace
and Security Council at its 1116th meeting and by
the Conference of Heads of State and Government of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) at its twenty-second ordinary session. That
request stresses the importance of enabling the Central
Africans to fully take ownership of their destiny by
authorizing them to strengthen the sovereign capability
of their law enforcement agencies to enable them to
effectively discharge their constitutional mandate to
defend and protect the country and its citizens. Indeed,
we believe that is all the more important in view of the
further deterioration in the country’s security situation,
due to the arming and massive increase in the number
of different armed groups on the national territory. In a
situation where the forces of law and order do not have
the means to carry out their mandate, serious, flagrant
and recurrent violations of human rights and crimes
against humanity will continue to be perpetrated
by terrorist groups in full view of the public with an
almost complete impotence of local authorities. Clearly,
imposing an arms embargo on a State combating
terrorism only worsens an already precarious situation.
In view of the aforementioned and in accordance
with the recommendations of the ECCAS Conference

S/PV.9352

of Heads of State and Government and the request of
the African Union Peace and Security Council, the
Government of Burundi calls for the total, direct and
unconditional lifting of the arms embargo, including
the notification requirement, which was unfairly
imposed on the Central African Republic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June, and thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting
on the situation in the Central African Republic.
I would also like to thank the other officials
and dignitaries at this meeting, beginning with Her
Excellency Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic; Her Excellency
Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA); His Excellency Mr. Bankole Adeoye,
African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security; Her Excellency Ms. Esmeralda
Mendoza, Secretary of State for External Relations of
Angola; Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Executive Director
of UN-Women, and the civil society representative
from the Central African Republic, Mr. Rhosyns
Ngatondang. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, for his
commitment to the cause of Africa.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo follows
with interest developments in the Central African
Republic, a neighbouring country with which it shares
more or less 1,577 km of border. That which affects the
Central African Republic can affect the north-western
and northern parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I therefore have duty of solidarity in two ways:
first, nationally and secondly, regionally, as a member
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.
Allow me to welcome the progress made in the
Central African Republic in implementing the process
of joint ownership of the joint road map of the Luanda
process and the Political Agreement for Peace and

23-1776831/33

S/PV.9352

The situation in the Central African Republic

Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. To date,
at least nine armed groups out of a total of 14 signatories
to the Political Agreement have been dissolved in
the Central African Republic. This momentum can
be maintained by strengthening the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration (DDRR)
process and by sustaining its financing.
In addition, the letter dated 15 May 2023 from
Secretary-General addressed to the Security Council
(S/2023/356) also highlighted further progress on the
goals defined in the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 9 April 2019 (S/PRST/2019/3).
These are the measures taken by the Central African
Republic for more effective arms and ammunition
management, the operationalization of the National
Commission on Small Arms and Light Weapons and
the start of security sector reform, among others.
At the diplomatic level, steps have been taken
to reactivate several joint commissions between the
Central African Republic and its neighbours, including
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those bilateral
platforms will further improve coordination efforts
between the Central African Republic and its neighbours
in the fight against common security threats.
The realities I have just described cannot, however,
sidestep the challenges and other remaining concerns,
including the following.
First, there is the rise of certain refractory armed
groups, which are well-equipped and receive external
training, which is a cause for concern. The final report
of the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic
(see S/2023/360) highlighted in this respect the
Janjaweed of Darfur, the Misseriya militia of the Sudan
and a number of rebels from neighbouring countries of
the Central African Republic.
Secondly, the impact of the crisis in the Sudan
on the Central African Republic, in particular with
regard to the movements of armed combatants, and
the problem of the ever-increasing number of refugees,
which exacerbates the humanitarian situation, are all
subjects of concern.
Before concluding, allow me to present a few of my
Government’s requests to the Council: first, increased
Council support for national and regional peace and
cooperation efforts, such as the Luanda process and the
Peace Agreement; and secondly, advocacy for financing
the DDRR process and humanitarian response plan
32/33

20/06/2023

for the Central African Republic; thirdly, recognition
of the recommendations of the 1116th meeting of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, held
on 31 October 2022, and the final communiqué of the
twenty-second regular session of the conference of
Heads of State of ECCAS. Those two decisions were
confirmed by the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region.
Those three entities have thus clearly asked the
Security Council, given the progress achieved and the
challenges and other threats that I mentioned previously,
to completely waive the notification obligation on
weapons established by resolution 2648 (2022),
adopted on 29 July 2022. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo endorses the recommendations of the three
aforementioned bodies. On the basis of its experience
with the famous notification clause, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo hopes that this obligation, which
weighs on the brotherly country of the Central African
Republic, will finally be lifted in order to strengthen
the security forces of the Central African Republic as
they face those multiple threats.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Congo.
Mr. Makayat-Safouesse (Congo) (spoke in French):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to welcome
your presidency of the Council, and, at the same time,
congratulate you on convening this important meeting
on the Central African Republic. At this point, I would
also like to welcome the presence of Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Central African Republic.
In view of the lateness of the hour, I will confine
myself to making three points and concluding with a
recommendation. My first observation flows naturally
from all the statements we have made. I believe that
all the assessments to which we have listened, whether
by the Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) or by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central African Republic, show that the
country continues to face challenges that are as urgent
as ever — hence the difficulty of providing a ranking
of the country’s priorities when it comes to a country
which, like our own, remains weakened by multi-faceted
economic shocks. This situation, the repercussions of
which are keenly felt in certain parts of our subregion,
is of the utmost concern to us. That is even more so
23-17768

20/06/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

today, with the exacerbation of the Sudanese conflict
and the activity of negative forces and other unarmed
non-State groups, whose main motivation indeed
continues to be predation.
My second observation is a regional one: we
continue to believe that comprehensive development
for our respective countries can only be achieved in a
general context of lasting peace and security, both within
our States and between them. That is why my country’s
Government encourages all efforts by the international
community to promote confidence-building measures
at both the regional and subregional levels.
My third observation is that, despite all the efforts
by the international community, both at the level
of the United Nations and through MINUSCA and
other partners, all those efforts will remain in vain
if they are not accompanied by those of the Central
African Government, which is tirelessly committed to
establishing a lasting and definitive peace. We have
all witnessed the evolution of the sociopolitical and
security situation in the Central African Republic.
We are referring here to all the progress that has been
made thanks to those efforts by the Central African
Government, which are gains we must consolidate.
Finally, I would like to conclude by saying that
the support of the Council is decisive in enabling the
Central African Republic to play its full role in its quest
for control over its territory. This is why my country
would like to solemnly reiterate its call for the complete
lifting of the arms embargo on the Central African
Republic, with the cancellation of the notification
obligation. Sanctions, as we see on a daily basis, are an
obstacle to the operational capacity of the armed forces
of the Central African Republic to effectively carry out
their solemn duty to defend and protect their territory,

S/PV.9352

as well as to the peaceful populations already battered
by so many years of violence and atrocity.
The President: The Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): I will not be long. I would just like
to reiterate once again my sincere thanks to my sisters
and brothers from the Central African region, first for
their presence here, and secondly for their support to
our plea, because it is not the Central African Republic
who is here today, it is all of Central Africa. If a State,
especially a State at the heart of Central Africa, is in
turmoil, it is important that all the other States stand by
its side, and this is a moving sign of solidarity, for the
Central African Republic. So I would like to reiterate
my thanks for having been there, for supporting the
plea of the Central African Republic.
I also reiterate my thanks to the three African
members of the Council — Gabon, Mozambique and
Ghana — and to all the participants here from States
who have provided support. The Central African
Republic remains available to respond to the various
concerns. It remains available to continue working with
the sole aim of reducing the capabilities of the enemies
of peace and bringing a glimmer of hope to an entire
people who for years have been under the tyranny of
other men.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning this meeting, I would like to
thank the interpreters for remaining with us until
this time.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

23-1776833/33
