United Nations

A/RES/57/260

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 87 (e)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/57/532/Add.5)]

57/260. Convention on Biological Diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/201 of 20 December 2000 and 56/197 of
21 December 2001 on the Convention on Biological Diversity, 1
Reaffirming that the Convention on Biological Diversity is the key
international instrument for the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of
genetic resources,
Underlining the importance of traditional knowledge, innovations and
practices of indigenous and local communities for the conservation and sustainable
use of biological diversity, their development and wider application with the
approval and involvement of the holders of such knowledge, innovations and
practices, their protection subject to national legislation, and the fair and equitable
sharing of benefits arising out of their commercial use, in accordance with the
provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity,
Taking into account the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development 2 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 3
Noting with interest the partnership initiatives voluntarily undertaken by some
Governments, international organizations and major groups and announced at the
Summit,
Expressing its deep appreciation to the Government of the Netherlands for
hosting the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the third meeting of the Intergovernmental Committee for
the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, held at The Hague from 7 to 26 April 2002,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
2

02 55648

A/RES/57/260

Also expressing its deep appreciation for the generous offer of the Government
of Malaysia to host the seventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties, which will
be held in Kuala Lumpur in 2004,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on
Biological Diversity, submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly;4
2.
Notes the outcome of the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties
to the Convention on Biological Diversity, 5 hosted by the Government of the
Netherlands from 7 to 19 April 2002;
3.
Also notes the outcome of the third meeting of the Intergovernmental
Committee for the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, held at The Hague from 22 to
26 April 2002;
4.
Welcomes the fact that one hundred eighty-five States and one regional
economic integration organization have become parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, 1 and urges States that have not joined the Convention to
become parties to it;
5.
Invites parties to the Convention to ratify or accede to the Cartagena
Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity 6 as soon as
possible;
6.
Reiterates the importance of the decision of the Fourth Ministerial
Conference of the World Trade Organization to examine, through the World Trade
Organization Council for Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, the
relationship between the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights 7 and the Convention on Biological Diversity, as well as the
protection of traditional knowledge;
7.
Recalls the commitments made at the World Summit on Sustainable
Development to pursue a more efficient and coherent implementation of the three
objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the achievement by 2010
of a significant reduction in the current rate of loss of biological diversity, which
will require the provision of new and additional financial and technical resources to
developing countries and includes actions at all levels, and in this regard calls upon
the international community to provide the necessary support to developing
countries, and stresses the importance of the effective use of resources;
8.
Also recalls the commitment made at the World Summit on Sustainable
Development to negotiate within the framework of the Convention on Biological
Diversity, bearing in mind the Bonn Guidelines, 8 an international regime to promote
and safeguard the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization
of genetic resources. And invites the Conference of the Parties to take appropriate
steps in this regard;
_______________
4

See A/57/220.
Bearing in mind the procedural concerns of some States relating to decision VI/23, and in this regard
noting the deliberations and decisions of the Bureau of the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties,
with a view to addressing these concerns at the seventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties (see
paras. 294–324 of the report of the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties and the minutes of the
meeting of the Bureau of the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, held in Montreal, Canada, on
23 and 24 September 2002).
6
See UNEP/CBD/ExCOP/1/3 and Corr.1, part two, annex.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1869, No. 31874.
8
Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising
out of their Utilization (decision VI/24 of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological
Diversity).
5

2

A/RES/57/260

9.
Further recalls the commitment made at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development to implement the expanded action-oriented work
programme of the Convention on Biological Diversity on all types of forest
biological diversity, in close cooperation with the United Nations Forum on Forests,
members of the Collaborative Partnership on Forests and other forest-related
processes and conventions, with the involvement of all relevant stakeholders;
10. Notes the ongoing work of the liaison group of the secretariats and
officers of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, 9 the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa 10 and the Convention on Biological Diversity,
and encourages continued cooperation to promote complementarities among the
secretariats, while respecting their independent legal status;
11. Calls upon the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity to
continue to work closely with the Global Environment Facility and other relevant
institutions to help developing countries to build the required national capacities to
prepare for the entry into force of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, including in
the areas of risk assessment and risk management;
12. Welcomes the launching of the pilot phase of the Biosafety Clearing
House, and calls for strengthened international support for developing countries to
build their national capacities to interact with it and to benefit from its expeditious
strengthening so that it becomes fully functional at the time of the entry into force
of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety;
13. Emphasizes the need for a substantial increase in financial and technical
resources for the implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety by developing countries and countries with
economies in transition, and in this regard welcomes the successful and substantial
third replenishment of the Global Environment Facility;
14. Invites the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological
Diversity to continue to report to the General Assembly on the ongoing work
regarding the Convention;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the sub-item entitled “Convention on Biological Diversity”.
78th plenary meeting
20 December 2002

_______________
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.

10

3
