198

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Unity at its eighteenth ordinary session to organize throughout the Territory of Western Sahara a general and free
referendum of the people of Western Sahara on selfdetermination;
4. Welcomes the steps taken by the Implementation
Committee with a view to organizing and conducting the
referendum;
5. Appeals to the two parties to the conflict, Morocco
and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia e)Hamra y de Rio de Oro, to observe a cease-fire in accordance
with the decisions of the Organization of African Unity and
its Implementation Committee;
6. Urges, to that end, Morocco and the Frente Popular
para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro to
enter into negotiations with a view to establishing an immediate cease-fire and concluding a peace agreement permitting the fair conduct of a general and free referendum
on self-determination in Western Sahara;
1. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity
in the fair and impartial organization of the referendum;
8. Requests to that end the Secretary-General to take
the necessary steps to ensure that the United Nations participates in the organization and conduct of the referendum
and to report to the General Assembly and the Security
Council on this subject and on the measures requiring a
decision by the Council;
9. Urgently requests the Secretary-General to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity with a view to the implementation
of the decisions of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity and of
its Implementation Committee, and of the present resolution;
10. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
to continue to consider the situation in Western Sahara as
a matter of priority and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/47. Question of the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 6
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to the United
States Virgin Islands,
Noting the active co-operation given by the administering
Power, both through its participation in the work of the
Special Committee and through its willingness to receive
visiting missions to small Territories under its administration.
Having heard the statement of the administering Power, 7

6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirry-sixth Session. Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev.l), chaps. III, IV and XXIII.
1 Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, para,.

1-8.

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United
States Virgin Islands; 8
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation of the Declaration with regard to the Territory;
4. Requests the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to take all necessary
measures, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people of the United States Virgin Islands, to
expedite the process of the decolonization of the Territory
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
5. Reaffirms that it is the obligation of the administering
Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people of the Territory, to inform the local
people of the possibilities open to them in the exercise of
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence and to. enable them to exercise that right freely and
without interference in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Reaffirms that the administering Power has the responsibility for taking such measures as will ensure the
preservation of the identity and cultural heritage of the people of the Territory;
7. Urges the administering Power, in consultation with
the freely elected representatives of the people of the United
States Virgin Islands, to safeguard the inalienable right of
the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural
resources by aking effective measures which guarantee the
right of the ople to own and dispose of those resources
and to estab ish and maintain control over their future
development;
8. Reaffi s the responsibility of the administering
Power, unde the Charter, for the economic and social development o the United States Virgin Islands and in this
regard notes hat, although steady economic progress has
continued in he Territory, especially in the area of service
industries, t re are still problems which need to be resolved, inclu ing those relating to unemployment and the
infrastructure
9. Notes he sustained efforts undertaken by the territorial Gove
ent to diversify the economy and urges the
administerin Power, acting in co-operation with the Government of t e United States Virgin Islands, to strengthen
the economy f the Territory by, wherever possible, taking
additional m asures of diversification in all fields;
10. Req sts the administering Power to continue to
enlist the as ·stance of the specialized agencies and other
organization of the United Nations system in the development and trengthening of the economy of the United
States Virgin Islands;
11. keq sts the Special Committee to continue the
examination f this question at its next session, including
the possible ispatch of a further visiting mission to the
United State Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in

' Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev. I), chap.
XXIII

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/48.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 9
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations relating to American
Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in American Samoa, 10
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards the
full implementation of the Declaration in respect of American Samoa,
Welcoming the active participation of the administering
Power in the related work of the Special Committee and
expressing the hope that this co-operation will be strengthened further so as to accelerate progress towards the full
implementation of the Declaration with regard to American
Samoa,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission dispatched to the Territory in July 1981, 11
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of American Samoa and
stressing the necessity for diversifying the Territory's economy as a matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence
on fluctuating economic activities,
I. Approves the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission to American Samoa and endorses the observations,
conclusions and recommendations contained therein; 12
2. Also approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American
Samoa; 13
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy implementation of the Declaration, which fully applies to the
Territory;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
Visiting Mission for the constructive work accomplished
and to the administering Power and the Government and
people of American Samoa for the co-operation and assistance extended to the Mission;

• Ibid., chaps. III and XXVlll.
10
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras.
1-8.
11
A/AC.109/679 and Add.I.
12
A/AC.109/679, paras. 344-370.
13
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-~-ixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/36/23/Rev.l), chap. XXVlll.

199

6. Calls upon the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to take all necessary
steps, taking into account the freely expressed wishes of the
people of American Samoa, to expedite the process of decolonization of the Territory in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Declaration;
7. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the people of American Samoa
are kept fully informed of their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with the
Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
8. Reaffirms also the responsibility of the administering

Power for the economic and social development of the
Territory;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to take all possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy of
American Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of
assistance and economic development for the Territory;
10. Urges the administering Power to continue to foster
close relations and co-operation between the people of the
Territory and the neighbouring island communities:
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the freely elected representatives of American Samoa,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the right of the people
to own and dispose of those resources and to establish and
maintain control over their future development;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
consideration of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to American Samoa at an appropriate time and in consultation with
the administering Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
24 November 1981

36/49.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the
Secretary-General under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 35/26 of 11 November 1980,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970
(XVIII),

Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under
Article 73 e of the Charter and the action taken by the
Committee in respect of that information, 14
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the question, 15
'

4

Ibid., chap. Vil.

" A/36/563.
