S/PV.9326

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9326th meeting

Monday, 22 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(S/2023/355)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-14451 (E)
*2314451*

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

can be ended if both sides comply. I will return to that
at the end of my short presentation.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2023/355)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan; His Excellency Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security; and His Excellency Mr. Workneh Gebeyehu,
Executive Secretary of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/355, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Perthes.
Mr. Perthes: More than five weeks have passed
since the eruption of fighting between the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces in the
Sudan on 15 April. Despite repeated earlier declarations
of ceasefire by both sides, there has been no day
without fighting, and neither side has been able to claim
a military victory.
The agreement on a short-term ceasefire and
humanitarian arrangements, which was signed two
days ago in Jeddah is an important step forward. It
offers hope for the civilians and shows that the violence
2/23

22/05/2023

The civilian population of the Sudan has already
paid a heavy price for the senseless violence. According
to estimates of the Sudan Doctors’ Union, more than
860 civilians have been killed, including more than 190
children, with another 3,500 civilians injured. Many
are missing. More than a million have been displaced.
More than 840,000 have sought shelter in safer parts
of the country, while approximately another 250,000
have crossed Sudanese borders. And those figures do
not capture the harrowing stories of the thousands of
men and women who abandoned their homes in search
of safety across the borders. Many have waited for
days and weeks at border crossings to secure passage.
And neither of those statistics illustrate the suffering
of many others who could not leave and stay in
their homes with depleted supplies and no access to
humanitarian assistance.
I am grateful to those countries that are receiving
refugees and refugees fleeing the Sudan. It is vital
that borders remain open to those who seek safety.
Procedures at border crossings should be expedited.
The United Nations continues to provide its support to
alleviate the burden on neighbouring States and ensure
that refugee needs are met with dignity.
In Khartoum, Darfur and elsewhere, the warring
parties have fought their war with little regard for the
laws and norms of war. Homes, shops, places of worship,
water and electricity installations have been destroyed
or damaged. The health sector is collapsing, with more
than two thirds of hospitals closed, many health-care
workers killed and medical supplies running low. The
frequently reported use of health facilities as military
positions is unacceptable. I am appalled by the reports
of sexual violence against women and girls, including
allegations of rape in Khartoum and Darfur. The
United Nations is following up to verify those cases.
The warring parties must prevent any reoccurrence of
such violence.
Children are facing serious protection concerns
and continue to be vulnerable to recruitment, sexual
violence and abduction. Reports of rampant looting,
intimidation, harassment and enforced disappearance
are deeply concerning. United Nations premises and
residences, including the compound of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan, as well as large amounts of food
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and humanitarian supplies, have also been looted.
Criminality is compounded by the release of thousands
of prisoners and the increasing spread of small arms.
And I am also concerned about reported death threats
against political activists and leaders, the arrests of
Sudanese volunteers and the intimidation of journalists.
In parts of the country, fighting between the
two armies — or the two armed formations — has
sharpened into communal tensions or triggered conflict
between communities. In El Geneina, West Darfur,
clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Rapid Support Forces spiralled into ethnic violence on
24 April. Tribal militias joined the fight, and civilians
took up arms to defend themselves. Homes, markets
and hospitals were ransacked and burned, and United
Nations premises were looted.
In mid-May, renewed violence led to more death
and destruction. Altogether, more than 250 persons
were reportedly killed, and tens of thousands were
displaced to neighbouring Chad. The security situation
is impeding the delivery of humanitarian aid. I
continue to engage with national and local leaders to
de-escalate the situation. Worrisome signs of tribal
mobilization have also been reported in other parts of
the country, particularly South Kordofan and the Blue
Nile region. The fighting throughout the country has
resulted in serious human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law, and has undermined
the protection of civilians. Those violations must be
investigated and the perpetrators must be brought to
justice. The United Nations family continues to monitor
and advocate for an end to all the violations.
Some commentators have placed the blame for this
conflict on the international community for not having
seen the warning signs. Others blame the political
process, or the Framework Agreement — which was
intended to lead to a civilian-led Government — or
the international community, for giving an outsize role
in the process to men with guns. But let us be clear.
The responsibility for the fighting rests with those who
are waging it daily. The leaders of the two sides share
accountability for choosing to settle their unresolved
conflict on the battlefield rather than at the negotiating
table. It is their decision that is ravaging the Sudan.
And they can end it.
What happened on 15 April and has continued since
is precisely what the United Nations and our partners
in the international community tried to prevent. Before

S/PV.9326

and after the military takeover of 25 October 2021, we
engaged diligently with the two military leaders and
with the civilian leadership to persuade them to talk
and to return to a meaningful transition to civilian
rule through a political process. As the tensions grew
amid reports of a build-up of forces, I raised the alarm
in my briefing to the Security Council in March (see
S/PV.9289) and urged the parties to de-escalate. In
the two weeks prior to the outbreak of the fighting,
alongside my partners in the trilateral mechanism and
the Quad — Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the
United States and the United Kingdom — I intensified
our engagement with the military leaders to de-escalate
the situation. We coordinated those efforts with
Sudanese civilians, who also tried to mediate between
the Generals, recognizing the gravity of the situation.
We also asked actors in the region to use their leverage
with the two parties. Our efforts continued until the
night before 15 April, when we thought progress had
been made, only to wake up the next morning to the
reality that the parties had chosen war.
Unfortunately, the hostilities have compelled us to
temporarily relocate many of our staff to Port Sudan
or outside the Sudan. Let me be very clear here. That
does not mean that we have abandoned the Sudanese
people or the Sudan. We continue to work with our
Sudanese partners. We remain firmly committed
to four immediate priorities — first, achieving a
stable ceasefire with a monitoring mechanism;
secondly, preventing the escalation or ethnicization
of the conflict; thirdly, the protection of civilians and
provision of humanitarian relief and fourthly, preparing
a fresh political process for when the time is ripe, with
the participation of a broad array of civil and political
actors, including women.
Through our hub in Port Sudan, UNITAMS
has supported the efforts of our country team
and humanitarian partners to restore the flow of
humanitarian supplies into and within the country. The
United Nations family is doing its utmost to expand our
response throughout the country, particularly in areas
of acute need. But it is also essential that the eastern
areas of the country — Red Sea state, where Port Sudan
is, as well as Kassala and Al-Qadarif — be used both as
a point of entry for humanitarian aid and for receiving
a fair share of that aid, not least with regard to the
increasing movement of displaced persons to that region.
Additional funding is urgently needed. The revised
humanitarian response plan was launched on 17 May,

23-144513/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

requesting $2.6 billion for reaching 18 million people
in need, up from 15 million before the fighting began.
Thanks to Saudi and United States mediation,
representatives of the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Rapid Support Forces signed a declaration of
commitments in Jeddah on 11 May and an agreement on
a short-term ceasefire and humanitarian arrangements
on 20 May. The short-term ceasefire, which is expected
to enter into force tonight, will remain in effect for
seven days and is renewable. It should allow civilians
to move and humanitarian access to reach the people.
It is a welcome development, though the fighting and
troop movements have continued even today, despite
the commitment from both sides to refraining from
pursuing military advantage before the ceasefire
takes effect. We understand that a basic monitoring
mechanism will be set up between the two parties and
the mediators. UNITAMS stands ready to support
a monitoring mechanism for the longer term or for a
permanent ceasefire. We can build on the staff and
on the structures that have been established in the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee for Darfur, which
UNITAMS has been chairing since mid-2021.
I continue to urge the parties to honour the
agreement they signed two days ago. They must stop
the fighting. They must allow access for humanitarian
relief, protect humanitarian workers and assets and
allow safe passage for civilians to leave areas where
there are hostilities. I will also continue to engage the
leadership of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces to ensure the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure while pushing for an end to
this war. We are coordinating closely with Sudanese
partners working for peace. Let me also commend the
leaders of the armed movements that are signatories to
the Juba Peace Agreement for their efforts to restore
peace and for their neutrality in the conflict. Sudanese
civil society is playing a strong role in advocating for
peace while continuing to support civilians in need,
and its efforts must be supported.
Both parties have been calling on me to condemn
the other side’s actions. I call on both of them to end the
fighting and return to dialogue in the interests of the
Sudan and its people. Lives and infrastructure are being
destroyed. The growing ethnicization of the conflict
risks expanding and prolonging it, with implications for
the wider region. The agreed short-term ceasefire could
and should pave the way for talks for a durable cessation
of hostilities. As the talks advance, a diverse array of
4/23

22/05/2023

civil and political stakeholders should play their role.
Ultimately, only a credible civilian-led transition can
chart lasting peace in the Sudan. I note the appointment
of Malik Aqar, a signatory to the Juba Peace Agreement
and Chair of the recently formed peace bloc, as
Vice-President of the Transitional Sovereignty Council.
Mr. Aqar stated that his overall priority is to reach a
permanent ceasefire, end the war and silence the guns.
That certainly deserves all of our full support.
The regional and international efforts to urgently
end the fighting in the Sudan are laudable. As those
efforts multiply, we must ensure coordination if we
are to forge a common approach that will enhance
our collective leverage and the effectiveness of
our efforts. Any coordinated plan must involve the
Sudan’s neighbours and the region. I am very glad
that my colleagues, Commissioner Bankole Adeoye
and Executive Secretary Workneh Gebeyehu, will be
briefing the Council and going into more detail regarding
the efforts of the trilateral partners, the United Nations,
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). The United Nations
will continue to work closely with our partners in the
trilateral mechanism, including the AU and IGAD, in
support of those efforts and coordination with others.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Perthes for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.
Mr. Adeoye: On behalf of the African Union (AU),
at the outset, let me assure members of the Security
Council of the African Union’s full cooperation in
ensuring the success of its deliberation and engagement
on African issues, particularly that of the Sudan.
The worrisome situation in the Sudan, which is on
the Council’s agenda today, is engaging the attention
of the African Union at the highest level. Members are
aware how greatly we were mobilized from the very
first days of the overthrow of former President Omer
Al-Bashir to support the efforts to overcome the postrevolution challenges in the Sudan. The AU, with
the support of its partners, worked to put in place a
mediation arrangement that was expected to lead to an
inclusive, smooth and broad-based political transition.
The AU deployed active and effective mediation with
the support of AU member States and development
partners in 2019, which, in general, was met with the
satisfaction of the Sudanese people and partners, when
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

an institutional transitional mechanism for a peaceful
and balanced transition was established.
Unfortunately, the acute internal disagreements,
exacerbated by fragmentation and polarization among
political and military actors in the Sudan, coupled by
the multiplicity of external interference, undermined
the transition, which, of course, led to the stalemate
resulting in the irresponsible and senseless coup of
25 October 2021. The AU condemned the coup and
eventually, in line with its normative principles and
shared values, suspended the Sudan’s membership,
while continuing to work with partners for the rapid
restoration of constitutional order and a consensual
transition. In doing so, we established the trilateral
mechanism and collaboratively worked with the
United Nations and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, together with the AU. As all know, a
political framework agreement was signed in December
2022, and work was under way to ensure its extension
to all political actors and additional inclusivity.
However, the outbreak of hostilities on 15 April,
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces, tragically dashed our hopes to the leadup of the resumption of the political transition process
and civilian-led democratic rule. Since then, the AU
has been working relentlessly to ensure an end to the
conflict. On 16 April, exactly one day after the outbreak
of hostilities, the African Union Peace and Security
Council convened to consider the crisis in the Sudan.
It condemned the fighting, called for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire and requested the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission to use his good
offices to ensure that the guns be silenced. On 20 April,
the AU Commission Chairperson brought together the
key actors in the international community to coordinate
and intensify efforts for an immediate ceasefire, as
well as humanitarian assistance and the resumption of
the political process. Consequently, on 2 May, the AU
convened the expanded mechanism, and consultations
are under way for its full operationalization. Our
conviction is that only well-coordinated collective
action will give the success of the international action
for peace and stability in the Sudan a chance. Separate,
competing or rival actions would further complicate
and undermine the search for a peaceful resolution to
the crisis.
It is in that context that the African Union has
developed a comprehensive de-escalation plan, which
identifies six pillars that need to be addressed for

S/PV.9326

a sustainable resolution of the Sudanese conflict.
Permit me to highlight the six pillars, which are:
first, coordinated international action to avoid the
proliferation and duplication of mediation initiatives;
secondly, an immediate, unconditional, permanent and
comprehensive ceasefire; thirdly, urgent humanitarian
action to alleviate the suffering of the Sudanese
people; fourthly, the protection of civilians, State
infrastructure and ensuring accountability for actions
taken by the warring parties; fifthly, firm support for
neighbouring countries in the region that have been
impacted by the crisis; and, lastly, the resumption of
a fully representative and inclusive political process
leading towards the return of democratic, civilianled Government.
We are hopeful that African leaders will reconvene
under the auspices of the African Union Peace and
Security Council later this week to endorse the African
Union de-escalation plan. As Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Perthes has described, the
situation in the Sudan remains dire. The destruction
of public and private institutions is unfortunately
systematic, which is the case with health, academic,
economic, financial, social and humanitarian
institutions. The sick and the wounded are dying without
receiving any care. That is totally unacceptable. Gross
human rights violations are rampant. Arrests, looting
and sexual assault are on the rise. We must urgently end
the fighting, without delay.
The Council must shoulder its responsibility in the
face of the intolerable and unnecessary conflict. The
African Union has closely monitored the steps taken
by Saudi Arabia and the United States in Jeddah. We
also welcome the commitment demonstrated by the two
warring parties by signing a short-term ceasefire and
humanitarian agreement. However, we call for further
concerted actionable efforts towards a lasting cessation
of hostilities. We urge them to go the full distance to
achieve peace. A comprehensive permanent silencing
of the guns now is the only remedy for the good
people of the Sudan. The resumption of the political
transition premised on inclusive political dialogue
and national reconciliation that brings together all
actors of Sudanese society, fully complemented by
the international community, will promote peace and
stability in the Sudan.
We must now collectively start planning for
inclusive negotiations on a political process that will
be agreed to by the Sudanese people. It is important

23-144515/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

22/05/2023

that we take on board the relationship between the
centre and the periphery, between the State and its
citizens and between the Sudan and its neighbours so
that the Sudanese can build the Sudan that they want.
The African Union is working to support such an
inclusive political process that will allow for the full
representation of the voices of all sectors of Sudanese
civil society and political parties. The AU is also striving
to ensure that States bordering the Sudan, which are
endlessly receiving growing numbers of traumatized
Sudanese refugees, are assisted at this difficult time.
The AU will be deploying special envoys — as directed
by the Chairperson of the Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat — to all neighbouring
countries in due course.

of humanitarian assistance, the restoration of essential
services and the withdrawal of forces from hospitals
and essential public services, which are greatly needed
by the people of the Republic of the Sudan.

A strong commitment by the Council to a ceasefire,
the implementation of humanitarian assistance and the
resumption of the political process is imperative, as is a
united and coherent international coalition, to promote
peace in the Sudan. We must arrest the Sudan’s slide
into complete collapse and chaos, which would have
unbearable consequences for the region, the African
continent and the world at large.

The past five weeks of fighting have had a heavy toll
on the people of the Republic of the Sudan. As reports
and Special Representative Perthes have indicated, this
is the start of a substantial challenge facing the people
of the Sudan unless we collectively stop the violence
and conflict. The longer the fighting takes, the higher
the toll will be. It will also further complicate and
compound the crisis, as new internal and external actors
may become involved in the conflict. Most importantly,
shortages of food and medical facilities and services
will exacerbate the humanitarian crisis.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gebeyehu.
Mr. Gebeyehu: Allow me to begin my statement
by thanking the Council for convening yet another
meeting on the situation in the Sudan and inviting the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to brief it and share our views and perspectives. The
Security Council’s continued engagement and followup on developments in the Sudan is much appreciated
and needed.
IGAD welcomes the signing of the agreement on
a short-term ceasefire and humanitarian arrangements
in the Sudan between representatives of the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces on 20 May
2023 in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, brokered by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the United States of America. That
most recent development constitutes commendable
progress and makes us cautiously optimistic that a
permanent cessation of hostilities is within reach.
As per the agreement, the ceasefire will remain in
effect for seven days, effective today, and is subject
to extension on the basis of agreement between the
parties. We are also happy that the agreement is aimed
at, inter alia, facilitating the delivery and distribution
6/23

The fact that previous ceasefire agreements were
violated repeatedly in the past five weeks may cause our
hope for and trust in respect for the current ceasefire
agreement by the warring parties to wane. However, it is
noteworthy that, unlike previous agreements, the parties
have signed the current agreement, which will also be
monitored by a United States- and Saudi-supported
ceasefire monitoring mechanism. Irrespective of
challenges that may be faced in its implementation,
such progress is worth capitalizing and building upon.

Besides the people of the Sudan, neighbouring
countries are also feeling the impact of the war, as they
are hosting thousands of refugees. Those countries
are either emerging from conflict or facing serious
economic and humanitarian crises themselves. For
instance, the Republic of South Sudan, which has
close economic and social ties with the Republic of the
Sudan, has been affected by the conflict, as the price
of goods has spiked, and the purchasing power of the
South Sudanese pound has weakened since the conflict
broke out in the Republic of the Sudan.
It is due to the close historical social and
economic ties that IGAD member States have with the
Sudanese people, as well as the direct impact that the
war is having on those countries as a result of their
geographical proximity, that IGAD has been actively
working together with other partner organizations and
States to secure a ceasefire. In that regard, the highlevel IGAD delegation led by His Excellency Mr. Salva
Kiir Mayardit has been engaging the warring parties
on a daily basis and consulting and coordinating with
regional and international actors. On 17 and 18 May,
I was in Juba, South Sudan, to encourage President
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mayardit in his commitment to lead IGAD’s efforts
to resolve the crisis in the Sudan and also to exchange
views on the next steps to be taken to silence the guns
in the Republic of the Sudan. I call on the international
community to support and complement those efforts in
a coordinated manner.
Despite our limited capacities and resources, IGAD
and its member States are doing everything possible
within our reach to support the people of the Sudan.
Neighbouring countries have also sent humanitarian
assistance. Countries such as Ethiopia, South Sudan
and Djibouti have played a key role in the evacuation
of foreign citizens and the staff of diplomatic missions
and international organizations based in the Sudan. It is
high time that the international community work closely
and support those front-line countries to help them to
provide adequate and timely support to the people of
the Sudan and Sudanese refugees, as well as in sending
much-needed humanitarian support to the country.
While I appreciate and commend the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the United States of America for
their relentless efforts in facilitating the Jeddah talks, I
encourage them to involve and engage with the trilateral
mechanism as the entity entrusted by the regional,
continental and international communities to facilitate
the political process in the Republic of the Sudan.
The only way we can stop the fighting in the
Sudan sooner rather than later is if our efforts are
better coordinated and streamlined and our collective
actions swifter. We all have one purpose and goal in the
Sudan: to silence the guns and to resume the inclusive
Sudanese-led, Sudanese-owned political process that
will pave the way towards the formation of a civilian-led
transitional Government. Let us put our heads together
and join hands to support the Sudanese people’s quest
for durable peace and democracy. As experience in the
region shows, our chances of success are greater when
efforts are coordinated and neighbouring States are
actively involved and engaged in finding solutions.
I would like to end my remarks by reiterating
IGAD’s unwavering commitment to continue working
and coordinating closely with the United Nations and
other continental and international actors, as well as
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United States
of America, towards achieving a permanent ceasefire
and the resumption of an inclusive political process in
the Sudan.

S/PV.9326

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Gebeyehu for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes,
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye and Executive
Secretary Workneh Gebeyehu for their briefings.
Let me start by underlining our support for Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes and all
United Nations staff who continue to work in the Sudan
under extremely challenging circumstances.
The conflict in the Sudan is a tragedy and has
had a devastating impact on the Sudanese people. The
United Kingdom urges the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces to immediately stop
fighting, protect civilians and grant safe and immediate
humanitarian access.
Coordinated action by international and regional
partners is crucial to help end the conflict. So, we
welcome all diplomatic efforts towards that goal,
including the 11 May Jeddah declaration and the
ceasefire agreement agreed on 20 May. But those
commitments will be worthless if they are not put
into action or if they are used to secure a military
advantage. We call on the parties to abide fully by their
commitments in letter and spirit.
We also welcome the efforts of the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the League of Arab States to help bring an end to the
violence. It is essential that there be a strong coordination
of efforts among regional and multilateral bodies.
It is also imperative that the voices of the Sudanese
civilians be heard loud and clear. They must be
included at every stage of the process, especially in
mediation efforts to bring an end to the fighting and
ultimately to deliver a democratic transition with a
civilian government.
Let me address the appalling human rights and
humanitarian situation caused by the fighting.
As we have heard, more than 500 civilians have
been killed, thousands injured and millions more lack
food and medicine. In West Darfur, visceral violence
is igniting at a scale not experienced in decades. More
than 150,000 people have been forced to flee the Sudan.
The United Kingdom would like to extend its thanks

23-144517/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and pledge its support to the neighbouring countries
that have welcomed refugees.
Humanitarian need has risen sharply, having
already been at record levels prior to the conflict. So,
we call for an immediate end to the continued attacks
on civilian infrastructure, including homes, health-care
facilities, schools and places of worship. The looting
of humanitarian assets is simply unacceptable. The
perpetrators must be held accountable.
In conclusion, we offer our full support to the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan, as we enter discussions on the
renewal of its mandate, and we stand in solidarity with
the Sudanese people in their demands for a peaceful
and democratic future.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique) (spoke in French):
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security
Council (A3) — Gabon, Ghana and my own country,
Mozambique.
The A3 sincerely thanks this morning’s briefers
for their very important contributions. We thank His
Excellency Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Sudan; His Excellency
Ambassador Bankole Adeoye, African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security;
and His Excellency Mr. Workneh Gebeyehu, Executive
Secretary of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). We welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan at this meeting.
We have noted the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) (S/2023/355).
(spoke in English)
The A3 would like to commend UNITAMS for the
tremendous work it has conducted in a very difficult
and challenging environment which characterizes the
current situation in the Sudan. The invaluable work
of UNITAMS, with the cooperation of the Sudanese
authorities, has facilitated the evacuation of civilians,
diplomatic personnel and humanitarian workers from
areas of intense fighting in the Sudan. Furthermore,
UNITAMS has sought to continue with humanitarian
assistance to the Sudanese people, despite all
the challenges.
8/23

22/05/2023

The A3 deplores the dramatic deterioration of
the situation in the Sudan, which undermines all the
progress achieved particularly in the implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement. It is evident that the
current crisis puts the progress achieved thus far at risk.
Therefore, the A3 emphasizes the need for the parties
to silence the guns immediately and return to the path
of negotiation.
Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique commend the
leadership of the African Union and IGAD in seeking
solutions to address the situation in the Sudan. We
stress that the trilateral mechanism is crucial to have
a viable, sustainable and credible political process,
focusing on the resort to dialogue between the parties
in conflict, to build inclusive and long-standing peace
in the sisterly country.
The A3 further commends the African Union
for the formulation of a de-escalation plan which
will concretely contribute to the stabilization efforts.
The Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support
Forces are therefore encouraged to fully embrace the
de-escalation plan for the benefit of the Sudan, the
Sudanese people and the region.
We also welcome UNITAMS strenuous efforts
towards the cessation of hostilities and return to
political negotiations. We take this opportunity to
encourage UNITAMS to continue to assist the political
transition in the Sudan and support the peace process
and the implementation of the Juba Agreement.
The security situation in the Sudan is deteriorating
and alarming owing to the current crisis. It has
created a conducive environment for exacerbating the
intercommunal clashes that already continue to pose
security challenges in some regions of the country,
particularly in Darfur, Blue Nile and South and West
Kordofan states. That situation poses serious security
threats to the seven neighbouring countries.
Human rights violations, including attacks on the
civilian population, particularly women, children and
vulnerable people; diplomatic personnel and United
Nations and humanitarian workers are being reported,
and we condemn those attacks.
We register with grave concern the targeting of
diplomatic premises, including the widespread looting
of United Nations premises, particularly in Khartoum
and Darfur. The A3 condemns in the strongest terms
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

these criminal acts. They are in serious breach of the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
We reiterate that targeting civilian populations is
totally unacceptable. It constitutes a gross violation of
international humanitarian law. Perpetrators of such
acts should be brought to justice in due course.
Ghana, Gabon and Mozambique are deeply
concerned about the spillover effects of the current
crisis in neighbouring countries, including the increase
of cross-border flows of refugees, which may lead to
an increase in violence. In this context, there is a need
for stronger collaboration between UNITAMS and
other United Nations Missions and entities operating in
the region, in order to properly identify early-warning
signs of escalation of violence in the region.
The humanitarian situation was already dire in the
Sudan. With the eruption of these armed confrontations
and the disruption of chains of supply of several
products already associated with the socioeconomic
vulnerabilities, the humanitarian situation has
gotten worse. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/355) indicates that more than 700,000 people
have been internally displaced, most of whom are from
Khartoum, West Darfur and South Darfur. With the
current crisis, more than 150,000 people are estimated
to have left the Sudan.
In order to respond to the humanitarian crisis, the
A3 reiterates the appeal for sustained support for the
2023 humanitarian response plan for the Sudan. The
plan targets 12.5 million people through more than
200 projects in such key sectors as education, health,
child protection, gender-based violence and nutrition.
We also encourage humanitarian assistance through
other multilateral and bilateral mechanisms, paying
particular attention to the socioeconomic situation in
the Sudan.
The A3 welcomes all efforts aimed at achieving
a humanitarian truce and the establishment of
humanitarian corridors. We call for better coordination
of all the actors and stress the need to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is provided in the Sudan and
in neighbouring countries in compliance of the guiding
principles governing the delivery of humanitarian aid.
The A3 wishes to reaffirm the centrality of the
role of the African Union, IGAD and the trilateral
mechanism in stabilizing the situation in the Sudan. We
call for respect for the Sudan’s sovereignty in dealing

S/PV.9326

with its challenges. Gabon, Ghana, and Mozambique
pay tribute to the Sudanese people for the courage
and strength they have demonstrated during these
difficult times.
While paying tribute to the Sudanese people, we
wish to state that the Sudanese parties must not lose
sight of the central objective of resuming the transition
process towards an inclusive, democratic, civilian-led
transition Government that is able to address the acute
political and economic recovery of the country. We urge
the Sudanese people to refrain from acts of violence
and tread the path of national unity, reconciliation and
the building of peace in the country.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by thanking Special Representative Volker Perthes,
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye, and Executive Secretary
Workneh Gebeyehu for providing their essential
briefings today. I welcome Ambassador Al-Harith
Idriss Al-Harith Mohamed and the Sudan’s delegation
to this meeting. I also commend the tireless work of the
personnel of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in a highly demanding situation.
Brazil is concerned by the humanitarian challenges
provoked by over a month of continuous armed conflict.
We stand in solidarity with the people of the Sudan. We
commend the communities that have assisted fleeing
families in every corner of the Sudan as well as Egypt,
Chad, the Central African Republic, South Sudan and
Ethiopia. We also commend the vital work of the United
Nations personnel and the humanitarian agencies
on the ground. I wish to convey our appreciation for
the adjustments Special Representative Perthes and
UNITAMS have made since 15 April to implement the
Mission’s mandate.
As argued by the Secretary-General in his most
recent report (S/2023/355), the Sudan’s rapid descent
into deadly conflict is a terrible setback for the
country. We believe another terrible setback would be
the insistence on solving the current conflict through
military means. The United Nations, the African
Union, IGAD, the League of Arab States and virtually
all of the Sudan’s partners have called for ceasefires
and truces precisely because military means will not
solve the root causes of the ongoing conflict.
We also endorse the Saudi-American initiative that
led to the Declaration of Commitment to Protect the

23-144519/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Civilians of the Sudan. We echo the trilateral mechanism
and welcome the short-term ceasefire and humanitarian
arrangements agreed on Saturday in Jeddah.
We call on the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and
the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) to exercise maximum
restraint and uphold the truce. We encourage them
to use negotiation, mediation, dialogue and peaceful
conflict resolution tools. These instruments are all
means to achieve peace in the Sudan, which is an end
that, we are convinced, profoundly interests the parties
to the conflict and the Sudanese people.
We therefore emphasize that the negotiation
between the RSF and the SAF is not surrender by either
side. Negotiation is instead the first step to halting the
current military clashes, providing adequate protection
for millions of civilians in the Sudan, and avoiding
additional damage to essential civilian infrastructure
in Khartoum, Omdurman, Darfur and elsewhere.
Peaceful coexistence is a prerequisite. It is among
the conditions that will enable the parties to the conflict
to pave the way for a political transition to a civilianled Government. There will be no Sudanese ownership
of this political process without peaceful coexistence
between its leading military and paramilitary forces.
We sincerely hope that the Sudanese stakeholders
realize the damage that continuous fighting has caused
and will cause to the Sudan and the Sudanese people.
We call on them to engage with the ongoing initiatives
in good faith. There is widespread international support
for reaching a peace deal between the parties. The
African Union, IGAD, the League of Arab States and
partners of the Sudan have led the primary initiatives
to reach a ceasefire. The next step is silencing the guns
once and for all.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Perthes and the representatives
of the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) for their briefings.
I welcome the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
at this meeting.
Armed conflict in the Sudan has been going on
for over a month, with fighting raging in many places
and casualties on the rise, leading to a worsening
humanitarian situation. China is deeply saddened. As
a good friend and partner of the Sudan, we sincerely
hope that the two parties to the conflict will prioritize
the Sudan’s peace and the well-being of its population,
10/23

22/05/2023

end hostilities as soon as possible and resolve their
differences through dialogue and negotiation.
China notes that the two parties to the conflict have
reached a temporary ceasefire on multiple occasions
and signed an agreement for a short-term ceasefire
and humanitarian arrangement in Jeddah last week.
The pressing task is to ensure the implementation
of commitments to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure and to facilitate and provide security
guarantees for humanitarian assistance and evacuation.
We hope that the parties to the conflict will maintain
the momentum on dialogue, strive for a more durable
ceasefire and political arrangement and bring the
country’s development back on track.
China commends and supports the League of Arab
States, AU, IGAD and other regional organizations and
relevant countries for their key role in promoting peace
talks. We call on the United Nations and international
partners to support and cooperate with regional
organizations with a view to providing the necessary time
and space for regional mediation. The developments in
the Sudan have once again demonstrated that a solution
to the question of the Sudan can be found only from
within the country. External interference or unilateral
sanctions will not solve the problem but will instead
intensify tensions and aggravate the political and social
crises. The international community needs to draw the
appropriate lesson. Relevant parties should seriously
reflect on the current situation and refrain from
expanding unilateral sanctions and thus continuing
down the wrong path.
Since the outbreak of the conflict, the already
fragile economic and humanitarian situation in the
Sudan and its neighbouring countries has become even
more worrisome. According to the data from the United
Nations, as a result of the conflict, more than 700,000
people have become internally displaced persons,
more than 200,000 people have fled to neighbouring
countries and some 25 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance.
China commends the Sudan’s neighbours, which,
despite their difficulties, are hosting a large number
of Sudanese refugees, and we call on the international
community to step up assistance to the Sudan and its
neighbours in order to alleviate the spillover impact on
the region. China supports the Organization’s efforts
to communicate and coordinate with the Sudan and its
neighbouring countries on humanitarian issues in order
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to help the countries of the region with their response
capacity and to ease humanitarian pressure.
The mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) will expire in early June. In view of the
current situation, UNITAMS will face considerable
challenges in its future work. The Council’s original
intention in authorizing the Mission was to assist the
Sudan, at the country’s request, with the completion of
its political transition. The opinions of the Sudan are
therefore fundamentally important in the discussion on
the Mission’s mandate.
China encourages the penholders to stay in close
touch with the Sudan and fully respect its views. That
is contribute to the smooth functioning of UNITAMS
in future and to long-term cooperation between the
United Nations and the Sudan.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Volker Perthes, for
his briefing and for the work of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) in such a difficult and complex context.
We also thank Mr. Bankole Adeoye and Mr. Workneh
Gebeyehu for their briefings and acknowledge the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan.
Ecuador stands in solidarity with the people of
the Sudan, as well as with the families of the victims,
including humanitarian workers, who have lost their
lives in this conflict.
It has now been 37 days since the start of the armed
violence in the Sudan, which is deteriorating the already
precarious humanitarian situation of the civilian
population, with a differentiated impact on women
and children. The Security Council cannot and must
not remain immobile in the face of this situation and
must call on the parties to the conflict to immediately
cease hostilities and acts of violence. A return to calm
is urgently needed in order to ensure free, safe and
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance and to
facilitate an effective dialogue process between all
actors involved.
In this scenario, UNITAMS must play a critical
role in the search for peace and security, which affects
not only the Sudan, but the entire region. The work of
the Mission needs to be strengthened. In the upcoming
renewal of its mandate, contained in resolution 2636

S/PV.9326

(2022), we must therefore address recent events with
a view to building capacities in the context of the
challenges posed by the political, humanitarian,
development and security situation.
First, in terms of political strengthening, we
highlight the Mission’s work within the trilateral
mechanism, as well as its involvement in security
sector reform issues. In that regard, Ecuador considers
that the Mission’s role is fundamental in the efforts
being made by the countries of the region and by
regional organizations, such as the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
League of Arab States, leading to a transition process
towards lasting peace. The Mission’s efforts remain
central to enhancing gender inclusion in the political
process and should continue and strengthen the work
done before the outbreak of violence.
Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, we are
concerned about the massive displacement of the
population, with alarming figures — approaching
1 million people, with another 250,000 having fled to
neighbouring countries. We highlight and recognize
the generosity of the countries of the region that have
taken in refugees. It is imperative that the agencies
and entities of the United Nations system have the
necessary resources to overcome this humanitarian
crisis, with a view to alleviating the situation of people
being displaced and the host populations. Women and
girls are always the most affected in that context. That
is why the role of UNITAMS is crucial in conducting
peacebuilding activities, protecting civilians and
strengthening the rule of law, with a special focus
on gender-based violence. It will also be important
to strengthen the work of UNITAMS in the area of
explosive-ordnance clearance and demining activities,
which are part of the obligations established in the Juba
Peace Agreement.
Thirdly, with regard to the role of the socioeconomic
situation, the events of the past few days have reversed
the progress that had been made in the Sudan in
achieving some of the Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The role of UNITAMS is
therefore indispensable in restoring the coordinated
support of the agencies and other bodies of the United
Nations in conducting future activities, together with
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Ecuador supports the renewal of the UNITAMS
mandate and remains committed to ensuring that the

23-1445111/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Security Council provides the tools needed to support
the Sudan in overcoming these new challenges. We
acknowledge the seven-day ceasefire agreement signed
by the parties and hope it will enable unimpeded
access for humanitarian assistance, protect civilians,
especially women and children, provide protection for
humanitarian workers and property and facilitate the
official procedures that enable effective access for aid.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Perthes, Commissioner
Adeoye of the African Union (AU) and Mr. Gebeyehu,
Executive Secretary of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, for their briefings, as well as for their
tireless work on the Sudan.
Japan supports all the efforts by the trilateral
mechanism — of the United Nations, the AU and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development — to
help the Sudanese people in need. At the time of the
Special Representative’s previous briefing on 20 March
(see S/PV.9289), we were encouraged by the reporting
on the Sudan’s transition process, following the signing
of the Framework Agreement last December and the
broad and inclusive workshops on the outstanding
issues that were facilitated by the trilateral mechanism
earlier this year. However, on 15 April everything
changed, and Japan is alarmed by how rapidly the
situation has deteriorated. With that in mind, I will
mention three points.
First, Japan reiterates its call on both parties, the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces,
to immediately stop fighting and return to a peaceful
political process. We cannot accept any use of force
that undermines a Sudanese-led and Sudanese-owned
process towards a transition to civilian rule, as outlined
in the Constitutional Declaration of 2019. In that
regard, Japan commends the regional and international
initiatives aimed at seeking a lasting ceasefire and a
return to political dialogue.
Secondly, Japan is seriously concerned about
the humanitarian situation, not only in the Sudan but
in neighbouring countries as well. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, more than 1 million people, including women
and children, are expected to have fled the country by
October to seek security and fulfil their basic needs.
We welcome the Jeddah Declaration of Commitment to
Protect the Civilians of the Sudan and the agreement on
a short-term ceasefire and humanitarian arrangements,
12/23

22/05/2023

and we urge the parties to keep to those agreements. In
response to the influx of refugees, Japan has decided
to provide assistance to Chad, Egypt and South Sudan
through international organizations.
Thirdly, Japan stresses the importance of
maintaining the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) in those
difficult circumstances. The Council must speak in
a united voice and support the Mission as it seeks to
revive the political process while also maintaining
the other three pillars of its mandate. Going forward,
we are ready to actively contribute to discussions on
how best to adapt the Mission’s strategic objectives
and operations to the rapidly changing circumstances,
while ensuring that Council members have optimal
insight into the political dynamics that affect its work.
We also call on all parties in the Sudan to ensure that
UNITAMS can carry out its activities unhindered.
I want to conclude by reiterating our firm support
to the Mission and our solidarity with the people of the
Sudan as they face an unprecedented challenge to the
democratic transition in which they have invested so
much hope and sacrifice.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Special Representative Perthes
for his sobering briefing and take this opportunity to
welcome the new Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan, Ms. Nkweta-Salami,
to her new role. I also welcome the participation
of the Commissioner of the African Union (AU),
the Executive Secretary of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan in today’s meeting.
The work that Mr. Perthes and his team have
done to advance the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) in the current environment is truly
impressive and we appreciate the fact that they are
operating under extremely challenging conditions. It is
now more critical than ever for the Council to signal its
full support for the Mission.
Over the weekend, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United States announced that the Sudanese
security forces agreed to a short-term ceasefire and
humanitarian arrangements. We call on both parties to
fulfil their obligations under the seven-day ceasefire
and to allow humanitarian aid and relief assistance to
reach those in desperate need.
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The United States remains committed to bringing
about a sustained end to the conflict in the Sudan,
which has inflicted immense pain and suffering on the
Sudanese people. We have heard disturbing reports of
attacks on civilians, air strikes on hospitals, sexual and
gender-based violence and looting. We must all do our
part to bring about peace and stability. And we must do
so with urgency. There is no time to waste. To that end,
we are in close cooperation with our partners, including
Saudi Arabia, the African Union, IGAD, the League of
Arab States and our other partners in the Quad and the
troika and the friends of the Sudan. The United States
welcomed the 11 May Declaration of Commitment to
Protect the Civilians of the Sudan, which recognizes
the obligations of both sides under international
humanitarian law to respect human rights and facilitate
humanitarian assistance. Those obligations align with
the goals and intent of the AU’s 20 April communiqué
and support its forthcoming road map for de-escalation.
As we work towards peace, the United States is
committed to addressing the dire humanitarian needs
on the ground. More than 24 million people are now in
need of humanitarian assistance, a 57 per cent increase
over previous estimates. Humanitarian agencies,
national non-governmental organizations, civil-society
organizations, professional unions and neighbourhoodbased resistance committees are going to incredible
lengths to deliver food, provide medical care, resupply
hospitals and support evacuations, but they cannot do
that heroic work without unhindered humanitarian
access. All parties must allow for immediate, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access for those in need or
displaced by the fighting. We support the leadership
of the United Nations in marshalling resources for the
Sudanese people, including through the newly revised
humanitarian response plan, and we look forward to
closely coordinating our efforts.
For its part, the United States is committed to
helping support the needs of the more than 250,000
people who have crossed into neighbouring countries
in search of safety and the more than 840,000 who are
displaced inside the Sudan and cannot leave owing to
fighting, fuel shortages or fear. At the same time, we
must not forget the needs of the 1.1 million refugees
who were in the Sudan prior to the fighting. We
appreciate and commend the work of the neighbouring
countries that have welcomed Sudanese arrivals, and
we encourage all countries to ensure that refugees
and asylum seekers have access to protection and can

S/PV.9326

eventually return to their countries of origin voluntarily
and when conditions permit.
Finally, I would like to note that the United States
continues to engage with Sudanese civilian leaders,
resistance committees and civil society to establish
a civilian-led democratic Government as soon as
possible. The United States stands with the people of
the Sudan as they push for freedom, peace and justice
under democratic civilian rule. And we continue to
send a clear message to the Sudanese security forces
that they should end this senseless conflict once and
for all.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by thanking our briefers today for their
very comprehensive updates on the developments
in the Sudan, and I welcome the participation of the
Ambassador of Sudan in this meeting.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the shortterm ceasefire and humanitarian arrangement
agreed and signed in Jeddah over the weekend. The
agreement reinforces the 11 May Jeddah Declaration
of Commitment to Protect the Civilians of Sudan and
forms part of a step-by-step approach agreed by the
parties. We thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United States for their extensive efforts in facilitating
those important developments. We urge for more talks
to improve the security and humanitarian conditions
for civilians on the ground and to enable the necessary
political solution to this crisis. In the meantime, we
stress that the details of the recent agreement must be
fully implemented.
The work of the United Nations on the ground and of
diplomatic missions has been exceptional in extremely
challenging circumstances. We strongly condemn the
vandalizing of diplomatic premises, including the
latest incidents at the Embassies of Kuwait, Jordan
and Qatar. Diplomatic premises must be protected
in accordance with international law, including the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. Since the
beginning of the fighting, the United Arab Emirates
has sent nine planes to the Sudan, evacuating nearly
1,000 people. We continue to host and care for nationals
from 26 different countries. We are also supporting
neighbouring countries that have taken in refugees.
The United Arab Emirates dispatched 229 tons of
aid to Chad to support displaced Sudanese and the
Government of Chad’s humanitarian response, and we
encourage all who can to support the displaced.

23-1445113/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

There still remains much work to be done. The
seven-day ceasefire and humanitarian arrangements
signed over the weekend build on the Jeddah
Declaration, by which the parties agreed to facilitate
the safe passage of aid workers and the distribution of
humanitarian supplies. They also agreed to allow the
unimpeded flow of goods, restore essential services
and withdraw forces from hospitals and essential public
facilities. We hope they will be able to make good on
those commitments. The United Arab Emirates will
support the Security Council’s endorsement of the
Jeddah Declaration and the short-term ceasefire and
humanitarian arrangements. Together they must be
built on within a wider format, including with partner
countries, to promote confidence among the parties.
From what High Commissioner Filippo Grandi told
the Security Council last week, as well as recent data
from Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, we know the number of refugees is
increasing. More than 200,000 refugees have now
crossed over into neighbouring countries. That is
accelerating a humanitarian crisis for the region at a
time when the Sudan’s neighbours are themselves
under great strain. We commend those neighbouring
Governments that have allowed people to seek refuge
despite their own difficulties. The millions who
remain in Khartoum and other areas of the Sudan face
unacceptable danger and are struggling to meet their
basic needs. Fuel shortages mean that hospitals do not
have consistent power. The ongoing fighting makes
it difficult to replenish dwindling food supplies, and
there are reports of food shortages in many areas. The
alarm bells continue to ring for all of us.
Tragically, the lives of many children have also
been upended or cut short by the fighting. According
to UNICEF, 190 children were killed during the first 11
days of the fighting alone, with another 1,700 injured.
Most worrisomely, those numbers are underreported.
Children are entitled to exceptional protections under
international humanitarian law, and the Council has
called for special measures to be taken to protect them,
including in its resolution 2601 (2021).
We commend the courageous efforts of the
Sudanese front-line responders providing emergency
services and reiterate our call for all actors to abide by
their commitments. Measures such as flights between
Port Sudan and Addis Ababa are pivotal for the welfare
of civilians, but they are simply a stopgap for the
permanent ceasefire that we want to see in place to ensure
14/23

22/05/2023

the continuity of relief services. The only sustainable
end to this situation is through a political track, which
must include a broad array of civil and political actors,
including women. The United Arab Emirates will
continue to work with all key partners to support
coordinated mediation efforts at all levels. The United
Nations, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the League of Arab States have been
committed to supporting the Sudan on its path to peace.
The solution does lie in a broad regional approach with
a strong international backbone.
The United Arab Emirates believes that the
continued engagement of the United Nations, through
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan, is critical, and we support the
renewal of its mandate. We also support the work of
the many United Nations agencies operating on the
ground. The international community must remain
resolute in its commitment to safeguarding the future
of the Sudanese people. Only by calling for a return
to the political track will the violence be brought to a
swift and sustainable end.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I would like to join
others in thanking Special Representative Perthes,
Commissioner Adeoye and Executive Secretary
Gebeyehu for their briefings.
In the wake of the outbreak of the clashes in
Khartoum on 15 April, we reiterate our call on both
the parties to cease hostilities without preconditions
and to lead the Sudan back to a political transition.
We welcome the latest mediation efforts, including the
Declaration of Commitment to Protect the Civilians of
Sudan and the brokering of the upcoming seven-day
ceasefire. We believe that is the only path to sustainable
peace and stability in the Sudan.
Malta firmly deplores the loss of life and is
deeply concerned about the fact that since the start
of the clashes more than 800 people have been killed,
including 200 children, and more than 5,000 injured.
Women and girls remain at high risk of sexual and
gender-based violence, with extensive reports of rapes
and sexual assaults. Protection measures must be put
in place and strengthened for women and children, the
elderly, people with disabilities and other vulnerable
groups. We cannot afford to leave anyone behind. We
want to remind all the parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law and call for safe, rapid
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and unhindered humanitarian access to all civilians, at
a time when humanitarian needs in the Sudan have risen
to record levels. We also call for thorough investigations
and for perpetrators to be brought to justice and held
accountable for their crimes. Malta condemns all
attacks on civilian infrastructure, including homes,
hospitals, schools and places of worship. We also
condemn attacks on humanitarian and medical workers
or on United Nations premises. We are concerned about
the fact that an estimated $14 million worth of food
products destined for the most food-insecure sectors of
the population, along with more than 1 million polio
vaccines intended for children, have been destroyed as
a result of looting.
It is clear that the conflict in the Sudan is having
repercussions on the wider region. An estimated quarter
of a million people have fled the country, and the high
number of refugees and displaced marks a crisis of
regional proportions. As Sudanese and third-country
nationals fleeing the Sudan face perilous journeys, we
acknowledge the efforts being made by neighbouring
countries to host those seeking refuge. At the same time,
we remain concerned about the situation of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the Sudan, especially the
women residing in IDP camps, who remain at high risk
of sexual and gender-based violence.
Malta welcomes all efforts that seek to support
dialogue and mediation, including by the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the League of Arab States and the United Nations, as
well as by the Sudan’s neighbours and other partner
countries. We commend the efforts of the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee, chaired by the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS), as well as the civilian signatory parties
to the Framework Agreement, who have also been
instrumental in defusing tensions and promoting
community-level dialogue. All efforts must be inclusive
and ensure the participation of women, young people
and civil society. Malta will continue to support a
political settlement, including through unified messages
from the Council. We urge both parties to listen to
and act on those calls. We express our full support
for Special Representative Perthes and UNITAMS
for their unfaltering commitment to the Sudan’s path
towards stability, despite their limited capacity. As we
look forward to the Mission’s renewal, we also want
to use today’s meeting to call for full respect by the
authorities for the UNITAMS mandate.

S/PV.9326

Our message is clear. It is only by silencing the
guns that we can guarantee a space for dialogue and
mediation and a solid foundation for the Sudan to return
to a path towards a civilian-led Government, peace and
a stable democratic future.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security, Mr. Workneh Gebeyehu, Executive Secretary
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
and Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for their briefings. We
also welcome the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, Mr. Al-Harith Idriss Al-Harith Mohamed, to
today’s meeting.
Russia is deeply concerned about the dangerous
dynamics of the situation in Sudan. The 15 April
outbreak of hostilities between units of the regular army
and the Rapid Support Forces has resulted in many
casualties. The humanitarian situation is complex. The
numbers of internally displaced persons and refugees
are growing. Any further escalation of the situation
risks exacerbating the security situation in the Sudan
itself as well as destabilizing neighbouring countries
that are themselves in extremely vulnerable situations.
Many are struggling with their own conflicts, receiving
international assistance and hosting peacekeeping and
special political missions.
In order to effectively respond to the current
crisis in the Sudan, we must understand its causes and
analyse the steps that led to this outbreak of tensions.
We believe that to a great extent the conflict is a result
of the mismanagement of the political settlement in the
Sudan. Much of the responsibility for that lies with the
Western countries that have long considered themselves
entitled to interfere in the country’s internal affairs.
Instead of enabling a genuinely Sudanese-owned and
Sudanese-led political process to take place, hasty
measures have been imposed on the country that are
neither based on the national political culture nor
broadly accepted by the population. Unfortunately,
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) also forced the
process of the transfer of power to civilians.
We have repeatedly pointed out that the efforts
to attract international financial assistance for the
much-needed social and economic stabilization of the
country have been inadequate. On the contrary, in fact,

23-1445115/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

22/05/2023

the country has been deprived of that assistance as a
form of punishment, making its provision contingent on
achieving artificial deadlines and obtaining consent for
the adoption of questionable democratizing formulas.
We continue to believe that the Sudanese people should
be fully granted the right not only to make decisions
about their own and their country’s future but also to
take full responsibility for them. Many of the structural
problems of Sudanese society have their roots in the
legacy of colonialism and are related to the process of
consolidating a unified State. That discussion is beyond
the scope of the current crisis and represents a longterm effort, but if we fail to address it, sustainable
stability in the country will be difficult to achieve.

United Nations assistance. The current mandate could
be technically extended, and the main role delegated to
national and regional efforts. It could then be revisited
after the acute phase is over. Providing humanitarian
assistance to the Sudanese population and to the
neighbouring countries that have generously opened
their borders will be crucial.

We call on the Sudanese parties to demonstrate the
necessary political will and take immediate steps to
definitively end the armed confrontation. We believe
that any disagreement can be resolved at the negotiating
table, and the Sudanese have the wisdom and political
experience they need to do that. We welcome regional
efforts to help the Sudan. We need to give them space
and time, consult with countries of the region and
support the steps they take. We must ensure that there
is no repetition of the experiences in Libya, where
forceful intervention led the country to catastrophe and
has destabilized half the continent. We believe that the
signing of the Jeddah Declaration of Commitment to
Protect the Civilians of the Sudan and the agreement on
a seven-day humanitarian truce by representatives of
the army leadership and the Rapid Support Forces is a
step in the right direction.

The situation has continued to deteriorate since
15 April in West Darfur as well as in Khartoum. We
condemn the indiscriminate acts of violence, which are
in violation of international law and the commitments
made by both parties on 11 May in Jeddah. They must
not go unpunished. Rallying members of armed groups
based on their community affiliation has also continued,
and we condemn those developments. As we know,
this crisis threatens to destabilize the entire region.
We are witnessing a massive increase in the number of
displaced persons, refugees and food-insecure people.
The determination of the parties to continue fighting
means that millions of civilians will continue to be
affected either by the clashes or by the disruption of
humanitarian assistance.

For its part, Russia, for which the Sudan has always
been a friendly country, is maintaining contact with
the Sudanese parties. If needed and requested, we
stand ready to assist them, but we will not interfere
in the country’s internal affairs. The Russian embassy
in Khartoum is continuing its work despite serious
security threats. At this point, it will be critical to
ensure that all the mediators work in a concerted
manner, regardless of their potential national interests.
We hope that the measures being taken will create the
necessary conditions for stabilizing the situation in the
country and relaunching an inclusive political process.
Attempts to influence the situation by force, including
through illegitimate unilateral coercive measures,
are counterproductive.
With regard to the future work of UNITAMS, we
believe that given the current situation on the ground,
now is not the time to complicate the parameters of
16/23

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Representative for the
Secretary-General Volker Perthes, African Union
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye and Executive Secretary
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) Workneh Gebeyehu. I will focus on five points.

We welcome the continued action of the United
Nations on the ground, as well as the solidarity of
neighbouring countries in hosting refugees. Together
with its European partners, France will fully play its
part in contributing to the humanitarian response. The
European Union’s support already amounts to more
than €150 million for 2023. We are also supporting the
efforts undertaken by regional actors, as well as the
United States and Saudi Arabia, and we welcome the
ceasefire that has just been agreed. The parties must
implement all the commitments made in Jeddah by
opening humanitarian corridors and ceasing hostilities.
The scale of the crisis demands that close coordination
be maintained with international partners, including
the European Union.
The Security Council must speak out and remain
active on this issue. It is unacceptable that the Council
has not adopted any kind of statement since the first
day of the conflict. The work of the Security Council
is complementary to regional efforts, especially those
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the African Union. It is all the more necessary
because the parties have not responded to those efforts
to date and have locked themselves into continuing
the fighting. We reiterate our full support for the
work of the United Nations and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS). We welcome the continued work of the
Special Representative with the parties, in conjunction
with the African Union and IGAD. We also encourage
UNITAMS to give as much support as possible to
the actions of political forces advocating for peace,
especially in civil society and at the local level. Peace
cannot be restored without the involvement of all
Sudanese actors. When the time comes, Sudanese civil
society must take part in the discussions to achieve a
lasting ceasefire and a political solution to the crisis.
In view of the remarks made by the representative
of the Russian Federation, I would like to add some
comments to my initial statement.
Russia is accusing the West of imposing its own
policies on the Sudan and not doing enough there.
That is completely erroneous, given that the driving
force behind the conflict is a rivalry between two
generals exacerbated by internal divisions in the
Sudan. I would like to point out that the establishment
of a unified army was never imposed from outside. I
would also like to remind the Russian Federation that
where financial assistance is concerned, France was
at the forefront of the initiative to relieve Sudan’s debt
from 2019 onwards, an initiative that Russia was the
last country to join, in 2021, and that the process was
suspended after the coup d’état in October 2021 without
prejudice to humanitarian aid. It has always been clear
that our financial assistance is tied to the democratic
transition, which was not externally imposed either but
was rather a result of the aspirations of the Sudanese
people themselves. It is the failure to address those
aspirations since the 2021 coup that has contributed to
the current crisis.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I too would like to
thank Special Representative Perthes, Commissioner
Adeoye and Executive Secretary Gebeyehu for their
briefings. Let me also express Albania’s deep gratitude
to Mr. Perthes and his team for their commitment and
tireless efforts in the Sudan, especially during these
very challenging times. We appreciate his update on
the evolving situation in the country and commend his
presence here today, despite the difficulties and danger

S/PV.9326

involved in travelling in and out of the country. We also
welcome the representative of the Sudan to this meeting.
We join others in welcoming the news of a
temporary seven-day humanitarian ceasefire between
the parties, mediated by the United States and Saudi
Arabia this past Saturday. However, words must be
followed by action. Continuing the conflict will only
worsen divisions, fragment society and escalate the risk
of prolonged intercommunal clashes. Albania deeply
regrets the current situation in the Sudan, which has
compromised the significant progress that had been
achieved before the conflict erupted. The risk of severe
regional fragmentation is extremely high and deserves
the Council’s attention. We are gravely concerned
about the scale of casualties, injuries and displacements
in Khartoum and Darfur. It is disturbing to hear the
reports of the numbers of newly displaced people. In
that regard, we commend the Sudan’s neighbours for
keeping their borders open and allowing internally
displaced persons to seek shelter. Furthermore, conflict
disproportionately affects communities according
to gender. Before the crisis, approximately 8 million
women and girls needed humanitarian assistance.
The conflict has further intensified their challenges
in accessing vital services and has heightened their
vulnerability to sexual violence.
We urge both conflicting parties to uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian law
to protect civilians and infrastructure. We strongly
condemn acts of violence targeting diplomats, United
Nations employees, humanitarian organizations and
medical workers and the looting of their properties.
Furthermore, it will be vital to ensure the safe
movement of civilians away from areas of ongoing
hostilities, granting them access to essential resources
such as food, water and medical supplies.
In conclusion, we commend all diplomatic
efforts made by the international community, regional
actors, the United Nations, the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
League of Arab States. Albania reiterates its strong
support for the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan and commends the
work of the Mission and its dedicated team led by
Special Representative Perthes.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Switzerland.

23-1445117/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and would like to express
Switzerland’s gratitude to him and his team for their
tireless efforts in extremely difficult conditions. We
thank the African Union Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security and the Executive Secretary
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan. Sudanese civilsociety actors have played a key role in the efforts to
return to a democratic transition and have a critical role
to play in the political efforts to stabilize the current
situation. Their voices must be heard. I therefore regret
that the current conditions did not allow civil society to
participate safely in today’s briefing.
I share the concerns expressed by my colleagues
about the ongoing fighting, which is plunging the Sudan,
already in the grip of an unprecedented humanitarian
crisis, into a humanitarian disaster. The latest reports
on the escalation of violence in El Geneina in West
Darfur are particularly worrisome. We express our
sincere condolences to the families of the victims. I
would like to highlight three points.
First, it is essential to silence the guns to protect
civilians. The heavy toll that the conflict is taking on
the population is unacceptable, and yet the fighting
has continued in densely populated areas, critical
infrastructure continues to be targeted and widespread
looting and theft threaten the security and livelihoods
of civilians. Many diplomatic premises, as well as
those of humanitarian organizations, have been looted
or destroyed, severely limiting their occupants’ ability
to support the Sudanese population. The conflict also
threatens to exacerbate existing conflicts, particularly
in Darfur and Blue Nile state, which could lead to a
further escalation of the conflict.
Secondly, both parties to the conflict must respect
international humanitarian law. Parents and children
remain trapped in the crossfire and are struggling to
access food, water and medical care. It is essential to
facilitate and enable full, safe, timely and unhindered
humanitarian access to civilians in need and the
evacuation of the injured, as was affirmed in the Jeddah
Declaration of Commitment to Protect the Civilians
of Sudan. Many who were able to flee the violence
remain very vulnerable and need our full support. We
commend the countries of the region for their solidarity
in hosting refugees and returnees. We welcome the
agreement on a short-term ceasefire and humanitarian
18/23

22/05/2023

arrangements signed by the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces in Jeddah, which comes
into effect tonight. Its full implementation is crucial to
alleviating the suffering of the population. Switzerland
will continue to support humanitarian efforts in the
Sudan and in the region.
Thirdly, respect for a long-term ceasefire must be
combined with a return to negotiations. In that regard,
we support the ongoing diplomatic efforts, in particular
those of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the League of Arab States,
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), neighbouring
countries and bilateral partners. Those diplomatic
efforts should be closely coordinated. As regards
prospects for an eventual return to a political process, it
must be underscored that Sudanese civil-society actors
remain at the heart of any sustainable solution.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
UNITAMS and the trilateral mechanism. We stand
with the Sudanese people in achieving their aspirations
for peace, justice and democratic governance.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The statement made by the representative of
France is yet more proof of what I said in my earlier
statement. It is well known that the international
community to which our Western colleagues refer
includes only themselves, and that they are never to
blame for anything. Indeed, all they do is bring “peace”
and “democracy” to the world. Such endeavours have
never resulted in stability, however, That is the way
that “peace” and “democracy” have been brought to
Libya, Somalia and many other parts of the world. As
regards France’s efforts on “peace” and “economic
development” in Africa, volumes have been written
about that already.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), for his
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

comprehensive briefing. We have taken note of the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Sudan and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS)
(S/2023/355). I also thank Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African
Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security; and Mr. Workneh Gebeyehu, Executive
Secretary of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). I also thank Ambassador Pedro
Comissário Afonso for the statement he delivered on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council. I welcome the new Resident Coordinator,
Clementine Nkweta-Salami, and I pray for mercy for
the spirits of the fallen during the clashes.
This statement is divided into three parts: the truce,
ceasefire and humanitarian assistance. I will first
address the humanitarian situation.
Thankfully, the agreement on a short-term ceasefire
and humanitarian arrangements was signed between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and Rapid Support Forces on
20 May with a view to ending the armed clashes. It may
be renewed and could lead to a permanent ceasefire.
It will remain in effect for a week, starting today. The
agreement, facilitated by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United States of America, strengthens the
Jeddah declaration, signed on 11 May, and its primary
purpose is to protect civilians and to curb the impact
of the war on civilians, to promote compliance with
international humanitarian law and respect for human
rights, ensure access to humanitarian assistance and
restore basic services.
The agreement commits the other party to evacuate
and to not to capture territories and to protect public
facilities, in particular hospitals, medical facilities,
power plants and water infrastructure. It also establishes
a defined monitoring mechanism for coordination
to oversee the implementation of the agreement and
update it. The scope of the agreement includes all of the
Sudan and seeks to bring to an end to the hostilities and
the targeting of civilian and humanitarian aircraft and
to prevent weapons from being received from foreign
sources and to bring to an end boarding and quartering
in civilian residences, military build-up, the demolition
and destruction of civilian infrastructure and all acts of
looting and vandalizing.
The agreement addresses, in a practical way,
the humanitarian concerns and ensures access for
humanitarian assistance in the following manner. For

S/PV.9326

its part, the Sudanese Government will commit to the
principles of the Jeddah declaration that complements
this agreement, while respecting international
humanitarian law and human rights, and will ensure
the conditions for the provision of urgent assistance and
access to humanitarian agencies without impediments
and will guarantee the protection of humanitarian
workers and cooperate with the International
Commission for the Red Cross (ICRC) with regard
to detainees and prisoners during the conflict, in
accordance with its sovereignty.
Secondly, with regard to the monitoring and
coordination mechanism, the Government of the
Sudan agreed that the mechanism will include three
representatives from Saudi Arabia and the United
States and three representatives from every party with
liaison officers in order to implement the short-term
ceasefire and facilitate the humanitarian arrangements.
The humanitarian actors in the Sudan, such as the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the ICRC, may communicate with the mechanism
concerning issues of violations of the ceasefire or
risks humanitarian workers are facing. Accordingly,
there will be coordination to guarantee the protection
of civilians and protect freedom of movement, while
respecting the principles of humanitarian work.
As a result of the humanitarian situation, the
Government of the Sudan has launched an initiative
and has called on the international community, United
Nations agencies and relevant regional organizations, as
well as donors, to provide humanitarian assistance. The
Government has committed Port Sudan and the airports
of Dongola, Port Sudan and Wadi Seidna to receiving
assistance, with distribution carried out by United
Nations agencies and national organizations, as per the
work of the Sudanese Humanitarian Aid Commission
and as per humanitarian principles which emphasize
neutrality and integrity in humanitarian activities.
The Government facilitated the visit of UnderSecretary-General Mr. Martin Griffiths to the Sudan
to support the humanitarian work, and the Sudanese
Humanitarian Aid Commission has coordinated with
international actors and is currently managing relief
operations and providing support to affected persons.
The Commission has also affirmed that it is ready to
remove impediments facing humanitarian agencies.
We are coordinating with all parties to chart the safe
corridors through which assistance will be distributed
to affected persons, hospitals and medical centres.

23-1445119/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
the friendly States that have provided support and
humanitarian assistance to the affected people in the
Sudan, including the United Nations.
Thirdly, with a view to addressing the aggression
and protecting civilians, based on our constitutional
responsibility to protect our national security, we
have exercised restraint and committed to upholding
the norms of war to minimize losses. That has been
demonstrated through the signing of the Jeddah
declaration and the new agreement to implement a
temporary ceasefire. Moreover, we have responded
to the repeated calls for a ceasefire, which led to the
current agreement.
The Sudanese Armed Forces have been able to
largely contain the aggression targeting the Sudanese
State. We have exercised restraint and committed to
upholding the norms and have contained the area of
the conflict to a narrow area and to prevent the enemy
from achieving strategic gains. We have prevented
the insurgent militias from receiving assistance from
across the borders. The Sudanese Armed Forces have
used carefully targeted weapons with limited impact.
However, the insurgent militias are seeking to receive
additional resources from within the Sudan and abroad.
That makes it imperative for the Sudanese Armed
Forces, despite the agreements, to continue monitoring
entry points. The militias have attacked El Obeid city
twice and have sought to use the airport to receive
foreign assistance. However, we have successfully
thwarted their attempts without civilian losses. They
tried to attack the army headquarters in the city of
Nyala, but that was easily defended. Small numbers of
militia attacked the town of Rahad, to the east of El
Obeid city, and they burned a police station and a local
market with the intention to loot and vandalize.
Fourthly, despite the fact that those violations have
been addressed neutrally in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we would like to provide examples of the
systemic crimes committed by the insurgent militias
to destroy our economic order and erase institutional
and collective memory. They have looted 27 banks,
16 factories, 32 companies, businesses, mobile and
jewellery stores, various warehouses and food centres,
pharmacies and research centres. They have looted
markets in Khartoum, Omdurman and Khartoum
Bahri, leading to losses in the billions of dollars. As a
result, close to 150,000 citizens are now unemployed.
20/23

22/05/2023

Diplomatic missions and residences have been
attacked. Systemic looting has targeted diplomatic
missions to sabotage the Sudan’s relations with the
world. Between 16 April and 1 May, our Ministry
of Interior, Ministry for Foreign Affairs, military
and security services, and Civil Aviation Authority
received close to 50 reports of criminal attacks on the
following diplomatic missions, in chronological order:
the United States of America, Indonesia, the United
Arab Emirates, the European Union, Kuwait, Djibouti,
India, Republic of Korea, Switzerland, the Russian
Federation, Ethiopia, Yemen, Syria, Spain, the Niger,
Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, the Netherlands, Morocco,
Libya, the Sultanate of Oman, Canada, Zimbabwe,
Iraq, Bulgaria, Malaysia, Egypt — in whose embassy
an administrative attaché was assassinated — Chad,
the Congo, Qatar and Uganda. In addition, gunfire
has erupted against residences of ambassadors and
other members of diplomatic missions, whose vehicles
have been looted or destroyed. Surveillance cameras
have also been destroyed and the rebel forces are now
positioned directly around those diplomatic premises.
Crimes have also been committed against
governmental agencies and protection caravans.
Court and tribunal registries have been stolen.
Land-ownership registries at Land Office have been
destroyed or stolen, in order to establish the militia’s
ownership of the buildings they have occupied in
carefully selected residential neighbourhoods. Other
crimes can be categorized under cultural-historical
erasing: militias have looted different museums — of
the judiciary, of the army and the National Museum,
they have vandalized multiple universities, including
the Universities of Al-Ahfad and Omdurman, and they
have destroyed national monuments.
The militias have also committed rape, thereby
sabotaging the honour of our citizens. They have also
detained civilians, including women and children, and
destroyed millions of vaccines for children. They have
targeted civilian objects, houses of worship, including
mosques, and five churches, transforming them into
military sites. Moreover, we refer the Council to
the statement made recently by Ms. Sulaima Ishaq
Mohamed Al-Khalifa, Director of the Combating
Violence against Women unit, which denounced the
systematic crimes perpetrated by the rebel militias.
Are these not considered by the Security Council
crimes of aggression? The destruction of the capital
of the country , other cities, public roads, airports and
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

different civilian centres, as well as vital infrastructure
and strategic facilities creates a situation of chaos and
leads to the collapse of the State. We therefore call on the
international community and the Security Council to
condemn in the strongest of terms these unprecedented
acts of aggression crimes against the State, diplomatic
missions and international organizations.
On building peace, in parallel with the official
efforts of the UNITAMS and the Government, steps
have been undertaken by civil society to build peace
and reconcile society. To that end, civilian components
in South Darfur have signed a document calling for the
end of the war and the restoration of civilian life. The
signatories included 80 tribes, which is germane to our
discussion, given that speakers today have mentioned
that the ethnic impact of the conflict is clearly growing.
With regard to the situation in El Geneina, West
Darfur, an emergency meeting was held, with the
Governor of Darfur in attendance. Urgent visits to El
Geneina and meetings with volunteers health workers
and different civilian representatives took place in
order to address the situation on the ground and, in
cooperation with State authorities, de-escalate the
situation and achieve peace after the bloody events in
the area in the recent period. In addition, supplies and
medicine have been provided from Port Sudan to be
distributed among the affected, and all internal roads
have been secured to and from Darfur.
On the negative implications for the region, there
is a conceptual misunderstanding with regard to
the classification of the Sudanese who have fled to
neighbouring countries in recent days, using the terms
refugees and internally displaced persons. This is not
a denial; rather, I seek to establish the facts. Under the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,
a refugee is a person outside his or her country of
citizenship who, for reasons of persecution — on the
basis of race, religion, nationality or membership
in a certain social or political group — is unable or
unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of
that country or is unwilling to return to the country. It
is true that modern regional refugee instruments have
expanded the definition of refugees to include foreign
aggression, occupation, foreign hegemony, public
disorder and internal conflict, but in this case, there are
no large numbers of refugees in Egypt, Eritrea or Chad,
and the Sudanese who have fled there have not been
classified as such.

S/PV.9326

Pursuant to the guidelines on internal displacement,
the internally displaced are persons who have been
forced to abandon their homes or regular places of
residence to avoid armed conflict, widespread violence,
natural disasters or human rights violations, but have
not crossed international borders. That is why there are
no camps in Khartoum, its suburbs or in the various
cities for persons who have left Khartoum and returned
to their families living elsewhere. This is one of the
advantages of the well-known solidarity among people
in the Sudan. For those who have referred to such
persons as internally displaced persons, describing
them as such does not grant a special legal status to
persons who are actually internally displaced; as long
as they remain within their country’s borders, they
remain citizens and cannot be classified as internally
displaced persons. Nevertheless, the thousands of
Sudanese all over the Sudan who have sought refuge
with their families inside the borders do require urgent
assistance and relief.
As for the large numbers of persons who have crossed
the borders to neighbouring countries as afflicted
persons, they are suffering difficult circumstances in
Egypt, Ethiopia, Chad and South Sudan. Many of them
have not been registered as refugees and do not have
personal resources. They therefore must be granted
priority, so they can receive humanitarian support.
It is worth mentioning that the number of Sudanese
who have reached Ethiopia through the Gallabat
crossing, intending to travel to Ethiopia or other places
has, as of 18 May, reached 3,568 persons, including
only 30 registered refugees. The number of Sudanese
persons who have registered as asylum-seekers since
12 May is only about a hundred persons, and before
18 May, they numbered only 60 refugees. Most of
the Sudanese who have left the country through the
Gallabat crossing have not sought asylum in Ethiopia,
as their destination are the Gulf States or Egypt. These
persons represent 95 per cent of the those crossing the
border with electronic visas; only 2 per cent of those
who reached Ethiopia came with a tourist visa allowing
them to remain there for a month.
Most of the people who have left the country
are businesspersons and rich individuals who reside
in hotels in Addis Ababa. In Egypt, the Egyptian
representative verified to me that there are no camps
for refugees and that the Sudanese residing in Egypt are
there as citizens, not refugees. We thank the Egyptian
Government for hosting them and ask the international

23-1445121/23

S/PV.9326

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

22/05/2023

community to support those Sudanese persons because
they number more than 90,000 persons. I have asked the
States of neighbouring countries to provide a response
to the negative regional impact of the armed conflict in
the Sudan. However, no one has verified that there has
been an impact on regional security.

Fifthly, initiatives must continue to support the
capacity to sustain peace and build resilience, to
coordinate humanitarian efforts, to enhance social
reconciliation, to build trust among sectors of local
communities and to promote the role of youth and
women in peacebuilding.

As for the regional efforts of the IGAD and the
African Union (AU), we support the AU 2063 Agenda,
in particular its Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2030
initiative, for States that have recently emerged from
long-term conflict, in order to achieve resilience and
restore calm, peace and all aspects of the post-conflict
reconstruction and development agenda. We look
forward to the fulfilment of the role of IGAD and the
trilateral mechanisms, including that of Presidents
Museveni, Mayardit and Guelleh. The Sudan will
participate in the IGAD summit in Djibouti on 12 June.

Sixthly, resources must be mobilized to achieve
social and economic integration for internally displaced
persons. We must also mobilize international support in
order to meet development needs. We reiterate that there
is a shortfall with regard to the provision of resources
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. Mission reports have always blamed the
Sudan, however, the financial assistance pledged by
donors and international actors has not been provided.

Since most delegations have addressed the role of
UNITAMS, I would like to mention that the Mission was
voluntarily requested by the Sudan, and the Security
Council established it in 2020. It is an integrated
mission called upon to assist during the transition in
the Sudan, pursuant to Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Peacemaking is not only linked to the
political-demographic track It involves renewed
communication with donors to go beyond the
provision of basic humanitarian support to increase
resources. We hope that the new Resident Coordinator,
Ms. Clementine Nkweta-Salami, will work towards that
end and make positive progress through re-engagement
with donors. We hope that priority will be given to the
following areas.
First, there must be
development assistance.

peacebuilding

through

Secondly, once the conflict ends, there must be
reconstruction by providing technical advice for the
implementation of integration, disarmament and
demobilization programmes.
Thirdly, youth capacity-building and skills must
be enhanced. The role of youth in contributing to a
political settlement, leading the transformation and
building a civilian project by assisting vulnerable
groups to benefit from the Government economic plan
must also be strengthened.
Fourthly, women and girls must participate more in
the peacebuilding process.
22/23

Finally, efforts must be made to rebuild and to
rehabilitate the service sector.
I have some remarks regarding the report. I
note that the report failed to mention who began the
conflict — the rebel forces. Regarding the progress
of the political process, as indicated in the report, the
report was far from the truth, given that the manner
the process evolved was one of the elements that
complicated the political scene, due to the lack of
neutrality and transparency. We note that the Head of
the Mission sent messages that led to a negative impact,
such as the short period granted to integrate the Rapid
Support Forces into the Sudanese Armed Forces — five
years. Accordingly, some political factions tended to
be inflexible and made statements involving limited
options and threatening war. That includes some
statements made by leaders of the Central Council.
With regard to commending some resistance
committees that provided services for those displaced
from Khartoum, the report does not mention the
assistance of local residents. Despite the role of
the insurgent militias in attacking persons and
infrastructure, many have not deplored or condemned
them. That is not true for the Sudanese Armed Forces,
which have been blamed and denounced.
The lack of compliance with the previous
truces was not intentional. It only occurred because
the other side violated the ceasefire and opened
the doors of the prison — as attested by prisoners
themselves — to let them out. The reason for that was
not the lack of food in prisons, but rather the attack
on police by the militia in Kober and Al-Huda prisons,
23-14451

22/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9326

which led convicted criminals to return to society and
make it more dangerous.

withholding their resources because of the current
political situation.

With regard to the new visas, the evacuation of
United Nations personnel due to the dangerous work
environment and the killing of some staff security is
sufficient justification for our caution in issuing new
visas — in order to ensure that we can guarantee their
safety. The Government is doing what is necessary so
as to enable humanitarian work through a high national
committee, led by the Minister of Social Solidarity,
as well as dedicated staff from Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and other institutions in Port Sudan in order to
facilitate arrangements.

Finally, daily life has started to return to normal
in Omdurman. Transportation has restarted, but risks
remain, with some insurgent militia elements becoming
entrenched in various homes that were forcefully
taken from their owners in the neighbourhoods of
Al-Hashmab, Al-Abassiya and Al-Umara.

The Mission also did not make any concrete effort
to implement the Sudan Liberation Forces’ projects
in Darfur, Blue Nile and South Kordofan states. Its
approach in communicating with the various political
parties was unbalanced, which weakens gains made in
workshops it organized in the field of democracy and
sustained peace. This shortcoming was due to flaws in
approach and implementation and not being sensitive to
local environment capacities, which undermined urgent
national ownership priorities.
With regard to the protection of civilians and
missions, the Government had taken all necessary
measures, including providing additional protection for
the Head of the Mission and senior staff, but attacks by
the militia were deliberate.
With regard to mobilizing resources and supporting
economic growth, we have been dealing with the
military component since 25 October 2021, with donors

Badr Airlines, in Port Sudan, has announced flights
to Cairo, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
with continued aviation activity in the airports of
Port Sudan and Wadi Seidna. Turkish Airlines also
submitted an aviation authorization request to connect
the Sudan with other countries through Port Sudan.
Bus transportation continued from Khartoum to Port
Sudan and from Khartoum to the cities of Ad-Damazin,
Kosti, Sennar and as far as the cities of Rabak and
Al-Jabalayn, close to South Sudan. The process of
exporting cattle from western Sudan aboard two ships
to Saudi Arabia was finalized. Banks have begun
restoring their activities in most cities, with the Central
Bank branches overseeing such activities in the states
of the Sudan.

Allow me to express to the Sudanese people that
there are some positive elements in these difficult
times.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

23-1445123/23
