United Nations

S/PV.6222

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6222nd meeting
Monday, 23 November 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayr-Harting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Puente
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2009/588)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-61649 (E)

*0961649*

S/PV.6222

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

I invite Mr. Inzko to take a seat at the Council
table.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2009/588)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and
Sweden, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.
Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Špirić, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Starčević
(Serbia) and Mr. Lidén (Sweden) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2009/588*, containing a
letter dated 12 November 2009 from the SecretaryGeneral transmitting the thirty-sixth report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Inzko: Allow me before I begin my briefing
to recall May 1992, 17 years ago, when the Austrian
President of the Security Council, Mr. Hohenfellner,
introduced draft resolutions proposing United Nations
membership for Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The General Assembly acted accordingly
on 22 May 1992 (see A/46/PV.86), and since then
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a State Member of
the United Nations. In Slovenia, to this day, that date is
celebrated as the day of Slovenian diplomacy. Nor has
that important day been forgotten in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Seventeen years later, let me today congratulate
Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election to a seat on the
Security Council. This, in my view, is Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s greatest foreign policy achievement
since the signature of the Dayton Agreement. However,
it is of course also a huge responsibility for the
country, which I believe Bosnia and Herzegovina will
shoulder well, with the kind and generous assistance of
the other members of the Council.
For 14 years, the international community has
worked with the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
rebuild their society, focusing on the practical
challenges of post-war recovery and Euro-Atlantic
integration. Development in Bosnia and Herzegovina
today no longer focuses on practical challenges, but on
a fundamental political debate which has, not resolved
a number of relevant political problems. The
international community is working intensively with its
partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve this
debate. When that is done, we can achieve rapid

09-61649

S/PV.6222

progress towards our final objective: a sovereign,
prosperous and democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina
fully integrated in Euro-Atlantic structures.
But we have not yet resolved all the open
political issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and as a
result we have seen a series of obstacles, delays and
failures. All of these failures are, basically, a
consequence of political differences and, sometimes,
obstructionism. I believe, for two reasons, that we will
find a way around obstruction.
First, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a society with
distinctive, if sometimes specific, ways of producing
consensus. It may not always be possible to find the
most straightforward solution, but I am confident that
in due course we will find a Bosnian way, and that this
will allow us to reach our ultimate objective.
Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina is part of the
sustained international effort to integrate the countries
of the Western Balkans into Euro-Atlantic structures.
The international community cannot and must not
abandon its massive investment of political and
material resources because of the present difficulties.
Resolving the political impasse in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is in our interest as well as the interest of
the people of that country.
The unresolved political issues I mentioned
earlier, are a product of two confusions. First, there is
confusion in the Republika Srpska over the nature of
the entity and the nature of the State; and there is
confusion in both entities about the proper focus and
functioning of politics and the State as a system. The
Republika Srpska leadership has failed to grasp that the
State and entity authorities have separate and clearly
defined mandates and that each must do its work,
complementing the other. This discrepancy in approach
has generated considerable difficulties.
At the same time, a number of political leaders in
the Federation advocate a much stronger role at the
State level and a reduced role for the entities in the
State structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This too
does not contribute to improved dialogue and forwardlooking politics.
The reporting period has been characterized by
persistent political problems and a lack of progress on
key agendas in which Bosnia and Herzegovina is
involved. As a result, a number of laws that were
required for Euro-Atlantic integration and for the

09-61649

closure of my office have been delayed. At the same
time, the Council of Ministers has failed to make key
appointments at the highest level of Government and
State agencies. This has further slowed progress and
the
development
of
a
professional
public
administration.
On 1 October, Serb members of the House of
Representatives voted down a law that would have
extended the mandates of international judges and
prosecutors working in the State court and the
Prosecutor’s Office, despite repeated requests from all
the judicial institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
from the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and from non-governmental organizations
working in the fields of anti-corruption and war-crimes
prosecution to extend the mandate. The relevant
authorities also failed to undertake any serious effort to
replace these international judges and prosecutors with
local counterparts. This issue is still unresolved, and I
fear that a failure to solve the extension of the judges
and prosecutors may result in a collapse of the judicial
system in the country.
It is self-explanatory why the fight against
organized crime, corruption and terrorism is so
important. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s capacity to
pursue war crimes trials is equally crucial to the
individualization of the guilt and the reconciliation
process in general.
A consistent pattern can be identified in this
behaviour. Parties from Republika Srpska frequently
criticize State-level institutions for lack of efficiency at
the very same time as they are actively engaged in
undermining those same institutions. In other words,
from time to time they create a problem at the State
level and then criticize the State for having the
problem. This is happening at the same time as Bosnia
and Herzegovina is desperately struggling to become a
member of NATO and the European Union (EU). We
thus have a disagreement and confusion over the nature
of the entity and the nature and the functions of the
State.
The second confusion involves the proper focus
of politics. As I said earlier, this has been a problem
not only in Republika Srpska, but also in the other
entity — the Federation. During the reporting period,
tens of thousands of jobs were lost in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a result of the world recession and of
the failure to ensure cooperation and proper fiscal

3

S/PV.6222

coordination in the country. This represents an
existential crisis for thousands of families in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is a crisis that has been largely
ignored by the political establishment. Where there has
been any focus at all on the economy, it has concerned
the spending cuts that were required by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) before it would
disburse the first tranche of a €1.2 billion loan in July.
The new Federation Prime Minister, Mustafa
Mujezinovic, appointed on 25 June after his
predecessor resigned amid corruption allegations, has
had to face well-orchestrated protests from budget
beneficiaries who stand to lose money as a result of the
IMF-mandated cuts. There have been numerous
problems in this regard; however, the latest IMF
mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina ended successfully
last week, which should now open up the disbursement
of additional IMF funds. In this regard, I would like to
thank Prime Minister Špirić for the speedy and
successful negotiations with the IMF.
In related areas, progress in the reporting period
has been limited and further compromised by the
failure, for political reasons, to appoint key personnel.
This was also confirmed by the European
Commission’s progress report in October, which
outlined that overall only “limited progress” has been
achieved
in
addressing
EU-related
reforms.
Meanwhile, 120,000 citizens continue to be classified
as internally displaced, amid the constant politicization
of the issue of refugee return. However, there has been
no agreement to provide for a sustainable solution to
this problem, and the strategy for refugee return has
been blocked for years now.
I want to make it clear that this litany of
administrative problems, parliamentary gridlock, and
frequent Government stalemate has political, not
structural or administrative roots, although such causes
also exist. However, there can be progress if there is
political will. Clear evidence of this is the progress in
addressing the conditions for visa liberalization. I want
to commend and thank Prime Minister Špirić and other
political leaders in this regard. Prime Minister Špirić
has successfully accelerated the adoption of a number
of draft laws relevant to the visa liberalization agenda,
which we hope will keep the time gap between Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the other countries of the region
as small as possible.

4

It is for the aforementioned political problems that
the diplomatic initiative being spearheaded by Carl
Bildt for the European Union presidency and James
Steinberg for the United States Department of State is
so important. This is a resolute attempt to grasp the bull
by the horns and sort out the political problem at the
heart of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s present difficulties.
This is the highest level political effort since Dayton,
and there is no other process ongoing at present. I have
repeatedly welcomed and strongly supported these
efforts, and I hope that this joint EU-United States
initiative will come to a positive conclusion in early
December.
The joint EU-United States efforts, as well as the
recent visits of the British, Russian and Turkish
Foreign Ministers and other high-level dignitaries, such
as those of President Mesić last week and Prime
Minister Kosor on 2 November, are very important and
welcome, but nevertheless a clear indication that
continued high-level attention from the wider
international community is still needed to keep Bosnia
and Herzegovina on the right track.
Progress in the EU-United States initiative will
have a direct bearing upon the future of the Office of
the High Representative (OHR). As Council members
know, in February 2008 the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board drew up five objectives and
two requirements that must be met before my Office
can be closed to make way for a strengthened EU
Special Representative. At that time, it seemed
reasonable to expect these objectives and conditions to
be met fairly quickly, and in the course of 2008 we saw
substantial progress. During the current reporting
period, however, we have sometimes also witnessed
regression.
The two objectives related to State and military
property have not yet been met and the conditions for
closing the Brcko District supervision have not yet
been entirely fulfilled. As a result, the Peace
Implementation Council is not at present able to make
a positive assessment that would allow for the closure
of OHR. This was confirmed last week by the Peace
Implementation Council. The lack of progress on the so
called 5+2 agenda by domestic political leaders has
also forced me to use my executive powers on a
number of occasions.
As Council members know, I am the fourth High
Representative who has simultaneously held the

09-61649

S/PV.6222

position of EU Special Representative. There are clear
synergies to be derived from this arrangement, but at
the same time it has to be recognized that it was
initiated when circumstances in Bosnia and
Herzegovina were fundamentally different. Thus, the
time may have come to review the usefulness of having
the two positions held by the same person. This,
however, is only one possibility for the way forward
that will have to be considered in the coming months.
By the same token, for the past three years, as
attention has focused on closing OHR, the use of the
Bonn powers has been scaled back. OHR intervention
in the domestic political system has been further
constrained by the desirability of giving the political
actors greater political space to explore possibilities for
consensus as part of the current EU- and United Statesled negotiating process.
The task before us is to complete the rule of law
and economic reform agenda, resolve the issue of State
and defence property, make provision for continued
refugee return and, where necessary, eliminate the
political obstructions to those Dayton objectives. I am
confident that we can find international consensus on
the right way to do this. None of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board members want
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to deteriorate
further. At the same time all — and I stress all — of the
Steering Board members support full implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement, and that gives us good
reason for moderate optimism.
I would like to commend the Security Council for
its adoption last week of resolution 1895 (2009),
approving the extension of the mandate of the
European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR). The international community’s
military presence — down from 60,000 soldiers after
the war to 2,000 troops today — is clear evidence of
positive developments in the country. However, I
consider that a continued EUFOR deployment, with an
executive mandate, is still important, as it is a
guarantee to citizens that the international community
will not tolerate the possibility of a return to violence.
Despite the somewhat gloomy nature of my
report this morning, I am still confident that Bosnia
and Herzegovina can break out of the present impasse.
The country is now at a crossroads, and the political
leaders will now need to decide whether they are ready
to fulfil the necessary conditions that would help them

09-61649

move forward on Euro-Atlantic integration and
whether they are ready to address the conditions
needed for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative and the transition to a reinforced EU
engagement. However, the international community, as
I mentioned, will equally have to decide on its future
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, because a robust
international presence will still be needed after the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, as the
challenges deriving from the Dayton Agreement will
still need to be addressed. But the question will be in
what role and with what mandate the international
community will stay in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
future. That is an issue that the Peace Implementation
Council will have to decide upon in 2010.
As I have mentioned before, the international
community is now engaged in an intensive exercise
which would not only make the country more
functional but also support the enormous human capital
of the country. Let us remember that Bosnians and
Herzegovinians have shown resilience, creativity and
fortitude in the past. I know that, with their help, we
can improve the present situation and move ahead to
strengthen Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign,
prosperous, stable and democratic country, standing on
its own and, in the future, fully integrated into the
Euro-Atlantic family.
Finally, I would like to thank the outgoing High
Representative, Javier Solana, for his efforts to
strengthen peace and security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and I would like to wish him all the best
for his future.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to take the floor.
Mr. Špirić (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in
Bosnian; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): May I first extend my warm greetings to
all present and express my pleasure at having been
given the opportunity, for the sixth time, to report to
the Security Council on the current situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This is also an opportunity for me to
share my views on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the challenges and dilemmas we are
facing.

5

S/PV.6222

Since the previous Security Council meeting of
this kind, in May (see S/PV.6130), the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers has held 20 sessions,
18 of which were regular and two of which were
thematic. Thirty-eight bills and a number of important
strategies and action plans were discussed and adopted
at those sessions. The absolute priority — my own and
of my Office — was to meet the conditions for the
liberalization of the visa regime for citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is with great pleasure that I can
report that last week we fulfilled all requirements set
out in the European Commission’s visa regime
liberalization road map falling within the competence
of the Council of Ministers.
That was not an easy task, because we needed to
meet 174 requirements. Yet this achievement illustrates
that it is possible for domestic stakeholders to reach
agreement. Thus, in a relatively short period of time we
have succeeded in formulating an international legal
assistance bill, a border control bill, an anti-moneylaundering bill, a criminal code amendment bill and an
anti-corruption and coordination agency amendment
bill. We also drafted and adopted a number of
strategies such as a strategy to combat organized crime,
a strategy to combat corruption and an action plan for
the implementation of the strategy, a strategy to
reintegrate returnees, and a strategy to prevent money
laundering and the financing of terrorist activities
along with its corresponding action plan for the period
2009 to 2013. We also agreed upon a model for
information exchange among police authorities, as well
as other decisions.
In addition, we adopted a number of system-wide
measures, thus enabling all institutions at all levels to
prepare for the issuance of the new biometric passport.
To date, more than 10,000 biometric passports have
been issued, while several thousand applications are
currently being processed. Having fulfilled the road
map requirements, we made significant progress
which, unfortunately, we failed to sufficiently promote
within and outside Bosnia and Herzegovina. Thus, yet
again, a success achieved by Bosnia and Herzegovina
was overshadowed by other less successful processes
or attempts at reform, which, by coincidence or not,
came at the same time.
It is exactly for that reason that I believe that
linking the issue of visa regime liberalization to any
other process within Bosnia and Herzegovina is utterly
counterproductive. Countless times we have been

6

assured by the European Commission that the road map
requirements are of a technical, not a political nature.
Hence, I want to believe that that assurance will be
reflected in practice and that, following a positive
report, we will be treated in the same manner as
neighbouring countries, in whose progress I take sincere
delight. Reports by international non-governmental
organizations indicate that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
met more conditions at this point than the neighbouring
countries had met at the time when they were awarded a
positive recommendation by the European Commission.
Hence, I would like to express my firm conviction that
our progress will soon be formally endorsed by the
European Commission in the form of a positive
recommendation.
In addition, during the past period we have
adopted and submitted to parliamentary procedure 38
bills, of which I would single out the anti-mine bill, the
free zones bill, the general product safety bill, the
tobacco product bill, the census bill — which, despite
the consensus reached at the level of the working group
charged with developing the bill and at the level of the
Council of Ministers, was not supported by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly — and the
borrowing, debt and guarantee amendment bill, as well
as the draft budget for 2010, which was submitted to
the Presidency of Bosnia of Herzegovina for
consideration. We have also adopted a number of
strategies and action plans, such as the Bosnia and
Herzegovina communication strategy for the NATO
integration process, the small and medium-sized
enterprises development strategy, the strategy and
action plan for the control of small arms and light
weapons and others.
In the period from May to November, the Fiscal
Council held four sessions. Among the outcomes of
those sessions was the agreed draft budget for 2010,
which was forwarded to the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for further procedure in a timely manner.
Over the recent period, the Council of Ministers and
entity governments have been committed to fulfilling
the conditions set out in the letter of intent signed with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) with a view to
preserving the macroeconomic stability of the country.
An IMF mission visited Sarajevo last week and gave a
positive statement on the extent to which the
conditions had been fulfilled thus far.
As regards the conditions for the transformation
of the Office of the High Representative to an Office of

09-61649

S/PV.6222

the European Union Special Representative, I would
like to share my conviction that the 5+2 conditions will
not turn into 5+2+1, which, to put it mildly, would
further complicate things.
Since I had been informed by international
officials that the State property inventory conducted by
the Office of the High Representative would soon be
finalized, and with a view to facilitating the resolution
of that issue during the last session of the Council of
Ministers, I submitted that the decision should be
amended in such a way that the State Property
Commission would be tasked with producing, within a
period of 30 days, a preliminary list of the property
that Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions require in
order to exercise their constitutional competences.
Unfortunately, the ministers representing the Bosniak
people were not willing to vote in favour of such a
decision, the implementation of which would finally
meet the conditions for the transformation of the Office
of the High Representative.
The purpose of my statement today is to give the
Council a true picture of what has been achieved in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My intention is not to present
any fabricated information or to create a perception
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country free of
problems and challenges. After all, I am not certain
there is a country that has successfully trod the EuroAtlantic path without encountering any difficulties or
challenges. At the same time, I should like to reassure
those who persistently insist on finding that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has seen no progress at all and that all
prospects are nothing but bleak that that is not the case,
by sharing specific and verifiable information. Too
much pessimism is never an ally in attaining the
ultimate goal.
With no intention of entering into any debate with
the High Representative with regard to his report (see
S/2009/588*) that has been submitted to the Council, I
find that the document does not leave much room for
optimism. I fear that the international representatives
in Bosnia and Herzegovina have fallen into the same
pitfall that has trapped some leaders for years now —
that of seeking the culprit, not the solution. And I shall
again repeat what I have said on many occasions. In
Bosnia and Herzegovina no party is either exclusively
guilty or absolutely innocent, and I urge the Council to
take that fact into account when considering any report
on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

09-61649

To an adept analyst, the report tells more about
the Office of the High Representative and the situation
and relations within it than about the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. If the High Representative’s
report depicts the true state of affairs in the country,
then I need to ask a question, quite openly: how is it
possible, then, that Bosnia and Herzegovina was
elected to a non-permanent seat in the Security
Council? I always believed that such an honour was
given to those countries in which real and visible
progress had been made. Another question may be
posed as well: how is it possible that almost all
European Union member States supported Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s candidacy as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council when there is no readiness to
support even Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application for
European Union membership? There are too many
illogicalities and too much experimenting with Bosnia
and Herzegovina — just as there are so many dilemmas
and challenges to which all of us need to respond in an
appropriate manner.
If things are as dire as described in the High
Representative’s report, then one may justifiably
wonder what all of us together have been doing in the
recent past. On more than one occasion, I have
underlined that the international community is not a
mere observer, but an active participant in all processes
in Bosnian and Herzegovina.
I have said that my intention is not to debate the
report presented by the High Representative. However,
I feel a moral and professional obligation to note
certain details in the report that do not reflect the true
state of affairs.
For example, in paragraph 18 of the report, the
High Representative claims that over much of the
summer the Council of Ministers was unable to meet or
make decisions. Thus I feel an obligation, in my
capacity as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers,
to inform the Council that in the period from 1 June to
30 September 2009 the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Council of Ministers held 10 sessions during which
321 agenda items were discussed and 20 bills were
adopted. It is true that the Council of Ministers did not
sit in August partly because of the regular summer
break and partly because of a detail omitted from the
High Representative’s report, which is the failure of
one of the ministers representing the Bosniak people to
attend one of the scheduled sessions.

7

S/PV.6222

In addition, I would like to use this opportunity to
inform the Council that I have recently forwarded the
decision to appoint the new Security Minister for
further procedures. I did so although I still hold that
appointing the key directors of State agencies is as
important as appointing the Security Ministers. I opted
to take such a step in the hope that the party, which
remained unnamed in the High Representative’s report
and which has been impeding the appointment of the
directors of State agencies, will demonstrate a sound
sense of responsibility and unfreeze the process. What
cannot be overlooked, though, is the fact that the key
State agencies, which have billions of Euros at their
disposal, are managed by directors whose terms in
office expired long ago. I am of the view that we
should not allow any further degradation of vacancy
procedures or hindrance of the process.
On a number of occasions, when addressing the
Security Council, I have pointed out that the Republic
of Srpska can be a vehicle for the development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, not a threat to it. I fear that
the High Representative’s report delineates the
contours of the latter. In the report, I could not find one
single positive conclusion concerning the Republic of
Srpska and its institutions, although it is known and
recognized in general that the Republic of Srpska is the
more functional and efficient part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The opinionated tone with which the
report refers to the Republic of Srpska as an
obstruction and the federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as being in difficulties cannot but disturb
any objective observer.
I fear that the associates of the High
Representative who contributed to this report —
primarily the local staff — have fallen into the trap of
being superficial and unprofessional. The allegations
and statements about the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Srpska, Mr. Milorad Dodik, indicate that
he should wait for others in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
grow up politically and that he should wait for the
Office of the High Representative and the High
Representative himself to accomplish their tasks. That
situation has already produced unprecedented political
parasitism and threatens to undermine the credibility
not only of domestic institutions but of the
international community as well.
Constitutional reform has been a burning issue in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would first like to point out
that the issue of constitutional reform should in no way

8

be tied to the issue of the transformation of the Office
of the High Representative into the European Union
Special Representative. Specifically, constitutional
reform is not an established precondition for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, while
the closure of the Office is a precondition for a new
phase in relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the European Union. That is the current message
from Brussels, with which I fully concur.
I do not deny the necessity of constitutional
reform, but I believe that the manner in which this
issue is approached must be designed more carefully. I
believe that it is only through a step-by-step approach
that the desired goal can be attained. It has been
pointed out on a number of occasions that when it
comes to constitutional reform, only solutions based on
evolution and not on revolution are possible in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. To that I would add, once again, that
whenever all-or-nothing principles have been applied,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has ended up with nothing.
I would like to thank the representatives of the
European Union and the Unites States of America for
the efforts they have invested and the interest they have
expressed in constitutional reform through the Butmir
process. However, I should also like to point out that
constitutional reform must be the fruit of internal
dialogue and compromise based on the Dayton Accords
and in no way a solution imposed from elsewhere. It is
quite clear that imposed solutions are, in the long run,
unreliable, and that they create potential instability.
I believe that the statute of the city of Mostar may
best illustrate that assertion. When, some time ago, a
former High Representatives imposed the statute of the
city of Mostar, it was believed that the problem was
resolved. And where do we stand now? More than one
year after the local elections, the city of Mostar has no
mayor and it is quite uncertain when it will have one,
given the city’s statute.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at a crossroads. In
order to make further positive steps and achieve
progress, what is needed is much less superficiality and
much more earnestness on the part of both domestic
stakeholders and the international community. Also, we
all need a new optimism, which can be attained only
through an internal dialogue, that will ensure further
progress on the Euro-Atlantic agenda. I urge the
Council to encourage the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to seek the best possible solutions through

09-61649

S/PV.6222

dialogue, and I urge the High Representative to act as a
strong incentive to that dialogue.
I thank the Council for its kind attention, and I
am quite willing and ready to answer any questions
members may have.
The President: I thank His Excellency Mr. Špirić
for his statement. I shall now give the floor to those
Council members who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I should like to thank the High Representative
for the statement he has just made and to state that we
fully agree with his analysis of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I also welcome the presence of
Mr. Špirić, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Sweden will speak later on behalf of the
European Union, and France naturally aligns itself with
that statement. More than a year ago now, Bosnia and
Herzegovina took an important step in signing a
stabilization and association agreement, which
confirmed its wish to join the European Union (EU).
We had hoped then that positive momentum would
result from that act to confirm a European perspective,
but we see today with regret that political divisions still
exist.
France remains optimistic. Last year’s Prud
process opened the way to solutions. For now, the
Butmir process initiated by the European Union and
the United States is opening up some genuine
prospects. The international community cannot take the
place of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders and people
in dealing with the country’s problems. It is up to them
to demonstrate the political resolve necessary to arrive
at compromises and to head towards the future. The
international community, particularly the EU, is
mobilized and continues to follow developments
attentively. In this regard, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 1895 (2009), which extends the mandate of
the European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR) for another year. This is an
essential contribution from the EU to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s cause.
Today’s meeting could have been the opportunity
to note some progress by announcing the closing of the
Office of the High Representative and the arrival of a
new phase, since the EU is ready to take on even more
responsibility. But the five conditions and two

09-61649

objectives have still not been fulfilled, and I must thus
reiterate the necessity for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
leaders to come an agreement on a compromise. This is
within their grasp; it is up to them to assume their
responsibilities, and the international community calls
upon them to do so.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join you, Mr. President, and other
Security Council colleagues in welcoming Mr. Nikola
Špirić, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Mr. Valentin Inzko, the
High Representative, to the Council Chamber today.
I would like to begin by thanking the High
Representative for his comprehensive report on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last
six months (S/2009/588*). The United Kingdom fully
supports the actions taken by the High Representative
to uphold the Dayton Agreement and his efforts to
facilitate reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
should also note that the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council unanimously reiterated its full
support for the High Representative in its communiqué
on 19 November. We also welcome the Security
Council’s decision of 16 November to extend the
mandate of the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) for a further period
of 12 months. Although we are pleased that the
security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
currently stable, we agree with the High Representative
that EUFOR’s continued presence remains essential to
underpin that security.
The United Kingdom shares the concerns set out
in the High Representative’s report about the situation
over the last six months. It is a bleak and honest report.
Despite some positive developments, there has been
insufficient progress on key reforms. We have seen
another negative European Commission progress
report, and the political climate has deteriorated
further, with a worrying increase in nationalist rhetoric,
particularly, but not exclusively, from the authorities in
the Republika Srpska. This threatens to seriously
impede any further progress.
At the same time, other countries in the region
are getting ready to make big steps forward towards
integration with the European Union and NATO.
Unless Bosnian political leaders take urgent steps to
unblock the current stalemate on reform, Bosnia and
Herzegovina runs a serious risk of being left behind the

9

S/PV.6222

rest of the region. We would not like to see this
happen. The views of Bosnian political leaders vary in
many areas, but they have all made it clear that they
support the country’s EU aspirations. The European
Commission has been equally clear that an EU
membership application cannot be considered while the
Office of the High Representative (OHR) remains in
place. It is therefore essential that the “5 plus 2”
objectives and conditions for closing the Office be met
in full to allow for transition from OHR to the
reinforced EU Special Representative. With the aim of
EU integration in mind, we hope that Bosnian political
leaders will be able to reach agreement on some
modest reforms to bring the country’s Constitution into
line with the European Convention on Human Rights
and to improve the efficiency and functionality of the
State-level institutions.
Since the European Commission’s progress report
was issued in October, important steps have been taken
by Bosnia and Herzegovina on the reforms necessary
for visa liberalization. It is also good to hear about the
successful International Monetary Fund mission to
Sarajevo and the number of legislative measures
enacted or in train. We welcome this progress, which
demonstrates what can be achieved when the political
will exists, and we call on Bosnia’s political leaders to
apply that determination to other pressing areas.
As my Foreign Minister made clear during his
visit to Sarajevo earlier this month, the United
Kingdom strongly supports the current efforts by the
EU presidency and the United States Government to
facilitate a local agreement between leaders on the
outstanding issues. We urge the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to seize this window of opportunity to
make real progress. A similar opportunity is unlikely to
occur for some time.
The United Kingdom strongly supports Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s European perspective. We are
determined to work with Bosnia and Herzegovina
wherever possible, so that it can take its rightful place
in Europe along with other countries of the region. But
ultimately it is only the political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina itself who can take the necessary action to
advance their progress towards integration within the
European Union and NATO, and provide the Bosnian
people with the new European future that they deserve.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election to

10

the United Nations Security Council for the next two
years. We hope that this will be a unifying challenge
for Mr. Špirić’s country, and we very much look
forward to working with him.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
welcoming Mr. Špirić, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like
to sincerely congratulate him on the election of his
country as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, an indicator of the trust of the international
community in his country. It will be a pleasure for us to
serve together on the Council next year. We are also
happy to see Mr. Inzko among us once again. I want to
thank him for his leadership, as well as for his report
(S/2009/588*) and his introductory remarks today.
Turkey considers itself historically a part of the
Balkans, and a sovereign, democratic and stable Bosnia
and Herzegovina is, therefore, important to us.
Developments in this country occupy a distinct place
on our foreign policy agenda. We continue to make
every effort to keep Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
right track, as evidenced by our Foreign Minister’s
recent visit.
We are glad to see that, since the conflicts of the
1990s, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made great
progress. We firmly support the aspirations of the
peoples of that country to fully integrate with the EuroAtlantic institutions, including NATO, through the
Membership Action Plan, and hope that those
institutions will be forthcoming in embracing Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We believe that such integration will
eliminate any feelings of exclusion, instil confidence in
the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensure its
future as a strong, stable, secure and whole European
country.
Having said that, we cannot help but agree with
the analysis presented by Mr. Inzko on the current
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country is at
a critical point. While the international community
anticipates ever more steadfast and ambitious steps
towards the consolidation of an effective, stable and
viable State, as foreseen in the Dayton Peace Accords,
what is offered is rather, to paraphrase the High
Representative, nationalist, anti-Dayton rhetoric and
actions that challenge the sovereignty and
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
What we want to see is a common vision and
joint action, not the pursuit of narrow ethnic interests.

09-61649

S/PV.6222

In these circumstances, the international community is
also faced with serious challenges. Unless we tackle
that situation in a prudent manner, we may be faced
with more serious problems in the Balkans.

different expectations of that process. The important
thing is to be able to reach a compromise that
addresses some vital issues and increases the State’s
capability to govern.

Turkey is a member of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council (PIC) and feels a
special responsibility towards Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It has been almost two years since the PIC Steering
Board set five objectives and two conditions for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
(OHR) to an enhanced European Union (EU) Special
Representative mission. While there has been
important progress on some issues, there are important
outstanding problems. The overall process is quite slow
and, in certain instances, there have been steps
backwards. This situation is keeping the PIC Steering
Board from concluding that its requirements have been
fulfilled in a satisfactory manner.

In that regard, we share the opinion of the
European Commission, reiterated by the High
Representative, that the problem of blockages due to
abuse of entity voting rules need to be addressed and
that a stricter definition of the vital national clause in
the Constitution is necessary. It is true that
constitutional reform is not a part of the 5+2
requirements. At the same time, the second condition
for the closure of OHR is for the PIC Steering Board to
make a positive assessment of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We believe that success with regard
to constitutional reform will help decrease political
tensions and lead to a general normalization of the
political climate.

Let me emphasize once again that we do not want
the OHR to remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina forever.
We want Bosnia to take ownership of its own future
and pursue the aspirations of its peoples to become a
part of the Euro-Atlantic structures as soon as possible.
However, it will not be possible to proceed in the OHR
transition before those objectives and conditions have
been met in their entirety. Recently, there have been
again some steps forward, but we would like to be
convinced that those are not tactical but real and
concrete, based on sincere and serious political will.

Therefore, one cannot deny that any progress in
the reform process will have a positive impact on the
evaluation of whether the 5+2 requirements have been
fulfilled. We are also of the opinion that it would be
best to act prudently to consider the implementation of
constitutional
reform
in
parallel
with
the
transformation of OHR and to not act in haste so as to
prevent possible administrative gaps.

In that context, let me also underline that we are
firm in our support for the High Representative. We
ask him to continue his efforts. We expect him to make
the decisions that he sees fit and to use the powers
granted to him as needed to enforce those decisions.
We do not agree that the actions of the High
Representative and OHR personnel are unlawful. Such
challenges are certainly not helpful to the international
community’s deliberations on the transition of the
OHR.
Turkey welcomes and supports the discussion on
the constitutional reform process initiated by the EU
and the United States. We know that this process is not
easy. The reform package has not been embraced by all
of the founding leaders. We hope that the political
leaders will seriously engage in those efforts, show
commitment and flexibility, and eventually agree on a
workable package that ensures a functional State
structure. It is natural that each of them should have

09-61649

Let me repeat that Turkey fully supports the
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into relevant
Euro-Atlantic structures. We also support and
appreciate the efforts of the EU to assist that country in
taking its rightful place in the European family of
nations and to provide stability through its Police
Mission and peacekeeping force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that the EU-led peacekeeping
force is an important part of the EU’s comprehensive
efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we encourage
the EU to keep a military presence in the country as
long as necessary.
Being fully committed to peace and stability in
Bosnia Herzegovina, Turkey contributes actively to
both EU missions. Turkey also remains ready to assist
the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina in any way it
can in achieving their aspirations.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, back to the Council and thank him for his
comments.

11

S/PV.6222

Let me also welcome High Representative
Valentin Inzko, thank him for his comprehensive
briefing and express our gratitude for his dedication
and hard work. The United States fully supports the
actions taken by the High Representative to implement
the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made extraordinary
progress in the years since the war that tore the country
apart in the early 1990s and caused such suffering for
all its people. Since the signing of the Peace
Agreement 14 years ago, Bosnians have worked hard
to rebuild their economy and infrastructure and have
begun the long, difficult process of reconciliation.
The country has assumed its obligations as a
responsible member of the international community. It
has dedicated itself to playing a constructive role in the
region and in the world. NATO members have
welcomed it into the Partnership for Peace, and Bosnia
and Herzegovina has signed a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union (EU).
At the United Nations, we are proud to sit on the
Human Rights Council with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and we look forward to welcoming it to the Security
Council in January.
The United States is committed to helping the
Bosnian people achieve their aspirations to become
members of the EU and NATO. In that spirit, the
United States and the European Union have engaged
with party leaders, civil society representatives and
Parliamentary committees in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in what has become known as the Butmir process, so
named since meetings of those groups took place at the
military base outside of Sarajevo that has served as the
headquarters of international peacekeepers since the
days of the Multinational Military Implementation
Force.
The Butmir process is an effort to help Bosnian
leaders not only resolve the remaining issues in the
5+2 agenda set by the Peace Implementation Council
for closure of the Office of the High Representative,
but also to reform the Bosnian Constitution within the
Dayton framework so that the State can advance
towards joining the European Union and NATO.
For all the distance that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has come, several aspects of the High Representative’s
report (S/2009/588*) are indeed troubling.

12

First, we are greatly concerned that very limited
progress has been made towards meeting the
outstanding
requirements
that
the
Peace
Implementation Council set for the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to an enhanced
European Union Special Representative mission. We
are similarly troubled by the lack of progress on the
priorities and conditions required for Euro-Atlantic
integration.
Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina has witnessed
a sharp and dangerous increase in nationalist political
rhetoric that could stir up anger and resentment and
undermine the very State institutions that must be
strengthened if the country is to meet the challenges of
the twenty-first century. Such divisive and aggressive
rhetoric is particularly troubling as the campaign
season for the October 2010 presidential and
parliamentary elections approaches.
Thirdly, the High Representative has noted that
war crimes prosecutions and reform of the judicial
sector have suffered due the inability of leaders to
reach political decisions that advance national goals.
We agree with the highest State-level judicial and
prosecutorial officials that the mandates of
international judges and prosecutors in the war crimes
and organized crime chambers of the State Court and
the Prosecutor’s Office should be extended past
December. Extending the mandates of those
international officials is critical to the successful
completion of related investigations. The practical,
political and budgetary preconditions that would let
that vital work continue without international
assistance are not yet in place.
Fourthly and finally, we are deeply concerned
about the lack of support for the authority of the Office
of the High Representative. Let me state once again
that the United States continues to fully support the
High Representative and his work. We look forward to
the day when the Office can make the transition to an
enhanced European Union special representative
mission. But first, the agreed-upon reform agenda, the
five objectives and the two conditions must be
completed. A successful transition will require action
and support from all Bosnians, including the country’s
leaders.
As the High Representative points out, Bosnian
leaders have taken some positive steps recently,
including the adoption of legislation that will help

09-61649

S/PV.6222

fulfil the conditions necessary for visa-free travel
within the European Union and steps towards resolving
issues among the entities that had threatened the State
electricity transmission company, Transco.
Finally, let me note the one-year extension of the
mandate of the European Union peacekeeping
(EUFOR), which the Council adopted last week
through
resolution
1895
(2009).
As
High
Representative Inzko has pointed out, EUFOR plays a
key role in contributing to a safe and secure
environment. We believe that EUFOR should remain in
its current executive mandate and configuration for the
time being.
The United States remains fully committed to
supporting peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to supporting that country’s greater
integration into Euro-Atlantic structures. We stand
ready to assist the Bosnian people in these efforts.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
Council meeting of Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
are grateful to him for his assessment of the current
situation in the country. We join in the congratulations
to Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for
2010 and 2011.
Our thanks go to Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing today and for his report to the Security
Council on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(see S/2009/588*). However, we cannot agree with the
fundamental tone of the report. The leitmotif of that
document is the ongoing tension in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the inability of the Bosnian
authorities to independently resolve their country’s
issues. In our view, this one-sided and unbalanced
assessment does not accord with reality and is cause
for concern.
The report of the High Representative, with its
assertions of allegedly growing friction among Bosnian
parties and of increasing potential for conflict, is at
odds with the conclusions set out in the reports that the
Council regularly receives from European Union
forces. For years, they have been saying that the
situation in Bosnia is stable and that the prognosis is
favourable. This confirms our opinion that the political
debate in that country does not exceed the

09-61649

constitutional framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnian leaders are not undertaking anti-Dayton
actions.
In order to establish a more balanced picture of
the processes under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we draw the Council’s attention to the second report
prepared for the Council by the Government of
Republika Srpska on the situation in the country, which
sets out arguments refuting the emotional conclusions
regarding the inability of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
function without the Office of the High Representative.
Unfortunately, we must observe that the Office
itself has become an institution for destabilization in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The unjustified and hasty use
of Bonn powers is inevitably leading to heightened
tension in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As members know,
Russia has long called for an end to this obsolete
mechanism.
Throughout Bosnia and in the entities,
democratically
elected
bodies
are
functioning.
Interference in their work, including micromanagement,
does not serve to strengthen the statehood of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. To the contrary, it destroys it; it
undermines intra-Bosnian dialogue and it devalues the
country’s democratic institutions. The use of Bonn
powers appears even stranger against the background
of the election of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council.
The mandate of the High Representative relates
solely to the implementation of the Dayton Agreement
and to items established by the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council. The work of the Office
of the High Representative should focus on prompt
implementation of outstanding issues from the five
objectives and two conditions approved by the Steering
Board — the 5+2 formula. We believe that agreement
on parameters for settling problems of State property
and military property is entirely possible, even before
the end of this year. That would open the door to
setting specific deadlines for the conversion of the
Office of the High Representative to a European Union
special representative mission and facilitate a
qualitatively new phase in the Bosnian settlement
process.
We agree with Steering Board partners that a
European perspective for Bosnia and Herzegovina is of
key significance. That is another reason why it is
essential to close the Office of the High

13

S/PV.6222

Representative. According to Brussels, its presence
makes it impossible to consider the question of
European Union candidate status for Bosnia. Linking
this theme with constitutional reform in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which as members know is the essence of
the Butmir initiative, will only lead the Bosnia
settlement
process
into
an
impasse.
Sharp
disagreements and the reaction of the Bosnian parties
to the Butmir ideas show that a precondition for
constitutional change is the creation of conditions for
constructive dialogue in Bosnia and Herzegovina itself.
A review of Dayton will be possible only on the basis
of consensus between both entities and all three
constituent peoples; this must be achieved voluntarily,
without arm-twisting or the imposition from outside of
ready-made models. In that regard, we view attempts to
frame the movement of Bosnia and Herzegovina into
the European Union in terms of the Bosnian’s adoption
of the so-called Butmir package as unacceptable.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative, for his comprehensive briefing. We are
grateful also to His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his statement. Once again, we
congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election as
a member of the Security Council and wish them every
success during their term.
What we have just heard describes an overall
situation that remains fragile and bleak and that
appears to be close to an impasse. The Republika
Srpska’s constant challenges to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and constitutional order of Bosnia
and Herzegovina pose a serious obstacle to vital reform
and, in general, to efforts towards peace in the spirit of
Dayton. We are deeply concerned about the resurgence
of nationalism, which inflames passions and weakens
the Federal Government, which is already beset by
financial difficulties. We are equally concerned by
threats against the High Representative, which must be
taken seriously.
We hope that the political negotiations in the
framework of the Butmir process initiated by the
European Union and the United States will restore
dialogue and ensure progress. We also welcome the
Security Council’s adoption on 18 November of
resolution 1895 (2009), which extends the mandate of
the European Union military mission in Bosnia and

14

Herzegovina (EUFOR). That European force
undeniably remains the key support for stability and
security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge the
political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular the leaders of Republika Srpska, to keep
dialogue alive in order to safeguard the territorial
integrity of their country and make democratic
progress for the benefit of their citizens. In that regard,
Bosnia and Herzegovina should do all it can to make
its Euro-Atlantic integration a reality.
In a different vein, my delegation notes with
regret that the country’s National War Crimes
Prosecution Strategy, which we welcomed last May,
and the National Justice Sector Reform Strategy have
not yielded the hoped-for results, principally because
they have been blocked by Republika Srpska, in
particular with respect to the extension of the mandates
of international judges and prosecutors.
The economic situation in the country is very
worrying, and the outlook is grim due to the effects of
the global economic and financial crisis. In addition,
the energy problem, which is now acute and a decisive
factor of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economic health,
must urgently be resolved.
With regard to ongoing reforms, in particular
those related to the economy, public administration and
defence, we call on the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to accelerate the implementation of
strategies, plans of actions and programmes in order to
rapidly meet the conditions for the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to a European Union
Special Representative mission. Similarly, efforts must
be made to ensure progress in the areas of human
rights, principally with respect to the protection of
minorities and refugees, and freedom of press.
The regional environment is also a determining
factor in the political, social and economic
transformation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is why
we welcome the improvement of the country’s relations
with its neighbours.
In conclusion, we encourage the political actors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward and to
demonstrate firm resolve to break the gridlock in their
country in order to build a strong and stable State, of
course within the framework of its integration into
Europe.

09-61649

S/PV.6222

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the convening of
today’s meeting. I thank High Representative Valentin
Inzko for his briefing. We commend him for his efforts
in promoting the political process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I also welcome the participation in
today’s meeting of Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
thank him for his statement.
Over the past year, the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been generally stable.
Some reform initiatives in the areas of the
Constitution, the rule of law, the economy and national
defence have made some progress. Meanwhile, we are
also aware of the worrisome picture described by the
High Representative in his report (S/2009/588*). There
has been almost no major progress in the
implementation of the reform agenda. The Republika
Srpska often challenges the State institutions, authority
and laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina and questions the
authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council.
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina faces
many difficulties, including demonstrations by veterans
and victims of the fighting in Sarajevo. We express our
concern in this regard and hope that the European
Union and the United States will strengthen their good
offices and promote high-level political dialogue to
achieve real results as soon as possible.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We earnestly
hope that all the country’s political leaders will
effectively implement the Dayton Peace Agreement,
actively engage in dialogue, enhance political and
mutual trust, push for Government institution-building,
constitutional reform and the rule of law, and make
greater progress in these areas so as to preserve lasting
peace, security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Balkan region.
We also hope that the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the International Monetary Fund and
other parties will pay greater attention to the negative
impact of the global economic crisis on economic,
development and political reform in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and take corresponding active measures.
China welcomes the prospect of the gradual
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the
European Union. We are happy to see Bosnian reform

09-61649

proceed
in
accordance
with
the
European
Commission’s road map on visa liberalization or
elimination. We believe that, in accordance with the
mandate of the Dayton Peace Agreement, the High
Representative should continue to take positive
measures to promote the accession of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into the European Union.
The European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in close cooperation with the Armed
Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, is an important
force in guaranteeing local security. We welcome the
European Union’s ongoing positive role in maintaining
peace and stability and promoting economic and social
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
China will continue to support the High
Representative
in
fulfilling
his
duties
and
responsibilities. Together with the international
community, we are ready, to the extent possible, to
offer Bosnia and Herzegovina our help in achieving
lasting peace, stability and development.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico welcomes Mr. Valentin Inzko and
thanks him for introducing his report (S/2009/588*).
My delegation also welcomes the participation of
Mr. Nikola Špirić in this meeting. We welcome him
and congratulate him on the election of his country as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council
starting 2010. We believe that the election of his
country to the Security Council is a demonstration of
the confidence vested by the international community
in the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the role
that it can play to foster regional stability.
Mexico believes that if lasting peace and stability
are to prevail in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the various
political forces of the country must give new impetus
to their dialogue and mutual understanding and
demonstrate the political will to achieve true progress
in the remaining aspects of the peace process.
In that regard, we note with concern that the
report of the High Representative continues to portray
a polarized political environment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that has hampered the work of State
institutions, reduced the leeway to achieve the
necessary implementation of the Peace Agreement. We
again call on all actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
redouble their efforts to meet the outstanding
commitments and to keep channels open for dialogue

15

S/PV.6222

and negotiations in order to resolve their differences
and avoid actions that could jeopardize the stability of
the country.
We therefore welcome the joint initiative of the
European Union and United States Government to
promote domestic political dialogue in order to
facilitate and accelerate institutional reform. We trust
that such initiatives will contribute to the establishment
of the conditions necessary to progress in reaching
agreements on pending issues.
My delegation emphasizes the importance of the
international community’s ongoing support for the
endeavours of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to strengthen the rule of law. The United
Nations, like other organizations on the ground, must
continue to play a key role through its firm support in
such areas as the training of police officers, lawyers
and judges, and capacity-building to resolve civil law
disputes, including those on property rights. My
delegation also encourages the State authorities to step
up their action to implement the National War Crimes
Prosecution Strategy and the National Justice Sector
Reform Strategy.
We trust that the endeavours to establish a central
database on war crimes cases and greater regional
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
neighbouring countries to determine jurisdictional
responsibilities will contribute to progress in these
Strategies, as will greater cooperation with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
These actions are critical if the region is to turn the
final page on conflict and regional division.
One of the outstanding issues of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which we believe requires priority
attention, pertains to the situation of about 120,000
internally displaced persons who still cannot return to
their homes due to unfavourable conditions on the
ground. It is therefore important to achieve the
necessary political consensus to comply with the
provisions of annex 7 of the Peace Agreement, which
refers to the establishment of a strategy for the return
of displaced persons and refugees, supporting the
rebuilding of houses, the return of property and the
provision of necessary services.
Reintegration is a vital step towards national
reconciliation. The needs of displaced persons must be
explicitly addressed within a legal framework
providing guarantees for the safe return of refugees.

16

There is no denying that a favourable economic and
political context would contribute to meeting the shortterm humanitarian needs of these vulnerable groups of
people and to ensuring their safe return under optimal
conditions in the medium and long term. This would
contribute to ensuring genuine national reconciliation
and integration and lasting peace.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate my
country’s support for the work of the High
Representative and our hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will overcome its differences and
consolidate a democratic and multiethnic State where
its citizens, like those of the entire Balkan region, will
be able to enjoy a more stable and more prosperous
future as an essential part of integrated European
institutions and organizations.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his comprehensive briefing. We also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and thank him for his statement.
Uganda commends the High Representative for
his efforts in promoting the political processes, in
particular facilitating the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement. We are concerned about the negative
developments arising from the ongoing attacks against
State institutions, mainly by the Government of
Republika Srpska, and the continued challenges to the
authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. The
impact of this has limited political progress, which
could lead to further tension in the country. We
therefore call on the authorities of Republika Srpska to
refrain from divisive rhetoric and actions that
challenge the sovereignty and constitutional order of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the joint European Union-United
States efforts aimed at initiating high-level political
dialogue with the key leaders among the parties to
sustain unity, facilitate reforms and break the political
stalemate. We call on all parties to offer cooperation
with this process in order to move the country forward.
Furthermore, we urge all parties, including the
neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to uphold their
commitments to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the spirit of
good-neighbourliness and peaceful coexistence.

09-61649

S/PV.6222

We commend the European Union stabilization
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR), in
collaboration with the armed forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for contributing to a safe and secure
environment, which has enabled the Office of the High
Representative and other international organizations to
fulfil their respective mandates. It is in recognition of
this important work that, this past week, Uganda
supported the extension of the mandate of the EUFOR
configuration (see resolution 1895 (2009)).
We welcome the progress that has been achieved
in the area of the entrenchment of the rule of law and
acknowledge the efforts by the European Union Police
Mission in collaboration with the Office of the High
Representative in supporting police reform and the
fight against organized crime.
We are nevertheless concerned that the progress
made could be jeopardized by the stagnation in the
implementation of both the National War Crimes
Prosecution Strategy and the National Justice Sector
Reform Strategy. It is therefore important that the
mandates of the international judges working in the
Prosecutor’s Office be extended, as recommended by
the High Representative, in order to ensure justice
sector reforms as soon as possible.
It is evident from the report (see S/2009/588*)
that Bosnia and Herzegovina, like many other countries
around the world, has not been immune to the global
economic crisis. We are concerned about the
substantial impact the crisis has had on foreign direct
investment in the country. Furthermore, the funding
deficit created could also impede the Government’s
capacity to make crucial investments for sustainable
growth and to cover its other obligations.
The Government will require the support of
international partners to focus on addressing these
challenges, because they could potentially have a
negative impact on the stability of the country. Given
the important economic links that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has with the countries in the region, we
believe that strengthening economic cooperation with
those countries will further enhance the Government’s
efforts to cope with the challenges arising from the
global economic crisis.
We are also concerned about the situation of
refugees and displaced persons. We call on the
authorities to address their plight with a view to
ensuring their quick return and resettlement.

09-61649

Finally, we too congratulate Bosnia and
Herzegovina upon its election as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the period
2010-2011, and wish it success during its mandate.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): Let me join
other members of the Council in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the
Security Council today and in thanking him for his
statement. I especially congratulate him on the election
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the term
2010-2011. I also thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
thirty-sixth report on implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement (see S/2009/588*) and for his
comprehensive update.
As noted in previous meetings of the Council on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, advancing the cause of
building a secure, democratic and stable multi-ethnic
State has always been among the most important
objectives for the political leaders and the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, my delegation notes with concern the
division among political leaders that is challenging the
Dayton Peace Agreement and, by implication, the
sovereignty and constitutional order of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are also disturbed by the limited
consensus on the main reform priorities, which is
detrimental to the implementation of previously agreed
reforms. The lack of substantive political dialogue is
yet another source of concern.
In this context, we are heartened by the relatively
stable relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its immediate neighbours. At this critical juncture, the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina need to
work together towards a shared vision on the direction
of the country, so as to speed up the smooth operation
of institutions and create more functional and efficient
state structures.
We continue to strongly support the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
including the revised strategy for the implementation
of annex 7 of the Agreement, as it provides a firm basis
for resolving the problematic displacement of some
120,000 persons. We call upon the political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to make every effort to
promote the sustainable return of refugees and

17

S/PV.6222

internally displaced persons and guarantee their rights
to employment, health care, education and pensions.
Much more also needs to be done in the areas of border
and migration management, as well as the fight against
corruption and organized crime.
Finally, we support the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina in his efforts to facilitate
progress towards the full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. At the same time, we wish to
emphasize the need to ensure enhanced ownership and
responsibility by Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
political process of the country. We call upon the
international community to continue to play an
important role in promoting peaceful resolution of the
conflict and in facilitating Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
transition to a stable, reform-oriented, modern and
democratic country.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset I wish to warmly welcome Mr. Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Mr. Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I take the opportunity to
reiterate our support to the High Representative and to
his Office.
During the 14 years that have passed since the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has stayed far away from war, but has not
managed to establish peace firmly. The report of the
High Representative (S/2009/588*) and the statement
of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers clearly
point out the challenges to be faced in consolidating
the progress achieved and in implementing a clear
agenda that would herald a promising future for the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The continued lack of trust among political
leaders and the resulting negative climate has had
undeniable adverse consequences on the functioning of
institutions, on reconciliation among peoples and
consequently on the country’s development prospects.
The impasse in the country is essentially due to the
persistent, divisive rhetoric employed and the
continued challenges to the authority of the State and
the High Representative.
The international community expects a change of
attitude on the part of the political leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that is favourable to the establishment
of a multi-ethnic and multinational State and that
would foster democratic interaction among all of the

18

political parties. Undeniably, the agenda for
membership in the European Union is an important
incentive and provides a framework for action to
overcome the major challenges.
The inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina want
a European future, and that future will only be possible
if their political leaders shoulder their responsibilities
in this historic process. Here, Costa Rica welcomes the
Butmir process as a positive step whose success
depends solely on the commitment of the stakeholders.
The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina must show
maturity and political will in order to progress towards
achieving unity and the development of the country
and to make progress on the agenda for membership in
the European Union.
In conclusion, I wish to refer specifically to two
aspects that appear vital in the effort to build peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Six months ago we welcomed
the adoption of the National War Crimes Prosecution
Strategy and the National Justice Sector Reform
Strategy. However, today we have become aware that
there has been scant progress on those strategies to
date. My country believes that entrenching the rule of
law and combating impunity are fundamental for
coexistence to prosper, and we thus call for redoubled
efforts to ensure the full implementation of both
strategies.
Lastly, we are concerned that the issue of the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
continues to be politicized. We trust that the Ministry
for Human Rights and Refugees will soon submit a
revised strategy for the implementation of Annex VII
of the Peace Agreement and that it will be rapidly
adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples in order to ensure the safe and lasting return of
the thousands of people who have not yet seen an end
to this sad chapter in their lives.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Allow me at the same moment to congratulate Bosnia
and Herzegovina for its election as a new member of
the Security Council. We also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Special Representative of the
European Union, and thank him for his briefing
today — the second in his new role. I wish to assure
him of Croatia’s full support in the conduct of his

09-61649

S/PV.6222

duties and wish him every success in fulfilling his
mandate. Croatia also aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by Sweden on behalf of the European
Union.
Here I wish to make some additional comments.
Croatia strongly supports the clear and unambiguous
European and Euro-Atlantic perspective on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That was recently stressed during the two
visits at the highest political level from Croatia. We
believe that the futures of all of the countries of SouthEast Europe belong in the European Union, as it
provides the most suitable framework for their overall
development. We also support the official application
by Bosnia and Herzegovina to NATO for a
Membership Action Plan. Last year, important progress
enabled Bosnia and Herzegovina to sign the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union. However, we note with regret that the
report before us (S/2009/588*) states that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made little progress towards
implementing internal reforms — and has even
regressed somewhat — as well as towards satisfying
the priorities and conditions required for progress on
the Euro-Atlantic agenda.
We are concerned by the ongoing attacks against
State institutions, competencies and laws perpetrated
mainly by the leadership of the Republika Srpska, as
well as the continuing challenges to the authority of the
High Representative and the Peace Implementation
Council. In particular, we are concerned with the
assessment of the High Representative on the current
situation in the country during the reporting period that
“anti-Dayton rhetoric challenging the sovereignty
and constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina
also played a role” (S/2009/588*, p. 3).
We agree with the assessment that not all
outstanding requirements have been met so far for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the European Union Special Representative to take
place. We support the work of the High Representative
and share his assessments.
On the other hand, we believe that Bosnia and
Herzegovina should continue — even accelerate —
reforms and the adoption of visa liberalization-related
laws in order to be admitted to the “White Schengen”
list as soon as possible, so that its citizens do not lag
too far behind their neighbours.

09-61649

It has been our long-standing position that the
impasse in Bosnia and Herzegovina can be overcome
only through comprehensive and inclusive dialogue
that includes the peoples of all three constituencies
throughout the entire territory of the country. This is
closely linked with the reforms needed to bring Bosnia
and Herzegovina closer to the path of integration with
the European Union and will also facilitate fulfilment
of the country’s other international obligations.
It is particularly important that the current
dialogue on constitutional reform intensify, with the
committed engagement of the international community
and with the support assured by the High
Representative.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing considerable
problems, some of which are challenging the very
foundations established by the Dayton Peace
Agreement. However, it should be stressed that any
constructive engagement that supports the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and any intention
to improve the current situation and remedy the
fundamental problems should be welcomed and
encouraged. In that respect, let me welcome last week’s
decision on the prolongation of the mandate of the
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On this point, we wish to reiterate that the
country’s stability depends on respect for the
constitutional principle of the collective equality of all
three constituent peoples: Bosniacs, Bosnian Serbs and
Bosnian Croats. We have stated on several occasions
that there can be no Bosnia and Herzegovina without
Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their political and
cultural survival is vital to the continued existence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as these two elements are
closely intertwined.
One needs to keep in mind the particular situation
of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the smallest
and most vulnerable of the country’s three nations.
Their voice must be considered on the basis of
equality, both ethnic and civic, as guaranteed in the
Constitution and as arising from the history of the
country. All three peoples must feel that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is their country and that they are safe and
protected over its entire territory. Their fundamental
rights and freedoms, as well as their civic and ethnic
rights, should be protected throughout, as should be the
right to return to their pre-war homes and to be safe
and protected.

19

S/PV.6222

Another important factor in the normalization of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the fight
against impunity for war crimes. We wish to stress that
all fugitives from the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia who are still at large must be
arrested and transferred to The Hague as soon as
possible.
Finally, let me conclude by saying that Croatia,
together with the rest of the international community,
is offering the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina a
clear and unambiguous European and Euro-Atlantic
perspective. In that regard, we urge all three peoples to
invest their greatest efforts in the Butmir process,
which represents the biggest opportunity to date to
make real progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As a country that joined NATO recently and is
undergoing a very demanding but rewarding process of
negotiations with the European Union, Croatia can
testify that strong central institutions are fundamental
to the process of Euro-Atlantic integration. As a
neighbouring State, we are very interested in seeing
Bosnia and Herzegovina embark on that process as
soon as possible. We regard it as the best guarantee of
sustainable peace, security and prosperity for the
country, the region and all Europe.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I welcome Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and thank him for his statement. I also wish to
commend Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative of
the Secretary-General for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his comprehensive briefing.
Looking back at the early 1990s, we feel great
satisfaction at seeing the country, which was then the
scene of the most brutal crimes against humanity and
of pain and suffering, has overcome its tragedy and
begun to regain its strength, re-establish links among
its peoples on a civilized basis, guarantee the rights of
all, and pave the way towards overall security, stability
and prosperity for all its citizens. We note that
important achievements have been made towards the
establishment of a Bosnia and Herzegovina united with
its three peoples on the basis of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, despite the differences among the parties,
which are fuelled by the painful memories of the past
and a lack of trust among the various parties. I wish to
commend the efforts of the High Representative to
persuade the parties to pursue the implementation of

20

the Dayton Peace Agreement and to respect their
attendant obligations.
Despite the positive developments of recent
years, the country continues to move very slowly in
implementing the constitutional reform process and in
establishing conditions conducive to the transition of
the Office of the High Representative to the European
Union Special Representative mission. The slow pace
can be ascribed to the lack of trust and constructive
dialogue among the leaders of the parties, as well as to
one party’s challenges to and defiance of State
authority, its failure to meet some of its obligations,
and its attempts to reduce the powers and authority of
the State and the federal Government. All these
obstacles have hindered the implementation of the
National Justice Sector Reform Strategy, the
appointment of some judges to the Federation
Constitutional Court, and the achievement of
consensus on the distribution of tax revenues and of an
acceptable and lasting solution to the problem of State
property and other problems requiring the willingness
of all parties to fulfil their obligations in good faith.
Among the problems of concern to us is the fact
that 120,000 Bosnians are still registered as internally
displaced and unable to return to their villages. We
deeply regret the fact that the politicization of the issue
of internally displaced persons and refugees has
obstructed their return and prolonged their suffering.
We believe that this issue must be prioritized and that
all the State’s energies and power should be dedicated
to its solution, which would contribute strongly to
stabilizing the State as a whole. We also feel that the
tracking and prosecution of those guilty of crimes
against humanity and war crimes could help to ease
the suffering and erase the memories of the past, and
contribute to the search for a better future for all the
peoples of the country.
Peace and security will not be achieved if each
party clings stubbornly to its own positions; they can
be achieved only through consensus, mutual
understanding, a sense of realism, and the fulfilment by
each and every party of its obligations and
commitments. We therefore urge all actors and parties
to shoulder their obligations, act responsibly, engage in
constructive dialogue, respect State institutions,
cooperate fully with the High Representative and abide
strictly by their commitments under the Dayton Peace
Agreement and its annexes, the Paris accords and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. That is the

09-61649

S/PV.6222

best way to ensure the stability and multi-ethnic and
multicultural nature of a Bosnia and Herzegovina
working towards sustainable development, prosperity
for all its people and the enhanced stability of the
Balkan region as a whole.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I too should
like to join my colleagues in extending a warm
welcome to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Špirić. I also take this opportunity to congratulate the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election
to membership of the Security Council next year. We
wish it every success in its contributions to the work of
the Council.
I should like also to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
comprehensive briefing, and I commend his dedicated
efforts since assuming that important responsibility in
March.
Japan extends its full support to the policy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina towards Euro-Atlantic
integration. As a major contributor to the Peace
Implementation Council, we hope it can achieve the
five objectives and two conditions soon, so that the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the European Union Special Representative will be
realized at the earliest possible date. We also hope that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to advance on its
way forward to accession to the European Union by
accelerating constitutional reform. We welcome
high-level political discussions through the Butmir
process initiated in October by the United States and
the European Union. It is a fresh attempt to enable the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to approach their
major goals. I would like to confirm Japan’s support
for the process.
At the same time we are concerned about the
attacks against State institutions and the challenges to
the authority of the High Representative. Those moves
go against constitutional order and the implementation
of the five objectives and two conditions — the 5+2
process. We urge all political leaders to refrain from
increasing nationalistic rhetoric challenging the
constitutional order. They should heed the voice of the
international community and cooperate with one
another to tackle the remaining challenges of 5+2 and
constitutional reform. To that end, it is essential for the
international community to continue to pay close

09-61649

attention to political developments in the country. The
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina rests with the
determination of its people themselves.
The consolidation of peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a cornerstone of peace and prosperity in
the entire Western Balkan region. Based on this belief,
Japan has been actively contributing to the
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina through its
official development assistance programme, amounting
to $450 million in three major areas, peacebuilding,
economic development and intraregional cooperation.
We have supported projects of community
reconciliation through poverty reduction, through the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, and in
October Japan committed to a grass-roots grant aid
project for support of demining in Gracanica and
extended loans amounting to ¥126 million for
assistance in the environmental area.
The political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
still remains delicate. We believe that the role played
by the High Representative continues to be of vital
importance. We reiterate our full support for High
Representative Inzko. We also recognize the key role
played by the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for a safe and secure
environment.
I would like to conclude by expressing Japan’s
strong hope that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will work together through internal dialogue to
stabilize the situation and achieve early integration into
the Euro-Atlantic community.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
First of all let me extend a warm welcome to
High Representative Valentin Inzko. We would like to
thank him for the report before the Council today (see
S/2009/588*). Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm
our full and continued support for him and his Office
as well as for the efforts that he undertakes in
upholding the Dayton process and facilitating reform.
In addition I should like to warmly welcome the
presence of Prime Minister Nikola Špirić, Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We should also like to congratulate Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its election to the Security Council,
and we look forward to working with it, as its
immediate neighbour at the Council table. We also

21

S/PV.6222

hope that this important challenge and responsibility
will provide an element of cohesion within Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We should also like to align ourselves with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union, but I should
like to make the following additional points.
We are encouraged by the recent progress on visa
liberalization, and we hope that the implementation of
the road map will soon be completed. Bosnia and
Herzegovina must not fall behind its neighbours on the
path towards Euro-Atlantic integration. Membership in
the European Union (EU) offers by far the best
medium-term and long-term chance for a solution to
most of the current problems in the region.
We share the concerns of the High Representative
about the prevailing political climate, which continues
to prevent the country from completing outstanding
reforms. Closure of the Office of the High
Representative and the transition to a reinforced EU
Special Representative remain crucial for Bosnia’s
further advancement. We appeal to all political leaders,
with the assistance provided through the EU-United
States initiative, to speed up key reforms related to the
Euro-Atlantic perspective, constitutional functionality
and the conditions that have been set for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
It is time to correct the current course. The path
Bosnia and Herzegovina chooses today will be decisive
for the future prosperity and well-being of the country
and its people.
Austria fully supports the ongoing efforts to
establish and consolidate the rule of law in SouthEastern Europe and welcomes progress achieved in that
regard by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Judicial and police reform present a very important —
but by no means the only — challenge in this area.
In this context, I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to the work done by the Regional
Women’s Lobby for Peace, Security and Justice in
Southeast Europe. This body unites women politicians
and activists from all countries of the region. It is an
important grass-roots initiative, which Austria and the
European Union support, in the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). Former
Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik is actively
involved in this work. A policy paper recently

22

published by this pressure group makes the very valid
point that respect for the rule of law is critical not only
in the judiciary but in all aspects of State
administration, especially in those areas with which
citizens interact on a daily basis, such as the education
and health sectors, where corruption regrettably
remains a fact of daily life. The policy paper — which
we shall be happy to share with members of the
Council and other interested Member States — also
stresses the need for increased rule of law activities
related to gender-based violence.
We agree with the assessment of the High
Representative that the European Union military
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) still
plays a key role in contributing to a safe and secure
environment that helps the Office of the High
Representative and other international actors to
implement their mandates. This is also reflected in the
recent extension of the EUFOR mandate by the
Security Council, through resolution 1895 (2009).
Austria will continue its commitment as a troop
contributor to the operation. An Austrian officer, Major
General Bernhard Bair, has recently assumed the
responsibility of Force Commander.
Finally, let me reiterate that we are convinced
that the stability and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is key for the realization of a broad zone
of stability in the Balkans. I should like to assure our
friends in Bosnia and Herzegovina that Austria is and
will remain a reliable partner of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its path towards lasting stability and
European integration. Its future, like that of the entire
region, lies in the European Union. It is my firm
conviction that the major challenge facing the political
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina today is to make
that future possible.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Montenegro, Armenia, Iceland, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine align themselves with this
statement.
This is a critical time for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Political divisions are blocking necessary

09-61649

S/PV.6222

reforms. The economic challenges are significant, and
ordinary people are struggling to make ends meet.
While the rest of the region is moving forward towards
European integration, Bosnia and Herzegovina is at
risk of falling behind. The European Union shares the
High Representative’s concern about the nationalist
agendas that continue to dominate Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s politics and hamper efforts of progress
and reconciliation. The immediate challenge is not the
security situation, although that continues to require
international engagement, but changing the negative
political dynamic.

European integration. First, the proposal seeks to
achieve progress to meet the five objectives and two
conditions set by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative. It
sets out a model for the local political leadership to
reach a necessary compromise on the issues of State
and defence property, which is necessary for achieving
a transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the reinforced presence of the European Union. The
EU would not be able to consider an application for
membership by Bosnia and Herzegovina as long as the
Office of the High Representative is in place.

The European Union supports the continued
efforts of the High Representative to ensure
compliance with the Dayton-Paris accords and
encourages Bosnia and Herzegovina to move ahead
with crucial reforms in a difficult political climate. The
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR
ALTHEA) remains an important part of the EU’s
efforts to support a political process aimed at enabling
Bosnia and Herzegovina to make progress in the EU
integration process. We welcome the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 1895 (2009),
extending the Chapter VII mandate of EUFOR for
another 12 months.

Secondly, the proposal indicates a necessary set
of modest constitutional changes to allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina to meet the obligations of the European
Union integration process. It focuses on efforts to
increase the functionality of the State, without
changing its basic features. It also seeks to ensure
compatibility with the European Convention on Human
Rights. This proposal represents our best advice, but
the responsibility for reaching the necessary
compromises and taking them forward rests with the
local political leaders.

EUFOR ALTHEA continues to provide
reassurance and remains ready to respond to possible
security challenges throughout the country. A decision
on the possible evolution of Operation ALTHEA will
need to take political developments into account. The
European Union also remains engaged through the
European Union Police Mission, which is helping
Bosnia and Herzegovina to focus on the fight against
organized crime and corruption.
The European Union is deeply concerned about
the ongoing challenges to the stability and
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Other
parts of Europe are taking steps to enhance cooperation
and integration. The Lisbon Treaty, which enters into
force on 1 December, will bring the European Union
and its members even closer. The path chosen by
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders in the coming period
will be of great importance for the European future of
their country and its people.
In October, the European Union, together with
the United States, proposed a way forward. The
proposal includes two main elements needed in order
to advance Bosnia and Herzegovina’s prospects for

09-61649

The Peace Implementation Council’s meeting in
Sarajevo on 18 and 19 November was an important
occasion to take stock of developments. The European
Union shares the Peace Implementation Council’s
concern over the insufficient progress that Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s authorities have made in preparing the
ground for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. The Peace Implementation Council
communiqué also welcomed the current engagement of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders in discussions on
constitutional change and encouraged them to remain
seriously engaged and to reach lasting agreements. We
echo those sentiments.
The political process is in a decisive phase. We
urge the parties to reach the necessary compromises in
the coming period. Momentum needs to be built before
the spring, when Bosnia and Herzegovina will enter a
period dominated by the election campaign, which may
be less conducive to reform and compromise.
The recent progress made by Bosnia and
Herzegovina in meeting the benchmarks of the
European visa liberalization road map is a source of
optimism and an example that Bosnia and Herzegovina
can implement difficult and demanding reforms once
there is sufficient political will. This is encouraging.

23

S/PV.6222

The European Union has provided Bosnia and
Herzegovina with significant development and
humanitarian assistance over the years. We hope that
our future assistance will focus exclusively on
facilitating EU integration, not least through the
reinforced EU delegation tasked to advise Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s authorities on all aspects of the
European Union accession process. To be in a position
to accede to the EU, Bosnia and Herzegovina has to
take all necessary measures to reach full sovereignty. It
is for the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina — and
ultimately for its people — to decide what kind of
future they want.
The President: I call on the representative of
Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): At the outset, I should
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As a neighbouring country that desires sincere,
good-neighbourly and friendly relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Serbia is following the development
of the overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina with
due attention. As a signatory and a guarantor of the
Peace Agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1031
(1995) on its implementation, Serbia is firmly
committed to respecting the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a matter of
principle. Also, Serbia supported the candidacy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, and I wish once again to
congratulate it on its election.
The position of my country incorporates concrete
support of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the process of
European integration and we regard membership in the
European Union for all the countries of the South-East
European region as a common goal. Serbia is of the
view that regional economic cooperation — both
bilateral and intraregional, through the Central
European Free Trade Agreement — gives a particular
impulse towards the permanent stabilization of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as of the
region as a whole.
My country supports the processes of internal
political reforms aimed at advancing the institutional
capacities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and welcomes

24

all political initiatives to intensify these reforms. We
take note of the fact that the representatives of all
political parties from both entities and all three
constitutive peoples expressed certain reservations with
regard to the solutions recently proposed by the
representatives of the European Union and the United
States within the so-called Butmir process.
The Republic of Serbia will honour every
agreement that is accepted by the representatives of
both entities and supported by a consensus among all
three constitutive peoples containing sustainable
solutions in the spirit of contemporary democratic
values. We encourage all participants in this process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to do all that is necessary for
such an agreement to be reached. Also, Serbia views
the ongoing process of the transition of authority from
the Office of the High Representative to the European
Union Special Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be in accordance with the 2+3 principle
of consensus.
In conclusion, I should like to say that the
Republic of Serbia agrees with the assessments
presented in the report of the High Representative and
the conclusions of the European Union Council of
17 November concerning the role and contribution of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force in
maintaining security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
therefore support the proposal of Office of the High
Representative to extend the mandate of that mission.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko
to respond to the comments made and the questions
raised.
Mr. Inzko: I should just like to make some
general brief remarks. I should like to thank everybody
for their contributions, support, encouragement,
suggestions and, of course, the concern they have
shown for Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like
to sincerely thank Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his frank and open assessment of the situation. Believe
me, he has a very difficult job. I understand that very
well.
Beyond that, I would like to speak briefly about
the confusion that exists about my perceptions on two
issues, especially on the Bonn powers. The Bonn
powers have been used in the past around 900 times.
Lord Ashton once invoked them 60 times in one day.
This use of the Bonn powers is something that is now

09-61649

S/PV.6222

in the past; they are being invoked less and less.
Altogether, 180 politicians have been removed, among
them three State Presidents. But, as I said, this is a
concept of the past. I have used the Bonn powers only
in eight areas, and have tried to do so in a way that is
transition-driven, exit-driven, “5 plus 2” driven. The
use was usually technical and aimed at finding a
solution or in cases where the Dayton Agreement had
been violated. I did not use the Bonn powers lightly,
and, believe me, I was never happy about it, but, as I
am the ultimate authority in the theatre, when it comes
down to it and there is no other choice, I have to use
them.
Concerning the report (S/2009/588*), any report
is a reflection of reality, and is, I think, more valuable
if reality is reflected. Every report, whether it be a
European Union or a United Nations report, is, in a
way, seismic, registering any tremor occurring

09-61649

anywhere in the world, whether in Asia, Latin America
or Europe, even Bosnia and Herzegovina. I think it is
right that it reflect such tremors correctly and precisely.
We cannot turn a blind eye to such problems or brush
them under the carpet. They will not diminish or
disappear if we do so. Of course, I would be delighted,
next time, to present a more upbeat report, a report of a
sovereign, prosperous, and democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina, standing on its own and on its way to
being fully integrated into the Euro-Atlantic
integration. That is the wish of all of us, of course.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

25
