UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
UN

YEAR

~\BRARy

JUN2 4 383

17tw’

MEETING:

20 JULY 1974&s

,#-d&L-J\~)4
cc/

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l781/Rev.l)

.... .... ..... .... ..... ... ..... .

1

... ..... ... ....... ... ..... ..... .... ..... .... ....

1

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council (S/l 1334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece
to the Unitd Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11348). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

kdoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. 1781

NOTE

.,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.,. . ,,
” ;“i
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions’ of the :Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 20 July 1974, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Javier PEREZ

de CUELLAR

(Peru).

At the invitation of the President,. Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus),
Mr. Okay (Turkey) and Mr. Panayotacos
(Greece) took places at the Coancil table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon
and United States of America.
Provisional

1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In view of the limited number of places available at
the Council table, I propose to invite the representatives of Yugoslavia, Romania and India to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that they will
be invited to come to the Council table when it is their
turn to address the Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/l781/Rev.l)

of the agenda
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Petrid
(Yugoslavia),
Mr. Dama (Romania) hnd Mr. Jaipal
(India) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council table.

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(h) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 11348)
The meet@

3. -The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In addition, I wish to inform members of the Council
that I have received a letter dated 20 July from the
representative of Mauritius, requesting that Mauritius
be invited to participate in the Security Council
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure. Accordingly, if
I hear no objection, and in accordance with the usual
practice, I propose to accede to this request and to
invite the representative of Mauritius to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, also on the understanding that he will be
invited to come to the Council table when it is his
turn to address the Council.

was called to order at 4.50 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1334);
(6) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1348)

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Ramphul
(Mauritius)
took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Corrncil chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
This urgent meeting of the Security Council has been
convened at the request of the representative of
Greece contained in his letter of 20 July [S/11348],
which is the subject of agenda item 2 (c).
5. I now call on the Secretary-General,
to make a statement.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1779th
and 1780th meetings, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the representatives of Cyprus,
Turkey, Greece, Yugoslavia, Romania and India to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

who wishes

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In order to assist
the members of the Council in discharging their
responsibilities with regard to the very grave situation
in the eastern Mediterranean,
the following is a
summary of the latest developments,
based on the
1

:eports of my Special Representative, Mr. WeckmannMufioz, and the Commander of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP),
MajorGeneral Prein Chand.

troopers were dropped near Krini. from :16 transport
aircraft.
These troops began moving
towards
Nicosia.
15. In Nicosia, both the National Guard and Turkish
Cypriot fighters were threatening to attack the Ledra
Palace Hotel. UNFICYP
was assisting in the evacuation of guests from that hotel because the hotel was
full of.tourists. A hospital in Nicosia was sustaining
shell fire and heavy casualties were reported.
UNFICYP
was attempting to stop the shelling of
the hospital.

7. At 0450 hours Cyprus time in the morning of
20 July, Mr. Inhan, the Ambassador of Turkey in
Nicosia, telephoned the Force Commander to say
that he had instructions from his Government informing
him that Turkish troops would be intervening in
Cyprus very soon. In view of this and related
information,
the Commander
put UNFICYP
on
maximum alert.

16. In Larnaca district the situation as of 1200 hours
was quiet and both sides had promised not to open
fire.

8. Turkish military activity both in the air and by
sea began at 0545 hours. At 0555 landing craft and
three warships were observed five miles out from
Kyrenia; the landing craft were heading for shore. At
0607 hours, 19 Cl30 Hercules aircraft began dropping
paratroops into the main Turkish Cypriot enclave,
which extends from Nicosia to south of Kyrenia.

17. At noon there was heavy firing in Famagusta
between the National Guard and Turkish Cypriot
fighters, and Carl Gustav camp, where the Swedish
contingent is quartered, found itself in heavy crossfire. There were reports of a paratroop drop in the
Famagusta district.

9. At 0637 hours, the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation station carried an announcement calling on all
Greek Cypriots to take up arms to resist the Turkish
invasion.

18. In Kyrenia district, the area near the city of
Kyrenia where landings had taken place, was in
Turkish hands, as was the road linking the coast to
the major Turkish Cypriot enclave. At 1105 hours
there were reports of further landings on the beach
five miles west of Kyrenia.

10. As of 0645 hours a total of 34 aircraft had landed
paratroops and cargo in the Turkish Cypriot enclave
and there were further attacks on Nicosia airport.
Machine-gun and tank tire had broken out in the
Paphos Gate area of Nicosia at 0615 hours and there
was heavy small-arms fire throughout the capital city,
directed mainly against attacking Turkish aircraft.
Greek Cypriots with small arms were gathering in the
central stadium and National Guard armoured reinforcements were seen moving in the direction of the
airport.

19. In Limassol fighting broke out between National
Guard and Turkish Cypriot fighters at 1015 hours.
After intervention by the local UNFICYP
commander,
the tiring had subsided as of 1200 hours.
20. In Paphos and at nearby Mandria, the local
National Guard commanders were threatening to open
attacks on Turkish Cypriot fighter positions. The
National Guard at Paphos rejected the efforts of
UNFICYP
to head off the outbreak’of fighting.

11. At 0830 hours the Special Representative and
the Commander of UNFICYP reported that in addition
to the airborne invasion there had been amphibious
landings, approximately
two battalions in strength,
west of Kyrenia, near Snake Island.

21. I regret to inform the Council that UNFICYP
has suffered its first casualties as a consequence of
the current fighting. Six Canadian soldiers were
wounded, one of them seriously.

12. At 0845 hours Turkish air and ground forces
were attacking the Greek National Contingent camp
outside Nicosia. Nicosia airport was under heavy air
attack. At the same time large landing craft landed
near Snake Island. National
Guard troops were
reported firing on Turkish national forces at Dhikomo,
but both sides were contacted by UNFICYP
and
agreed to stop firing.

22. Upon receiving the reports about the outbreak
of hostilities before midnight I issued a statement
expressing my deep concern at’ this development
which is extremely serious for the maintenance of
international
peace and security. I immediately
instructed my Special Representative and the Force
Commander
to transmit
urgently
all necessary
information as a basis for the deliberations of the
Security Council. I also contacted the President
and members of the Council in order to determine the
future action to be taken by the United Nations.

13. At 1000 hours tiring had commenced along the
green line, despite UNFICYP
attempts to bring about
a cease-fire. Nicosia airport was under heavy ground
as well as air attack, which had subsided by 1100 hours.
It was not clear which side was in control of the
airfield.

23. In Nicosia, shortly after the outbreak of firing,
Cypriot
leadership,
Mr. Orek, of the Turkish
telephoned General Prem Chand at 0625 hours and

14. At 1012 hours 67 helicopters landed 500 Turkish
soldiers at Krini and a few minutes later 980 para2

27. During this period United
Nations
forces
remained in position along the green line in Nicosia
and were prepared to patrol this line with armoured
cars when the situation permitted. However, as of
1 000 hours heavy firing had commenced along the
green line.

gave assurances that Turkish Cypriots would not fire
on Greek Cypriots unless the latter fired first. This
was communicated by UNFICYP
to the Commander
of the National
Guard. However, no reciprocal
assurances were forthcoming
from National Guard
headquarters. Indeed, the National Guard was reported
making preparations to attack the Turkish Cypriot
enclave. It agreed to postpone this move in response
to urgent requests from UNFICYP.
The National
Guard insisted, however, that any movement by
Turkish troops out of the main enclave or any landings
from the sea would be resisted.

28. As of 1200 hours, the Turkish Cypriot leadership expressed its readiness to stop firing along the
green line as soon as the National Guard Commander
ordered his troops to stop firing.
29. At 1300 hours the Commander of the National
Guard advised UNFICYP
that he was willing to
accept its proposal for a cease-fire at 1400 hours along
the green line provided the Turks agreed to the same
condition and provided UNFICYP
ensured that the
Turks would not take advantage of the cease-fire to
improve their position. This message was immediately
passed by UNFICYP
to Vice-President
DenktaS,
who accepted the cease-fire. A later cable from General
Prem Chand said that the cease-fire would go into
effect at 1700 hours.

24. At 0700 hours the Force Commander passed a
message to the Turkish Ambassador expressing his
deep concern at the possibility of fighting in Nicosia,
where there were many civilians as well as embassies,
and offering UNFICYP
assistance to prevent the
spread of hostilities
into the city. The Turkish
Embassy subsequently replied that it would agree to
pass this request to the Commander of the Turkish
forces provided assurances were received through
UNFICYP
that there would be no attacks by the
National Guard on the Turkish Cypriot sector in
Nicosia and on Turkish cities and villages throughout
the whole island. This message was immediately
conveyed to the National Guard. At 0745 hours
there was a telephone call from Mr. Dimitriou,
who
said he was -speaking on behalf of the Council
of Ministers and the National
Guard and asked
UNFICYP to inform the Turkish side that the National
Guard could not be responsible for any attacks on
civilian Turks in various parts of the island unless
Turkish bombing and attacks on Cyprus ceased.

30. At 1930 hours UNFICYP
reported that the
cease-fire in Nicosia had failed to hold and that there
was firing throughout the city.
31. In the afternoon of 20 July heavy fighting
continued throughout the island and waves of airborne
troops from Turkey continued to land. Turkish air
attacks on the Nicosia airport and other targets in
Nicosia continued.
There was heavy fighting in
Larnaca district where UNFICYP
was attempting
to arrange a cease-fire. In Limassol district Turkish
Cypriot fighters requested UNFICYP
to supervise
their surrender to the National
Guard. Fighting
continued in Paphos.

25. At 0800 hours, fearing that ground fighting might
reach Nicosia in the course of the day, my Special
Representative and the Force Commander proposed
to the Turkish military authorities and to the National
Guard that Nicosia be declared an open city on humanitarian grounds. UNFICYP
was in touch with various
embassies in connexion with this matter. Although
Mr. Dimitriou
initially agreed to this proposal, the
response of the National Guard was negative unless
the Turkish attacks ceased. I have followed up this
suggestion here with the Permanent Representatives
concerned. It seems to me to be of particular importance that fighting in Nicosia and other heavily
populated areas should cease immediately.

32. I shall certainly continue
informed as further information

to keep the Council
becomes available.

33. We are faced with an appalling and extremely
serious situation. The fighting on Cyprus, with the
arrival of Turkish forces, has reached a new level of
violence and bitterness. The dangers of a wider
conflict, which we discussed earlier this week, have
now become a tragic reality. A major breakdown
of international
peace and security has occurred,
despite all bilateral efforts to avoid it.

26. UNFICYP
officials are also continuing their
efforts to prevent the fighting between Turkish troops
and the National Guard from spreading into intercommunal fighting along the lines of confrontation
in the island. As of 0830 hours the Turkish Cypriot
leadership had assured UNFICYP that Turkish Cypriot
forces would not fire on National Guard units except
in self-defence. However,
the Turkish
Cypriots
stressed that they had no control over the actions
of the Turkish national forces. The National Guard
and the Commander of the Turkish invasion forces
gave similar assurances.

34. An enormous responsibility
has now fallen to
the Security Council-the
responsibility for putting a
halt to the fighting, for preventing further escalation
and for finding a way in which we can begin to
restore the peace.
35. In this situation I appeal to the parties in conflict
to put a halt immediately
to the devastating battle
which is now going on and to co-operate with
UNFICYP
in its efforts to limit the fighting and to
protect the civilian population. The hopes of the world
3

are now centred on this Council.
our duty.

Let us not fail in

44. First, what we have done is to call yet again, as
various nations have done in this forum in the course
of the. last week, upon all States to respect the
sovereignty,
the independence
and the territorial
integrity of the nation of Cyprus all States, not just
some States.

36. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spamsh):
I thank the Secretary-General for the very important
information he has given us.
37. I should like to state that the President of the
Council, in close co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral, has devoted every effort to seeing that the
Council discharge in the most appropriate manner its
primary responsibility
for maintaining
international
peace and security, and to that end has held continuous
consultations
with the representatives
of member
States. Those consultations started on 15 July and
were intensified as the situation worsened. I should
like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General
and to all those representatives of member States
for their valuable and devoted co-operation.

45. Secondly, we, as the supreme forum of the world
community concerned with peace and security, have
called upon all parties to the present fighting as a
first step to cease all firing-all
parties, not just some.
46. Thirdly, we have demanded an immediate end to
foreign military
intervention
in .the Republic of
Cyprus. We have requested the withdrawal without
delay from the Republic of Cyprus of foreign military
personnel. We have called upon Greece, Turkey and
the United Kingdom to enter into negotiations. We
have called upon all parties to co-operate fully with
UNFICYP and we have decided to keep the situation
under constant review.

38. As a result of those talks and consultations it has
been possible to circulate a draft resolution [S/f 13501.
In view of the urgency of this question, I hope that
it can be put to a vote at this meeting.

47. It is a comprehensive resolution and it is one
which, if it is accepted by those nations most intimately
concerned with Cyprus, will hopefully bring peace to
that area. This is, I think, a time for brevity and not
for oratory.

39. Since I understand that no representative wishes
to speak at this time I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote.

48. Now that the fighting has commenced yet again,
I think the question we should ask ourselves is what
can we do now. Where do we go to from here in order
to attempt to minimize the fighting within Cyprus
itself? And, secondly, how can the United Nations
help to confine the fighting to Cyprus itself? At least
there is one small glimmer of hope in the fact that, so
far, the fighting has not spread outside the island of
Cyprus.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution

was adopted unanimously.L

40. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
explain their votes.
41. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I am grateful to you for the opportunity
of
participating in this debate and I am especially grateful
that the Security Council has just taken the decision
that it did, in the way that it did and by the majority
that it did. It is rare indeed that the whole of the world
community finds itself in such total unanimity when it
approaches an issue of such delicacy and gravity as
the one with which we are now faced.

49. There must, in our view, be immediate talks. The
Cyprus situation is one which will not be settled other
than by direct negotiations and direct discussions. The
United Kingdom,
as one of the guarantors under
the terms of the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee,z has
therefore asked both Greece and Turkey to hold
talks in London tomorrow. The object of those talks
would be to reduce tension in the area and to work
towards a return of constitutional
rule in the island
of Cyprus. So far we have had no response from the
Turkish Government. This is a matter of great regret
to the Government of the United Kingdom. Last night
the Government. of Greece responded to an earlier
suggestion made by the United Kingdom and accepted
that talks would be necessary. It is very much to be
hoped that the Turkish Government,
in accordance
with paragraph 5 of this resolution which was adopted
unanimously, will also feel able to accept the invitation
to these talks. But it is vital that they should start
soon if the twin aims, which I believe we in the Council
have set ourselves, of confining the fighting to and
within Cyprus are going to be fulfilled.

42. The resolution itself is one which has of course
emerged from. many consultations which have taken
place in the course of today. It was right that those
consultations should have been long and detailed; it
was right that we should have given very careful
consideration
indeed to the precise. nature of the’
dispute and to what we, the Security Council, could
call upon the parties to do.
43. Since I am the first to speak in explanation of
vote may I therefore devote perhaps one or two
moments to looking at the operative part of this
resolution.
’ See resolution

353 (1974).

2 United

4

Nations,

Treaty

Series,

vol.

382, p. 3.

50. I am conscious of the fact. , too. , that a number
of delegations, in the course of the informal discussions
which were going on through today, had some misgivings that paragraph 5 was somewhat high-handed.
I believe that some felt that it might seem that. there
was a suggestion in the paragraph that the internal
affairs of Cyprus should be settled in detail by some
bodies other than the people of Cyprus. There is, of
course, no such.intention at all. My Government would
certainly wish to keep in close touch-and
will keep in
close touch, as it has done in recent days-with
the
President of Cyprus, and the Council will no doubt
recall my statement yesterday [178&h meeting] as
to my Government’s views on the status of Archbishop
Makarios as the President of Cyprus.

community on Cyprus, or indeed the cause of peace in
the world. Neither can we be convinced that foreign
military intervention in Cyprus, from whatever quarter
and by whatever means, has at any time been
justifiable.
55. We oppose any intervention
in the internal
affairs of a State Member of the United Nations.
56. My Government has worked untiringly these past
days in an attempt to forestall the escalation toward
intervention in the eastern Mediterranean.
Tragically,
with the Turkish intervention last night, another step
has been taken toward exactly that which we have
attempted to forestall.
57. Turkey is and will remain an ally of the United
States. Greece is and will remain an ally of the United
States. It is in the interests of the people of Greece and
the people of Turkey to ensure that Greece remains
the ally of Turkey. As friends for a generation, both
peoples have made giant strides; as enemies they stand
to lose all. It is in the interest of the people of Cyprus
as well as those of Greece and Turkey and all members
of the Council that Cyprus not become a Mediterranean
battleground.

51. As far as the United Kingdom is concerned,
there is, in consequence, no question of our attempting
to settle the internal affairs of the independent Republic
of Cyprus without the participation of all concerned.
Over the last six years the attempt has been made
to reach agreement on suitable internal arrangements
for Cyprus through the intercommunal talks. We would
hope that at an appropriate time discussion could be
resumed, either in that forum or through some other
suitable arrangement. Agreement between the representatives-and
I mean by that the properly appointed
representatives-of
the two communities is essential
to any just and peaceful settlement of the affairs of
Cyprus on a lasting basis.

58. The United States will continue to work with
its friends toward this goal. We urge the Governments
of Greece and Turkey to display to the members of
the Council the maximum
spirit of restraint and
compromise in the interest of peace. We believe that,
with goodwill,
common sense and extraordinary
statesmanship by all concerned, it is still not too late
to avert a major tragedy.

52. In conclusion, may i just say that this has been
a terrible week. It commenced with a coup in a small
island in the Mediterranean;
it has ended with direct
military intervention by one country in the affairs of
that island. I hope that at this time next week we are
not sitting here again in this chamber looking back
at the events of a week which has proved to be even
more terrible than the one that we have just lived
through.

59. We appreciate that all members of the Council
have joined in calling for an immediate cease-fire.
We owe the embattled people of Cyprus no less. All
the members of the Council have wisely joined with
us in a request to the Governments of Greece and
Turkey to accept immediately
the United Kingdom
proposal for negotiations among the guarantor Powers.
We believe that at this time the Council can make no
greater contribution to the cause’of peace and constitutional government in Cyprus.

53. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): We
convene here today in the wake of opeh military
action in the eastern Mediterranean.
To our deep
regret, Turkish troops have landed on Cyprus. The
Council, all too familiar with the antagonisms which
have shaped Greek-Turkish relations on Cyprus, needs
no reminder of what the Turkish landing forebodes for
the stability of the island and what a serious threat is
posed for peace in the area. Regrettably, the process of
diplomacy was not given a chance to run its course.
The people of Cyprus are the tragic losers, once more
overtaken by events sadly beyond their capacity to
coritrol. Indeed, we are all losers, as international
peace hangs most precariously and dramatically in the
balance.

60.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD

(France) (interpreturion
has followed with the
greatest attention the debates which the Security
Council has devoted to the situation in Cyprus.
Speaking on behalf of the countries of the European
Community on 16 July [/779th meering], it expressed
the serious concern which the present crisis has caused
France and its eight partners. Our meeting yesterday
[/78&h meeting] enabled us to hear not only His
Beatitude Archbishop
Makarios,
the President of
%yprus, but also a series of statements which contributed to clarifying a situation which had thus far
been confusing.

from French): My delegation

54. My Government
deplores the pressures and
interventions which contributed to the Turkish action
on Cyprus, and for which Greece must bear a heavy
share of the responsibility. However, this invasion in
no way serves the hopes for peace of the Turkish

61. The French delegation would have preferred to
have voted yesterday upon the draft resolution which
5

was negotiated over the past few days on the initiative
of some non-permanent members of the Council, had
it been possible to have the vote yesterday. We cannot
but deplore the delays which took place and which
prevented concerted action on the part of the Council,
and which have perhaps prompted one of the parties
to invoke the provisions of the Treaty of Guarantee
and to resort to force in order to preserve interests
which should have been preserved by peaceful means.
That intervention is a serious concern to my Government. It was bound to be accompanied by the loss
of human life-and in this context I also have in mind
the members of UNFICYP who have been woundedand by material damage, which, added to that resulting
from the events of 15 July, is increasing the sufferings
of the Cypriot population.

indisuensable for the useful continuance
communal talks.

of the inter-

65. However, I shall not now enter into considerations which will no doubt be more usefully discussed
in the course of the negotiations, which we hope will
be initiated as soon as possible.
66. At this time the most urgent thing is the restoration of peace, and that is contingent upon the
commencement
of the negotiations
I have just
mentioned, the restraint shown by the parties involved
and a return to constitutional
order. Those three
essential points were the subject of very urgent
negotiations which were carried out today with the
Governments
of both Athens and Ankara by the
representatives of France, who acted on behalf of
the European Community.
I shall now read out the
substance of those negotiations, which is:

62. The French delegation hopes that all fighting will
come to a halt as soon as possible on the island of
Cyprus. None the less we are obliged to note both
that the circumstances surrounding the recent coup
d’etat in Nicosia and the fact that ‘officers of the
Cypriot National Guard belong to the Greek army
confer a special responsibility
upon the Athens
Government
for the events that took place. The
statements made yesterday in this chamber corroborated the feeling, obvious shared by all the members
of our Council, that the recall of the officers of the
National Guard, whose recall Archbishop Makarios
had requested on 2 July, played a role in the coup
d’etat which took place on 15 July. We cannot but
regret such an intervention in the internal affairs of
a State which not only is a sovereign nation, as
are all Members of the Organization, but also has by
diplomatic
treaties been endowed with a structure
guaranteed by international
law, an obvious and
express condition for its internal equilibrium.

“First, the nine Governments support the British
initiative for a meeting in London by the guarantor
Powers with a view to the holding of urgent
consultations necessitated by the events in Cyprus.
They appeal to the Governments of Greece and
Turkey to accept this invitation.
“Secondly, the nine Governments urge that the
Governments concerned take all measures in their
power to prevent a worsening of the situation.
They request Turkey to put a halt to military
operations and to cease fire. They request Greece
not to intervene militarily.
“Thirdly,
the nine Governments
are in favour
of a return to constitutional
order in Cyprus and
request the Turkish and Greek Governments, each
insofar as it is concerned, also to take a position
along those lines. The nine Governments cannot
consider that the maintenance in Cyprus of the
present & frcto regime is in keeping with the
constitutional order.”

63. In the explosive circumstances that have prevailed over the past five days it is essential that we
appeal to .a11 to ensure that the independence and
territorial integrity of Cyprus should be respected and
that all intervention in the internal affairs of the island
should cease without delay. Since Greece, which is a
guarantor of the treaties on Cyprus but has officers
stationed on the island who have been accused of
having derogated from their professional duty, nevertheless affirms that it respects the principles of the
Charter, its most significant contribution to an easing
of the crisis would have been for it to withdraw its
military personnel seconded to the Cypriot National
Guard. In this way it might perhaps have been possible
to prevent the developments that have taken place
over the past 24 hours.

67. I shall now refer to the resolution the Council
adopted a few minutes ago. First of all, I should like to
note that it takes into account the three points I have
just stated. That is not a coincidence, but merely proof
that in various responsible forums the same conditions
are recognized as necessary for the settlement of the
serious crisis which we are now confronting.
68. The French delegation this morning made great
efforts to reconcile the concerns of its Government
and the views which had been stated in this forum as
well as the wishes of the parties concerned. Thus it
cannot fail to be gratified that, thanks to the: wisdom
and untiring patience of our President and tl le understanding of the other members of the COUIncil, that
body has adopted a text very similar to thl e one on
which the delegation had tried to obtain the a,greement
of the members as a whole.

64. No doubt it might be desirable for us in due
course to ask ourselves under what conditions a more
normal life could be re-established in Cyprus. I am
thinking in particular of the constitutional democratic
provisions which ensure the presence of the legitimate
authorities and the coexistence of both communities.
I am also thinking
of the conditions which are
6

.:

69. My country, which has traditionally
close ties
of friendship with both Greece and Turkey and which
feels warm compassion for the sorely tried people of
Cyprus, will be ready, as will its European partners,
to make any contribution
to the cause of peace in
the Eastern Mediterranean that may appear us’eful.

Council delayed the adoption of the effective and
expeditious measures of which the Soviet delegation
spoke, although we warned that such a delay could
only lead to a further aggravation of the situation.
76. Now, Mr. President, I should like to make a few
comments about the resolution which has just been
adopted.

70. I would not wish to ,conclude this statement
without expressing our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his tireless efforts for peace, and also
to UNFICYP,
its Commander and its troops, for the
invaluable contribution they have made to the local
efforts to prevent or put a halt to the fighting and
to assist the victims. We are convinced that the
Secretary-General and UNFICYP
will in the coming
days render still more valuable services in that
connexion.

77. The Soviet delegation voted in favour of that
resolution because it meets the two basic demands
which we have supported from the very outset.
78. First, this resolution expresses support for the
sole legitimate Government
of Cyprus, headed by
President Makarios, and envisages the need to restore
the constitutional structure of the Republic of Cyprus.
79. Secondly, this resolution demands an immediate
end to foreign intervention against the Republic of
Cyprus and calls for the withdrawal without delay
from Cyprus of foreign military personnel, including
specifically those whose withdrawal was requested
by the President of the Republic of Cyprus in his
letter of 2 July 1974.

71. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (trcrnslation from Russian): From the very
outset, the Soviet delegation has favoured the adoption
by the Security Council of rapid and effective measures
in connexion with the dangerous situation that has
arisen in and around Cyprus.

80. As everyone Will understand,
this specific
reference is to the Greek officers whose flagrant
intervention in the internal affairs of Cyprus on orders
from Athens was the original cause of the present
crisis.

72. In the statements by the President of the Republic
of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, the representative
of Cyprus, Mr. Rossides, and some members of the
Council, it has been convincingly
shown that this
situation has arisen in Cyprus as a result of the open
and flagrant military intervention
by the Athens
Government in the internal affairs of a sovereign
State, the Republic of Cyprus, and as a result of a
military putsch inspired from Athens. It has been
irrefutably demonstrated that this putsch was carried
out on orders from Athens by Greek officers serving
in the National Guard of Cyprus.

81. Thus, the resolution adopted by the Council on
the whole meets the two main demands which the
Soviet delegation has put forward from the outset
and which were included in the text of the resolution
at its insistence.
82. Of course, the resolution which has been adopted
does not fully meet the requirements of the moment
in all respects. But if it is implemented,
the main
objectives will have been achieved, namely the
restoration-and
I emphasize the word “restoration”-of
the constitutional
structure of Cyprus and
of the Government headed by President Makarios,
an end to foreign intervention against the Republic
of Cyprus and the withdrawal of foreign military
personnel from the territory of Cyprus.

73. We were therefore somewhat surprised to see in
the agenda for today’s meeting a reference to the letter
from the representative of Greece to the President
of the Council. We should like, in this connexion, to
draw the attention of the Council to the extremely
hypocritical nature of this step taken by the Athens
Government and to point out that in this instance the
request for a meeting of the Council came from a
Government which has committed aggression against
an independent State, the Republic of Cyprus.
74. As early as the first meeting devoted to
consideration of the situation in Cyprus, on 16 July
[1779th
meeting],
the Soviet delegation
strongly
urged the Council, which bears special responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, to take
immediate and effective measures to put an end to
foreign military intervention in the internal affairs of
Cyprus and to ensure the immediate withdrawal of
Greek military personnel present in the territory of
Cyprus.

83. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): Mr. President, as
this is the first time that my delegation has spoken
during this debate I should like briefly to extend to
you our congratulations
on your assumption of the
presidency of the .Security
Council. Your skill,
experience and wisdom have been amply demonstrated
during the past few difficult days. I shoudl also like
to pay a special tribute to the outstanding manner in
which your predecessor, Mr. El Hassen, the representative of brotherly Mauritania,
presided over the
Council during the month of June.

75. We regret that, in view of the delaying tactics
employed by certain members of the Council, the

84. My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution that has just been adopted, despite some
7

misgivings relating to the language of paragraph 2. To
be sure, we understand the word “parties”
in that
paragraph as raising no implication of recognition of
the usurpers of the constitutional
power of Cyprus
as a legitimate party.

Nevertheless, it is our hope that all Member States
will co-operate sincerely with the Council to strengthen
peaceful coexistence among all the States of the
region concerned and to safeguard international
peace and security.

85. The reasons which prompted us to vote in favour
of the draft resolution are the following: first, it
deals with the basic cause of the crisis in Cyprus;
secondly, it calls upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Cyprus. Compliance with the provisions contained in
the text, and especially the provision contained in
paragraph 4, would lead to the restoration of the
legitimate Government and the head of State of Cyprus
and would guarantee the existence of the constitutional
arrangements
embodied
in international
agreements.

91.

86.

Mr.

NJINE

(United

Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretation
from
French):
Mr. President,
my
delegation is particularly happy to congratulate you
on your accession to the burdensome and delicate
responsibility
of being President of the Security
Council this month. Your great country, Peru, is
already engaged in close co-operation with my own,
not only within the United Nations family, but also
and particuiarly within the framework of the great
assembly of non-aligned countries. Therefore I can
assure you in advance of my delegation’s wholehearted co-operation with you in the discharge of
your responsibilities.
87. I should like also on behalf of my delgation to
thank sincerely your predecessor, Mr. El Hassen of
Mauritania,
for his distinguished
presidency last
month.
88. My delegation regards an immediate cease-fire
as an urgent necessity which will reduce the loss of
human life and further material damage. How is it
possible to restore peace to Cyprus when only gunfire is heard. All the parties concerned must show
a co-operative and moderate attitude, so that an
atmosphere propitious to dialogue may be created
and, so that the dialogue may no longer be conducted
in terms of deadly weapons.
89. We take this opportunity of expressing both our
gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his dedication
to the cause of peace and our great appreciation
for his tireless efforts to keep the Council regularly
informed of the developments in Cyprus.
90. Turning now to the resolution just adopted, the
provisions of which my delegation supports, we wish
to emphasize the importance that the United Republic
of Cameroon attaches to respect for the sovereignty,’
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus. In this regard, my delegation expresses
its deep concern at the alarming nature of the
information
that has been reaching the Council.

Mr. CHUANG
Yen (China) (translati&
from
In our statement yesterday [1780th meeting]
the Chinese delegation has already stated our principled
position on the situation in Cyprus. The Chinese
Government and people firmly support the just struggle
waged by the people of Cyprus under the leadership
of their President, Archbishop Makarios, the legitimate
head of State of Cyprus, and resolutely oppose the
aggression and subversion against Cyprus by all foreign
forces and the violation of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus.
Chinese):

92. We are seriously concerned about the present
situation in Cyprus. What should be stressed in
particular is that the two super-Powers, whose sole
anxiety is the absence of trouble in the world, are
stirring up flames everywhere by taking advantage of
the present situation; they are sparing no effort to
sow discord so as to achieve their aim of fishing
in troubled waters and plundering a burning house in
their contention for hegemony in the Middle East
and Mediterranean region. All countries and ,peoples
of the world which uphold justice should maintain
high vigilance against this and resolutely oppose their
aforesaid iniquitous acts.
93. The Chinese delegation has voted for the draft
resolution contained in document S/l 1350. But it must
be pointed out that the seventh preambular paragraph
and paragraph 6 of the text mention the question
of UNFICYP.
On the question of dispatching a
United Nations force, the Chinese Government has
always held its own position of principle. This is well
known to all. Consequently,
the Chinese delegation has reservations on the afore-mentioned
two
paragraphs.
94.

Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Mr’. President, my delegation wishes to
associate itself with the congratulations addressed to
you on your performance as President of the Security
Council. The well-deserved prestige which you enjoy
has been enhanced by the intelligent and able manner
in which you have guided the debates of the Council.
My delegation reiterates the offer made to you
privately to render the greatest co-operation to you
in the carrying out of your high functions.

Spanish):

95. My delegation listened with emotion to the statement made yesterday [ibid.] to the Council by the
President of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, ,and for
many different reasons it has feelings of solidarity
with the cause so worthily represented by him.
96. The difficult juncture through which the Cypriot
nation is passing at this time is of very great concern

to the Government
of Costa Rica, since a very
deplorable event has taken place, that is, a legitimate
Government legally constituted and firmly rooted in
the will of the people has been overthrown by some
who exhibit no valid credentials to claim to exercise it.

of the Security Council have for the most part been
effective and have prevented worse evils. None the
less, it would appear that that peace-keeping jurisdiction has not been fully exercised in those cases in
which the controversy is not quite as obvious even
though it might also be likely to endanger intemational peace and stability.

97. What has happened is all the more deplorable
because there is a conviction that the coup that took
place in Cyprus did not take place in circumstances
which might lead one to consider it an internal affair.
The information which has come to my Government
by different channels leads us to believe that the
movement which overthrew the Government headed
by Archbishop Makarios could not have been brought
about without assistance and foreign encouragement
and this adds the reprehensible element of foreign
intervention to it.

104. That is to say that, when the danger or threat
no longer takes place on a battlefield but is surreptitiously displaced to a country and slyly disguises
itself as an internal affair, although it might be
equally likely to endanger international
peace and
security, it produces a paralysing effect on the
decisions of the Council.
105. My delegation
finds this latter tendency
disheartening: first of all because it selects as its
victims small nation which are not powerful enough
to resist that concealed aggression; in the second place
because, if we come to the desperate conclusion that
there is no international
protection to prevent such
actions, the medium-sized
and small nations will
continue entrusting their security to an ever more
dangerous armaments spiral, which contradicts in its
essence all the efforts which today are being proclaimed
and which, regrettably, are not being carried out
sincerely, in order to establish through multilateral
agreements in the United Nations propitious conditions
for achieving general and complete disarmament.

98. The combination
of Cypriot armed forces and
Greek military offtcers was the element which unleased’
the armed attack which deposed Archbishop Makarios.
My country very sincerely deplores the fact that the
military collusion of forces of Cypriot origin abetted
by foreign forces overthrew a Government
whose
legitimate credentials emanated from its own people.
99. My Government deplores this because it never
accepted either one or the other. My country has
never accepted as valid the expedient that armed forces
could breach their loyalty to the authority of the
Power legally constituted and attempt to overthrow
it. Nor does my ‘country accept that any change in
the structures of power of an independent
and
sovereign nation should be in any way .made or
influenced by a foreign nation.

106. That is why my delegation feels that it is not
too late, ‘in the face of concrete facts which violate
the sovereignty, the independence and the territorial
integrity of the State, that the Security Council should
exercise its peace-making mission and enact effective
measures to prevent the commission
of acts as
reprehensible as the coup which took place in Cyprus.

100. Clearly, when a nation undergoes an essentially
national change, unequivocally
recognized as an
internal matter, even though the new regime may not
be to one’s liking from the point of view of a value
judgement, the international community is precluded
from taking any kind of action. But when, on the
contrary there is an evident usurpation of power with
the assistance of foreign forces, the international
community
could hardly look upon this with indifference.

107. My delegation feels that the present situation
in Cyprus may endanger international
peace and
security despite the fact that, originally,
attempts
were made to make it appear that it was an internal
affair, and that it is the obligation of the Security
Council, conscious of the responsibility
incumbent
upon it, to act as speedily as possible. It is quite
evident that it would be desirable for this action to
be channelled
through constructive-but
no less
vigorous-efforts
in order to restore to Cyprus its
constitutional
order.

101. The views set forth find their clearest explanation in the conduct and in the developments which
have guided the political life of my country. We are
a small nation and as such we have profound feelings
of solidarity
with another small country whose
existence has been disturbed by the nefarious alliance
of soldiers and foreign forces.

108. As a result of the Turkish intervention which
took place in the early hours of today, new events
have been added to the already very delicate situation
which has been evolving in Cyprus. When the coup
against the legitimate
Government
of Archbishop
Makarios took place, despite the fact that it altered
an established situation to which other States were
parties, it was perhaps not yet possible to see clearly
all the harmful consequences which that coup would
unleash. But it was sufficiently clear that things were
not going to stay as they were viewed from any angle,

102. We ponder what could be the fate of the smaller
countries if the international
community were to be
indifferent to such dangers and threats.
103. When direct confrontation
has taken place
between two States, thanks to the system of peacekeeping created by the United Nations, the decisions
9

the conclusion could be reached that we are faced
with a potentially
dangerous situation that night
affect international peace and security, whose trusteeship is in the hands of the United Nations.

The last few days have confirmed
that confidence is.

how well merited

115. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express the appreciation of my delegation to Mr. El
Hassen of Mauritania
for the efficient manner in
which he has acquitted himself of his duties as President during the month of June.

109. As a general rule, when situations of this kind
come about, my delegation has been in favour of having
the Security Council act as rapidly as possible because
it understands that any delay makes it easier for the
differences between the opposing uncontrolled forces
to become deeper and, also, for new dangerous
elements to be added.

116. My delegation has followed the development
of the last few days in Cyprus with the greatest
apprehension. An open physical conflict in the island
is an extremely dangerous threat to peace and security
in the area. My delegation has always been of the
view that the Council should act immediately
to
stop the fighting as a first step towards restoring
peace and reaffirming the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Cyprus as a non-aligned
country.

110. It is not in vain to ask if in the present situation
a timely resolution of the Council, which might only
have contained a general warning to all States to
refrain from intervening in Cyprus, in accordance
with the measures contained in Articles 41 and 42 of
the Charter, would not have been enough to discourage
any State which might have had the intention of
proceeding in that way.

117. My delegation regrets that the Council has
needed so much time to take action after the happenings
in Cyprus on 15 July. We are therefore happy that
the Council has now agreed to take action in the form
of the resolution
which we have just adopted
unanimously.

111. Perhaps such action, or even less, might have
sufficed so that we would not at this stage have to
deplore the Turkish intervention on the island, which
my delegation in no way accepts or can justify,
because, whatever the reasons for which it was carried
out, they in no way attenuate the character of an
unjustified violation
of the territorial
integrity of
another State.

118. Allow me now to give my delegation’s views
with regard to the developments
in Cyprus since
15 July. What has happened in Cyprus has become a
matter of very serious concern to the members of the
international community,
and Indonesia fully shares
that concern. Not only have the events that have taken
place in Cyprus disturbed the delicate balance
maintained for 10 years with the assistance of the
United Nations, but they constitute a serious threat
to the successful conclusion of the negotiations
between the two communities on the island which is
most important not only for the future of independent
Cyprus but also for peace and security in the region.

112. We must very sincerely state that this dangerous
escalation of the struggle in Cyprus was not wished
by any member of the Security Council. What in truth
has occurred is that because of disagreement which
arose among the five permanent members, which have
the monopoly of the decisions of the Council, it took
longer than it should have to bring about a resolution
that might have prevented things from going that far.
113. In the face of such deplorable events as those
which have been taking place in Cyprus from the
fifteenth of this month, in which a legitimate Govemment has been overthrown, the rights of a people
have been violated, constitutional
order has been
disturbed, and to that we can add the intervention of
two States, my delegation was very happy to see that
ultimately the Council was able to reach agreement,
which may now give rise to an action that will
restore peace and constitutional order in Cyprus, put
an end to foreign interference and prevent further
loss of life.

119. A physical confrontation between the Greek and
Turkish communities, especially if Greece and Turkey
are directly taking part in it, definitely constitutes
a serious danger for the peace and security of the
eastern Mediterranean area and may turn the region
into an arena for a wider, mutinational
conflict.
120. The upheaval on Cyprus is especially disturbing
to Indonesia because it affects a fellow member of the
non-aligned group of nations. Indonesia attaches
great importance to having the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus as a nonaligned country respected, and to having the delicate
balance between the two communities on the island,
on the basis of existing agreements, maintained until
they agree on the basis on which one Cypriat nation
and people will be built.

114. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President,
in speaking for the first time under your presidency
it gives me great pleasure to join those who have
congratulated you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current’ month. The
close association on both an official and personal
level which I have been privileged to enjoy with you,
Sir, permits me to state with confidence that the
presidency is in most capable and experienced hands.

121. My delegation would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his reports on the recent developments
in Cyprus. There can be no doubt whatsoever that
10

the fighting should stop and that an end should be
put to bloodshed and human suffering. The primary
responsibility of the Security Council with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security makes
it imperative for the Council to act, in view of the
explosive situation developing in Cyprus which may
endanger peace and security in that area. It is very
important and very urgent to stop the fighting and
the bloodshed and to restore the conditions of sufficient
tranquillity on the basis of the constitutional structure
and in accordance with existing agreements which will
be helpful to the two communities in their negotiations.

126. It is on the basis of these views that my delegation has voted for the draft resolution in document
S/l 1350.
127. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to
the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative in
and the Commander
and members of
CYPrW
UNFICYP
for the efforts they are making to help to
bring back peace and tranquillity
to Cyprus and to
restore constitutional order to that country on the basis
of existing agreements.
128. Mr. OULD MOULOUD
(Mauritania)
(interpretation from French): Mr. President, since I am
speaking for the first time, I should like to begin. by
extending to you the congratulations of my delegation
on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Your great experience of
international
affairs and your qualifications
as a
diplomat and a statesman have already contributed
-and we are sure, will continue to contribute-to
the full success of our work. I wish also to thank you
for the kind words that you addressed to the representative of my country,
Mr. El Hassen, whose
responsibility
it was to preside over the Council in
June. My thanks go also to other members of the
Council who have been so kind as to express. the
same sentiments.

122. My delegation believes that the Security Council
should address itself to the basic problem of the present
events occurring in Cyprus. In this connexion, my
delegation whole-heartedly
shares the view of the
Secretary-General expressed in his identical telegrams
addressed to the Prime Ministers of Greece and
Turkey, through the representatives of Greece and
Turkey, in which he said:
“At the heart of the problem of Cyprus are its
territorial
integrity,
sovereignty
and political
independence. Any development which affects them
obviously has the most serious consequences for
the responsibilities
of the United Nations in relation to Cyprus as laid down by the Security Council.”
[S/f 1336.1

129. I should like now to express the views of my
delegation concerning the question before us: the situation in the territory of the Republic of Cyprus since
15 July.

It is in this context that my delegation would like to
stress once again its view-which
it shares with other
delegations-that
the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Cyprus as a non-aligned country
should be respected by all States.

130. New and grave developments in this situation
obviously called for urgent and energetic steps by
the Security Council. Such action was all the more
justified because, so far as the maintenance of peace
in Cyprus is concerned, the United Nations, and more
particularly the Security Council, had and continues
to have particular responsibilities
that flow from the
Council resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent resoiutions. It was therefore a matter of urgency, from our
standpoint, that the Council take all the necessary
measures to halt the fighting in the territory of the
Republic of Cyprus.

123. Now that the situation in Cyprus has given rise
to an even wider conflict endangering international
peace and security, the Council must take immediate
steps to stop the fighting.
124. A second measure which should be taken, in
the view of my delegation, is the immediate withdrawal
from Cyprus of all foreign military personnel, including
those serving with the National Guard of Cyprus,
whose presence on the island is not on the basis of
existing agreements, in order to avoid further complication in the already highly dangerous situation. The
withdrawal of such personnel will be a step towards
establishing a situation in which the problem, will
become a matter mainly for the population of Cyprus,
whether of Greek or Turkish origin, to solve with the
help of the United Nations and without the direct
physical military involvement
of foreign elements
seeking to influence the outcome.

131. Having done so, the Council, we believe, must
spare no effort to safeguard the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus.
132. My delegation’s
position is rooted in my
country’s deep devotion to the ideals of independence, respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and non-interference
in the affairs of other States.
These ideals, which are supported by all peace-loving
peoples, are the foundation of the doctrine of the
non-aligned movement, a movement of which the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania and the Republic of
Cyprus are full members.

125. It is my delegation’s belief that such measures
would be helpful in preventing further bloodshed and
human suffering and in advancing the efforts to restore
tranquillity
in Cyprus in order to build more solid
foundations for lasting peace in the area.

ii

133. It is because of our common affiliation with the
non-aligned movement, as well as our allegiance to
its principles, that my delegation has supported and
continues unreservedly to support the constitutional
regime of the Republic of Cyprus. Furthermore, this
support has already been strikingly evinced by all of
the non-aligned countries, whose Co-ordinating Bureau
published an unambiguous communique on the subject.
I might recall that that communique was read out to
the Council at its meeting on 18 July [Z78Uth meeting,
pm-a. 731 by the representative of Yugoslavia.

negotiable at any time. This situation, creates, in
turn, too many anomalies which cannot easily be
reconciled at the same time. It is imperative for the
future of independent Cyprus that, first and foremost,
its independence, with all it implies, shoudl be accepted
by all parties and by all States Members of the United
Nations. When this is accepted, it will be possible
for the friends of Cyprus, as well as for the U.nited
Nations, to give all the necessary support for the
maintenance of that independence. Lasting peace will
not come, however, as long as foreign Powers continue
to claim either the whole or parts of Cyprus as their
own. The steps that are taken after the current tragedy
should therefore be aimed at making Cyprus, in fact
as well as in appearance, a sovereign State. We have
even heard the Cypriot people being described as
“populations”.
Positive steps should be taken by
the Government of Cyprus to reconcile the people
of Cyprus to the fact of their being an independent
.nation, made up of different peoples of the island
State that are not, as we know, culturahy homogeneous. The energies entrapped within them, and often
released in hate and fighting, should be directed
towards the building of one nation. Until these steps
are taken, the problem of Cyprus will remain.

134. It is in the interests of all the countries of the
eastern Mediterranean
and of the international
community at large that an early solution be found
to make possible a return to normal constitutional life
in Cyprus.
135. In view of the foregoing considerations,
my
delegation was happy to vote for the draft resolution
contained ‘in document S/l 1350, which, we believe,
will carry us towards an early and appropriate
settlement of this crisis,
136. I would not wish to conclude this brief statement
without paying a deserved tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for his unceasing efforts since the beginning
of the present crisis. The instructions he has given
and the arrangements
made on the spot by his
representatives have unquestionably
been of great
usefulness in restoring peace and limiting the effects
of the painful ordeal through which the Cypriot
population
is now going. We thank him and his
colleagues for their efforts.

141. My delegation would like to add its voict to
that of those who have already appealed to all States
to observe and respect this call by the Security Council.
142. My Government has always called forrespect for
human life; we have been greatly saddened by the loss
of life that has taken place. We therefore hope that
by this unanimity of the Council all fighting will cease.
As has been pointed out in the resolution, this should,
be but the first step towards bringing lasting peace to
that island, which has had enough trouble in its short
history since becoming independent in 1960.

137. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President, as this is
the first time my delegation has taken the floor under
your wise presidency, let me offer you my delegation’s
congratulations and good wishes. The matter before us
is of grave concern to all of us, as it involves the
question of a threat to general peace. My delegation
has been impressed with the manner in which you
have so ably discharged your duties.

143. We attach great importance to the demand to
remove from Cyprus all foreign military personnel,
whose continued presence can only aggravate the
situation. We hope, therefore, that speedy measures
and action will be taken to see that this demand is
complied with. We emphasize this because we have
all realized that continuing the present state of affairs
will aggravate matters and indeed endanger international peace and security.

138. My delegation will be very brief. I will therefore
confine myself to some brief comments in explanation
of the positive vote we cast on the draft resolution
just adopted.
139. My Government has always stood for recognition of and respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of all States, big or small. The
events that have taken place in Cyprus in the last few
days have greatly threatened the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of that State, which
has the closest ties with my own. It was therefore
appropriate, indeed obligatory, that this the highest
organ of the United Nations should call upon all
States to respect these three ‘principles in Cyprus.

144. In conclusion,
my delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General
and UNFICYP
for the
very good work they have done during this difftcult
period. It is our hope that the United Nations will
continue to play a major role in resolving not only
this issue but all other international issues that face the
world at present.
145. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): When we
learned, in the early hours of this morning, of the
new and grave turn of events in Cyprus, a sense of
deep-and,
if still possible, deepened concern-was
universal. In my statement yesterday [/78&h meeting],

140. It is a deplorable situation when the sovereignty
of a sovereign State like the Republic of Cyprus is
12

0

I clearly expressed the views of the Austrian Government and its unequivocal support for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus in
freedom from foreign intervention.
We have further
expressed our firm support for the restoration and
maintenance of those constitutional
structures established and guaranteed by international
agreements
that should guarantee the peaceful living together
and the prosperity of the two communities
which
for so many centuries have shared the island of
Cyprus: the Greek and the Turkish communities.

will put an end to the bloodshed and the immense
human suffering which afflicts the population
of
Cyprus. In requesting, furthermore, the withdrawal
without delay from the Republic of Cyprus of foreign
military personnel present otherwise than under the
authority of international agreements, including those
whose withdrawal was requested by the President of
Cyprus in his letter of 2 July, and in calling furthermore, on Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom to
enter into negotiations without delay, the Council
has given indications on the urgent measures further
required to meet the demands of the hour.

146. We made it equally clear, however, that these
objectives appeared to be gravely threatened by foreign
intervention of the type that led, early this week, to
the forcible overthrow of the constitutionally
elected
Government of Cyprus under President Makarios,
anaction which met with strong disapproval in Austria.

152. We also fee! the urgent need expressed in the
resolution for a!! parties to co-operate fully with
UNFICYP, whose mandate, as we have just heard from
the detailed report of the Secretary-General, continues
to be of primary importance for the restoration of
peace in the island. It is our firm hope that the resolution which has now received the unanimous support
of the Council will meet with immediate implementation and full respect.

147. We could therefore only regret and deplore the
new military intervention,
which occurred early this
morning and which, regardless of its objectives, can
only contribute to a further heightening of the danger
of war in the area.

153. It is our firm hope that the next report the
Council will hear from the Secretary-Genera!
will
provide it with the first information that the fighting
has been ended and that the first steps have been taken
towards the restoration of peace and constitutional
Government in Cyprus.

148. It is and remains our firm conviction that the
problems the independent Republic of Cyprus and its
communities
face can be solved only by peaceful
means. Negotiations
between a!! parties concerned,
and principally those parties linked by international
agreements on the matter, represent one of the most
important of those peaceful means.

154. The Austrian people feels nothing bur friendship
and sympathy for the nations and countries now so
tragically involved in conflict. It is in that spirit of
friendship and concern that we have today offered, and
will continue to offer, support for action by the Council
designed to restore peace not only to an area but
also to and between the people of Greece, Turkey and
Cyprus.

149. Since the outbreak of the crisis on Tuesday
last we have felt action by the Security Council to be
imperative,
and indeed indispensable,
to redirect
events in the region towards peace and negotiation
rather than towards a build-up of tension. My delegation has therefore been active in efforts during recent
days to formulate principles to be expressed by the
Security Council. We are therefore very satisfied and
relieved that the Council has now most impressively
and unanimously-and,
I must say, with the cooperation of a!! members of the Council and the parties
concerned, and particularly the representatives of the
Republic of Cyprus-arrived
at a resolution.

155. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (tuclnsc’ation fuo/n Russicrn):
Mr. President, despite the fact that this is the first
time I am speaking in the Security Council as the
representative of the Byelorussian SSR, I would not
wish to make too lengthy an introduction to my statement. At the same time, we should first of a!! like to
congratulate you on guiding the work of the Council
at this decisive moment and to note the ski!! with which
you are carrying out your complex and responsible
task.

150. In reaffirming and establishing principles of
action for peace, the Council has responded not only
to its own responsibilities
under the Charter but also
to the urgent calls made during the week and especially
today by many responsible Governments everywhere
and by international
bodies, especially those in
Europe.

156. May I also say that, throughout the almost
30 years of the United Nations’
existence, the
Byelorussian SSR has invariably spoken out in the
Organization in favour of peace and the security of
peoples and the implementation
of the lofty principles
and purposes of the United Nations. The service of
those purposes is undoubtedly
a lofty and noble
mission.

151. In calling upon a!! parties to the present fighting
as a first step to cease a!! tiring, and in requesting
States to exercise the utmost restraint and refrain
from any action which might further aggravate the
situation, the Council has pointed to the most urgent
of the requirements of the day. It is the immediate
fulfilment of those requirements by a!! concerned that

157. Allow me now to return to the substance of the
question under discussion. For some days now, the
13

whole world has been carefully following the development of events in Cyprus and expressing alarm that
the situation is becoming increasingly acute and
threatening. At the same time, we consider that the
latest events in the island in no way change the
substance and the nature of what took place earlier
in Cyprus as a result of the military plot of the Greek
officers.

161. In these complex circumstances the Byelorussian delegation
voted in favour of the draft
resolution in document S/11350. At the same time,
our delegation would like to state that our position
has been dictated by a concern for the restoration of
peace and-security in that region and for the protection
of the sovereignty,
independence
and territorial
integrity of Cyprus and the rights and interests of the
Cypriot people. We voted in favour of the draft resolution because those provisions were to some extent
reflected in that text. At the same time, we should
like to note that that document contained provisions
calling for the withdrawal without delay from the
Republic of Cyprus of foreign military personnel
present there. In this connexion, we have in mind
that the provision concerning the withdrawal of
military personnel will be implemented
absolutely
and that the military personnel whose withdrawal was
requested by the President of the Republic of Cyprus,
Archbishop Makarios, in his letter of 2 July will be
withdrawn absolutely and that the root-cause connected with the military pufsch~ of the Greek offrcers,
supported from outside the country and acting on
orders from Athens, will thereby be removed.

158. Our delegation has not spoken before and you
will allow me, Mr. President, to state our position of
principle with regard to what has occurred in Cyprus.
In this chamber, we have had the honour to hear the
statement by the deeply respected head of State of the
Republic of Cyprus, President Makarios.
In that
statement, Archbishop Makarios told the members of
the Council in sufficient detail about the situation
which has developed in Cyprus and called upon the
Council to use all the ways and means at its disposal
to help to restore the constitutional order in Cyprus
and the democratic rights of its people.
159. We cannot help but remember also the vivid and
convincing statements made yesterday by a number
of representatives strongly condemning the actions
of the Greek military junta. The members of the
Security Council will also remember the statement by
the Co-ordinating Bureau of the non-aligned countries
in New York which was read out by the distinguished
representative of Yugoslavia. The discussion which
took place yesterday in the Council shows that the
attempts of the Greek military junta and of certain
NATO circles to portray the events which have
taken place in Cyprus as being the result of an internal
struggle have not deluded anyone. It has been
demonstrated
beyond question
that the entire
responsibility for the events which have taken place
lies with the Greek military junta.

162. However, certain facts of which we learned
yesterday put us on our guard. Yesterday we witnessed
support for those manoeuvres undertaken by the Greek
junta in order to present its actions in a ‘different
light. It is a well-known fact that Greek ruling circtes
recently issued a statement concerning their intention
to replace the Greek officers in Cyprus-replace,
not
withdraw. Unfortunately,
that statement, that position
of the Greek military junta found support among some
member countries of NATO. And in speaking of that,
we should like once again to emphasize that the resolution refers to the immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of the military personnel concerning whom
a request was made in the letter from the President
of the Republic of Cyprus.

160. The Byelorussian delegation strongly condemns
the military putsch in Cyprus organized by external
forces against the constitutional
Government of the
Republic, which is pursuing a policy of peace and
non-alignment
with military blocs and favours the
development of friendly relations and co-operation
among peoples. However, literally in the last few
hours, we have been faced with a further deterioration
of the situation in Cyprus, the situation which arose
in the first place as a result of the flagrant intervention
by the Greek military junta in the internal affairs of
the country. At meetings of the Council a number of
representatives, including the representative of the
Soviet Union, have already stated that, through the
fault of certain members of the Council, this United
Nations organ, which has been entrusted with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security, has been slow to take a decision. That
delay has assuredly been harmful. As a result of that
delay circumstances have also arisen which have led
to a situation whose settlement now’ requires much
greater efforts by all concerned.

163. Those who organized the revolt in Cyprus bear
a heavy responsibility for the aggravation of the whole
situation in that region.
164. Certain circles are really disturbed because the
efforts of the Soviet Union to strengthen peace and
security and extend detente in international relations
to various parts of the world, efforts which are
supported by the widest circles of public opinion, are
yielding positive results. But no one, no force will
I
succeed in reversing that process.
165. The statement by the Soviet Government issued
as an official document of the Security Council
[.S//1340] is permeated with a concern for peace. The
Byelorussian delegation fully agrees with everything
said in that statement and supports the fundamental
assessment it contains of the events which have
occurred and of the steps which must be takenwithout
delay in the interests of the Cypriot people and their
lawful Government.
14

166. In conclusion, our delegation appeals to the
member countries of the Council strongly to support
the legitimate rights and interests of the Cypriot people
to promote a settlement of the complex problem of
Cyprus and to take all steps to strengthen peace
and security in the Mediterranean region.
167. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE
(Australia): In my
earlier statement in the course of this debate
[!780th meeting]
I have already expressed the views
of my Government on the acute situation that has
confronted us during this past week. Those views still
stand and I shall not attempt to repeat them here,
even though the gravity of the situation that we
contemplate
has been, as we all know, greatly
increased within the past 24 hours.
168. Whatever regrets members of the Council have
felt that the Council has not found it possible to take
action earlier on this grave situation that has developed
throughout
the eastern Mediterranean-and
my
delegation has been among those members-we
must
all feel satisfaction that we have been able to
adopt unanimously
this afternoon a decision that
addresses itself first to the immediate situation, but
also seeks to look beyond the perils of the present to
the solutions that must be found in the future to the
problems arising from the very complex fabric of
Cyprus.
169. The first clear duty that has faced us today
has been to call for a cease-fire by all the parties
involved in the fighting. My delegation has already
expressed its profound regret over the part played by
the Greek officers of the National Guard of Cyprus
in precipitating this crisis and I now express the same
profound regret over the intervention
of Turkish
military forces in aggravation of an already volatile
situation.
170. My delegation has therefore joined wholeheartedly in calling upon all the parties involved in
the fighting to cease all firing, in calling for an end
to all foreign military intervention in Cyprus and in
demanding respect by all States for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus.
171. My delegation hopes, further, that the ncgotiations envisaged in paragraph 5 of the resolution,
negotiations
among the parties to the Treaty of
Guarantee of 1960, will take place as speedily as
possible and that they will open a way for the restoration-in the words of the resolution-“of
peace in the
area and constitutional government in Cyprus”.
172. It is obviously desirable that the SccretaryGeneral should be kept informed of the progress of
these negotiations. Also in this connexion I have heard
the representative of the United Kingdom make it clear
that Archbishop Makarios will be consulted at all
stages of these negotiations.

173. It is important also that paragraph 6 of the
resolution calls on all parties to co-operate fully with
UNFICYP
to enable it to carry out its mandate.
UNFICYP
is one of the principal arms of the
United Nations and of the Council in its task of
maintaining harmony in Cyprus and in assisting in
any way it can towards a movement in the direction
of harmony between the communities. UNFICYP,
we
can all of us believe, is already finding its difftculties
redoubled and made more acute by the situation that
has arisen, and it is right that all parties should give
their full co-operation to it in the performance of its
tasks.
174. I have no more to say except once again to
express the satisfaction that I am sure we all feel in
the adoption of this resolution and particularly in its
unanimous adoption, and I am quite sure that my
own Government will receive word of its adoption
with considerable pleasure.
175. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tmnslution
from Russian):
Mr. President,
I have asked for the floor in order to read out a
statement which has just been issued by the Soviet
Government in connexion with the events in Cyprus.
The statement reads as follows:
[The speaker
read out the text of the statement
contained
in the document
subsequently
circulated
under the symbol S/11367.]

176. Now I should like to read out the text of a TASS
statement relating to the events. It reads:
“According to a report by Agence France Presse,
on 20 July 1974, in connexion with the sharp
deterioration in the military and political situation in
the eastern Mediterranean,
at first a part, and then
in the second half of the day all of the armed forces
of the Soviet Union are said to have been placed
in a state of combat readiness. According to a report
by the same agency, in response to this, the armed
forces of NATO in Europe were also placed on
alert.
“TASS is empowered by the competent organs to
state that this report by Agence France Presse is
an outright fiction aimed at further aggravating the
situation, apparently in the interest of certain
aggressive circles.
“The armed forces of the Soviet Union are in
their normal everyday status and have not been
placed on alert.”
177. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Again
the representative of the Soviet Union has peeked
into some mysterious comer and discovered that it is
really NATO which is instigating the tragic developments on Cyprus. It seems to be a curious recurring
nightmare, a sort of James Bondnish twist of the real

facts. The NATO allies who have spoken up at the
Council table have deplored all violations of the
independence,
the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

186. As PRESIDENT,
I give the floor
representative of France on a point of order.

to the

187. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpreration
French): I should like to refer to the statement
made by the representative of the Soviet Union, who
quoted an Agence France Presse dispatch. I should
like to remind him and the members of the Council
that Agence France Presse is not a Government organ.
It is an agency independent of the Government,
and the French authorities
bear no responsibility
whatsoever for the news it disseminates.

from

178. Along with the United Kingdom and France,
we have sought to promote and encourage negotiations
in London for the purpose of restoring peace and the
return of constitutional
government to the island of
Cyprus. If this is plotting, I submit to you that perhaps
the world needs more of it.
179. The PRESIDENT

(interpretation

ish): As the representative

of PERU,

the following

!

from

Span-

I wish to make

statement.

180. The delegation of Peru warmly applauds the
fact that the draft resolution contained in document
S/l 1350 was adopted unanimously. That draft contains
very valid elements which, if applied, we have no doubt
will restore peace and order in Cyprus.
181. My delegation was prepared to support the
document circulated
yesterday, and it was also
prepared to vote today in favour of any proposal to
put an end to combat. My delegation was concerned
that the Security Council should act speedily and
decisively and should assume the responsibilities
entrusted most specifically to it by the Charter which
confer upon this organ its real substance.
182. The resolution which we have just adopted
includes principles which have been enshrined in
international.
law and which my country. has traditionally respected, such as non-intervention
in the
affairs of another State and the non-use of force.
Because of the inclusion of those principles in the
resolution it will be an instrument that will be effective
in attaining peace in that region. We feel that it is of
great significance that the Council, unanimously,
should clearly and strongly have requested respect for
the sovereignty, the independence and the territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.
183. I should add that, as a non-aligned country,
we have been particularly concerned over the fate of
a member State of the non-aligned group, and also
over the fate of Archbishop Makarios, one of the most
distinguished leaders of the third world.
184. We hope that the resolution will achieve its
purpose and that the Council will keep a strict watch
over events in that area so that it may thus, fully and
without delay, discharge the responsibility
which is
incumbent upon it in keeping with the Charter.
185. In conclusion, my delegation would like to
place on record its deep appreciation for the efforts
carried out by the Secretary-General during the recent
very difficult events, and for the impeccable manner
in which he and his staff kept the President and the
Council informed.

188. The

PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
I now invite the representative of Mauritius
to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

Spanish):

189. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius): Mr. President, at
the outset I should like to thank you and, through
you, the members of the Security Council for allowing
me to participate in the work of the Council. I am
particularly fortunate that I should be doing so under
your wise guidance and presidency.
190. Since I arrived in New York from the United
Kingdom only a few hours ago, and since I have not
been in on the secrets of the gods concerning the
resolution which has just been adopted unanimously
and which my delegation welcomes, the points in my
statement may sound dightly out of date. I hope
members will bear with me.
191. If I have asked to participate in this meeting
of the Security Council, it is not because it is my
intention to interfere in what some would like to believe
are the internal affairs of NATO, but rather because
my country, which cherishes peace, freedom and
democracy, could not remain silent in the face of the
dangerous developments
in Cyprus, a non-aligned
Commonwealth island-country, not unlike Mauritius.
192. When the Council met for the first time last
Tuesday to consider the situation in Cyprus, my
distinguished colleague and friend, Mr. Rossides, the
representative of Cyprus, called for immediate action
by the Council in order to bring about a cease-fire.
He said:
“When a cause involving bloodshed and human
rights comes before the Security Council, it is not
permissible to seek an opportunity
to evade a
resolution.”
[1779th meeting, para. 91.1
i
I_

193. It may not be appropriate to blame the Council
for the worsening of the situation in Cyprus, but it
is opportune, I believe, to urge it to take decisive
action to put an end to the fighting that is taking
place on the territory of Cyprus and to ward off the
obvious open conflict that might erupt between
Greece and Turkey, with the possible involvement.
of other Powers.

194. We are confronted with a serious threat to
international peace and security. But in tackling the
global issue of war and peace we should ‘not lose sight
of another important objective, which is to restore
constitutional order in Cyprus, for the direct cause of
the present grave crisis is foreign intervention in the
affairs of a Member State. It has now been established
without the slightest doubt that the violent overthrow
of the democratically
constituted
Government
of
President Makarios had been instigated and organized
by the present regime in Athens and carried out by
the Greek officers-some
650 of them-and
by some
element of the Greek contingent stationed in Cyprus.
The original and primary issue is therefore that of the
intervention by a Member State in the internal affairs
of another Member State. Under these circumstances
Member States which are parties to the Treaty of
Guarantee concerning Cyprus should face up to their
responsibilities in a very decisive way.

development
which affects the territorial
integrity
and sovereignty and political independence of Cyprus
“obviously
has the most serious consequences for
the responsibilities of the United Nations in relation
to Cyprus “[S/11336]. An effective cease-fire should
therefore be followed by the cessation of all foreign
military intervention in Cyprus.
199. Adequate arrangements should then be worked
out for the withdrawal of all foreign military personnel
in excess of those envisaged in international
agreements concerning Cyprus, as provided for in the draft
resolution in document S/l1350 which has just been
adopted.
200. In conclusion, I would emphasize once more that
we should not lose sight of our primary objective,
which must be the restoration of constitutional
rule
in Cyprus. I shall, end by quoting the words of
W. H. Auden in his hymn to the United Nations on
the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
world Organization: “Beware, mortals, of words, for
with words we lie: we say. ‘peace’ when we mean
‘war’ ”

195. The Treaty, which was signed by the Governments of Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom,
provides for the “recognition and maintenance of the
independence and territorial integrity and security”
of Cyprus-as the British Foreign Secretary has said.
It is quite evident that Greece has acted in flagrant
violation of the Treaty. For its part, Turkey, having
warned us of “its inability to remain indifferent in the
face of these grave developments”
[S/11341], has
resorted to direct military action, presumably to restore
the balance of forces in .Cyprus. We are confronted
with the results of the violent action of the military
regime in Athens and an equally violent counteraction by the military forces of Turkey.

201. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus,
on whom I now call.
202. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): At the Council’s
meeting yesterday in this chamber I spoke of the
critical situation in Cyprus, which is one that because
of its. nature involves the whole world in a manner
that has its parallels in history. Today, the unfolding
of that situation has added to the tragedy in Cyprus
by another intervention, another aggression following
the first, in a cycle that is peculiar to the case of
Cyprus, because the two countries which have grossly
violated the independence and territorial integrity of
Cyprus are two of the guarantors of that independence
and territorial integrity. It is a sad reality, but it is a
reality, a very stark reality.

196. Without necessarily condoning the actions of the
Government of Turkey, the Government of Mauritius
wishes to put on record its support for the Turkish
view that the recognition of the regime which proclaimed its assumption of power following the overthrow of the Government
of President Makarios
“is not possible”
[ihid.].
For my Government,
Archbishop Makarios is and remains the sole legitimate
head of the State of Cyprus.

203. In paragraph 5 of the resolution
the Security Council:

197. We would have hoped that the United Kingdom
Government,
which holds the same view, would
match its support of President Makarios with decisive
action. It is not too late, however, for the United
Kingdom Government to play its part as one’of the
guarantors under the agreements on Cyprus. We are
therefore looking forward to the talks which it has
called for.

just adopted,

“Calls upon [the three guarantors]
Greece,
Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to enter into negotiations
without delay for the restoration of peace in the
area and constitutional
government in Cyprus and
to keep the Secretary-General informed”.
It is very important that the United Kingdom is in
that list and that the representative of that country
has made a very clear declaration that the United
Kingdom will keep in contact and consultation with
the President of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios-who,
as that representative
said yesterday, is the only
President that the United Kingdom recognizes-on,
the progress of those negotiations.

198.- In the meantime, the United Nations has its
role to play. For the last 10 years it has been actively
involved in keeping the peace in Cyprus. This role
should continue. To this end the Security Council
should see to it that an immediate cease-fire takes
effect; and, again, I welcome the resolution which
has just been adopted unanimously by the Council.
The Secretary-General
has rightly said that any
17

204. It is also very important that the SecretaryGeneral be kept informed so that the Security Council
and the United Nations in general may follow what
happens in these negotiations, for it is of particular
interest that, contrary to what is envisaged in the
Treaty of Guarantee-that
is, the danger coming from
somebody else, from outside Powers interfering in
the independence
and territorial
integrity
of
Cyprus-we
have two of the guarantors doing it.

sovereignty of Cyprus. I shall not mention each one,
but I was greatly heartened by the statements of all
the permanent members of the Councilall, without
exception-in
support of the independence
and
territorial integrity of Cyprus, because what these
two military interventions
mean is a threat to the
independence and, graver still, the territorial integrity
of Cyprus.
208. And we attach a tremendous importance to the
principle, of territorial
integrity, because Cyprus,
through the ages, has had many vicissitudes; it has
been overrun because of its strategic situation by the
Powers of the day. It fell under foreign occupation,
regained and then lost, and then again regained its
freedom; but it has always remained one integral and
undivided unit. That is why it has survived, according
to the historian Stanley Cousins, with an unbroken
continuity in its character and in its identity until
today. If that identity had been broken even once, by
partition or anything like that, it would have been
dissolved by now-it would have become ashes and
dust. Which are the countries today which have had
the calamity and disaster of partition
and have
survived? They have survived, but they are bleeding.
In Europe, in Asia, in the Middle East, in every part
of the world, partition has been the greatest calamity
that could befall any country.

205. Of course it has been said here in the Council
that the one has foilowed because of the other. The
responsibility
may in some way-perhaps
in a very
important way-rest upon the one which started the
aggression against Cyprus, but surely one aggression
does not justify another. The problem remains the
effect of these aggressions and interventions-contrary
not only to the Treaty of Guarantee which the
guarantors have signed, not only to a treaty obligation,
but also to the Charter of the United Nations and
to the concept that every member of the Council
has so emphatically
declared: the inadmissibility
of
such interventions
and aggressions against -a small
country.
206. And I must say again that, although Cyprus
may be a trifling, small country to be trampled on, in
the minds, if perhaps not in the words, of some, we
must not forget that it was small, unimportant countries
that were the cause, in the aggression against them,
of both the First and Second World Wars. Those who
committed the aggression thought: “Oh, what does
that little country mean? I am going to trample over
it and get what I want.” But there was the First
World War and, similarly, the Second World War;
and at the end of each of those World Wars the
international community, sobered by the effects and
tragedies of those wars-and another world war would
bring even greater tragedy which might mean the
end of the world-sought
to establish an international
organization to prevent these invasions and aggressions. First it was the League of Nations. But, again,
after a little while it was thought: “What do these
principles matter? Power is everything-not
principles. We are exercising our power, and therefore we
are not .going to let little countries stand up against
us when we hold the power.”

209. Therefore, the treat to our territorial integrity
is the greatest of threats, because even if you lose
your independence you may regain it; but if you lose
the wholeness of your country by its being cut in
two, that wholeness is lost for ever. That is why we
are gravely concerned with these developments in the
island, and we do hope that all the Member States
will, in their own interests and in those of the intemational community,
support not only in words but in
action the independence and territorial integrity of
Cyprus, threatened by whomsoever it may be.
2 10. Mr. President, I wish to thank you for the efforts
you have devoted to bringing about agreement on a
resolution on this complex problem. Two days ago
we encountered great difficulty in getting a draft
resolution, in spite of my urgings, but today there has
been much constructive work done. The gravity of
the situation that has been created has had a
sobering effect and has facilitated our reaching agreement. We have a resolution already adopted which
meets the essential requirements. That is, it:

207. But then the Second World War brought a far
greater sobering. Thus it is that we have the United
Nations, with principles and purposes embodied in
its Charter, as distinct from the League of Nations,
whose Covenant did not contain any principles. But
these principles have prevailed, and we are very happy
to see that they prevail today in the statements of all
members of the Security Council, and I take this first
opportunity
to express my gratitude, on behalf of
Cyprus and its President, Archibishop Makarios, to
all members that spoke in this Council today for their
constructive approach to the problem and for their
expressed dedication to the principles of the Charter
and to the independence,
territorial
integrity and

“C&r rfpon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus;
‘1 . . .
“Drmcmis
an immediate end to foreign military
intervention in the Republic of Cyprus that is in
contravention of paragraph 1 above;“-that
is, the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus. It calls for a cease-tire, of course, and:

18

“Requests
the withdrawal without delay from the
Republic of Cyprus of foreign military personnel
present otherwise than under the authority of
international
agreements, including those whose
withdrawal was requested by the President of the
Republic of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, in his
letter of 2 July 1974”.

Then it calls
guarantors.

for

negotiations

among

the

propaganda purposes only, as well as with the blessing
of Makarios,
following his treacherous assertion
that he felt more threatened by the Greeks than by
Ankara, the latter, taking advantage of the favourable
climate thus created, launched a full-scale aggression
against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of
Cyprus.

three

217. The details of those unprovoked attacks are
too long to be enumerated, and we are too short of
time to indulge in details. I will therefore mention just
a few: a full scale invasion by air and sea of the
northern coast of &he .island as well as the Nicosia
area; the occupation of the castle in Kyrenia harbour;
the town of Kyrenia under fire; the bombardment
of civilians and hospitals in Nicosia; and, last but not
least, the bombardment
with napalm bombs of the
headquarters of the Greek contingent in Cyprus
-and
all this in flagrant violation of the formal
assurances given to Mr. Sisco by the Turkish Foreign
Minister at Ankara that the invaders would not open
fire first unless shot at.

211. As I said before, I am grateful to the representative of the United Kingdom for bringing forward
in his statement the need for having consultations
on the progress of these negotiations with the President
of the Republic, Archbishop Makarios; and we hope
that the representatives of the other two countries
which will be participating in those negotiations will
follow the same line. In fact, it is the United Kingdom
that has the initiative, and will be having the initiative,
in the course of those negotiations.
212. And certainly, keeping the Secretary-General
informed is of vital importance, because that means
the direct involvement of the United Nations and the
following by the United Nations of the whole course
of events.

218. As justification
for all those despicable acts
perpetrated in cold blood, and on the basis of the
Turkish long-term goal of the partition of the island,
Ankara invoked its rights deriving from article IV,
second paragraph, of the Treaty of Guarantee,
deliberately
passing over in silence two essential
prerequisites
included therein-namely,
first, that
unilateral action is possible only after the failure of
consultations among the three guarantor Powers and,
secondly, the sole aim must be re-establishment
of
the stcrtus quo ante. Neither of those prerequisites
has been fulfilled. Actually, the exhaustion of consultations did not precede the Turkish attacks, nor were
Turkey’s plans aimed at the status quo ante, but,
obviously,
at the permanent occupation of large
portions of Cypriot territory.

213. I do not want to retain unduly the attention
of members of the Council on this subject, but I should
like to add that I hope and trust that this development
as it has unfolded-although
it may seem a tragedywill, given a sense of responsibility
on the part of
those concerned, bring about compliance with the
provisions of this resolution-voluntary
compliance,
too, through a realization of the dangers involved
for them, no less than for Cyprus, in continuing a policy
of intervention in Cyprus that could not lead to any
other result.but calamity for all.
214. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): 1 call now on the representative of Greece.

219.. Earlier I mentioned
the long-term goal of
Ankara-namely,
partition. Actually, Turkey’s whole
policy in creating and gradually enlarging its enclaves
and its recent demands for federation, which brought
the intercommunal
talks to deadlock, were meant to be
the prelude to the creation of the infrastructure for
partition-Ankara’s
permanent and final target.

215. Mr. PANAYOTACOS
(Greece): We are faced
with a very grave, really explosive situation that could
at any moment escalate into a generalized conflagration. There is no longer a time margin to be wasted in
propaganda gimmicks or double-talk.
It is time for
action-serious
action, immediate action.

220. Obviously, Ankara thought that now was the
right time to attain that target. For the moment I do not
intend to elaborate further on this topic. Time is very
precious. World peace is now seriously at stake owing
to the unwarranted Turkish aggression undertaken
under false pretences and on the basis of a well
prepared expansionist scheme. Greece, all its margins
of patience exhausted by the uninterrupted Turkish
provocations that culminated in the dastardly bombardment of the camp of the Greek contingent at Nicosia,
feels obliged, to its great regret, to take, in turn,
appropriate
counter-measures
in exercise of its
inherent right of self-defence provided by the Charter
and’ in order to safeguard its national interests. To

216. Addressing the Council yesterday, I expressed
to the Turkish representative my opinion that his allegations of a so-called Greek intervention endangering
the rights of the Turkish community could only stem
from the imagination of those who were merely trying
to cover up their real schemes and goals-namely,
those in Turkey itself. Shortly afterwards, the tragic
events that followed demonstrated beyondany possible
doubt the accuracy of my assessment. Actually, with
the encouragement of mounting anti-Greek vituperations based on false allegations or hasty judgements,
to use Mr. Scali’s words; and formulated
for
19

that end, and considering the camp of the Greek
contingent at Nicosia to be Greek territory, the
ambassador of Turkey at Athens was today summoned
to the Foreign Ministry and instructed to convey
urgently to Ankara the demand of the Greek Govemment that, in order to avoid further escalation with
unpredictable
consequences, the invading Turkish
forces should immediately
be confined within the
limits of the Turkish enclaves pending a final settlement
of the matter. Furthermore, it was made clear that, in
the event of Turkey’s failure to comply, Greece would
consider itself the victim of aggression, reserving for
itself full liberty of appropriate action as a guarantor
State by virtue of article IV, second paragraph, of
the same Treaty of Guarantee invoked by the Turks.

flagrant violation of the independence of the: Cyprus
Republic and of the international
agreemknts on
which this Republic was based.
“Turkey is a co-guarantor of the independence
and constitutional
order of Cyprus. Turkey is
fulfilling
its legal responsibility
by taking this
action. The Turkish Government did not resort to
armed action before all the other means were tried,
but to no avail. This is not an invasion but an act
against an invasion. This is not an aggression but
an act to end aggression. The Turkish armed forces
are not going to open fire unless they are tired at.”
And the text ends as follows:

221. In conclusion, I am directed to inform the
Security Council of Greece’s aforesaid intentions,
convinced that, on the basis of the Council’s
responsibilities for the maintenance of peace, it might
take any last-minute step in this respect in order to
put an end to the Turkish acts of aggression.

“I appeal to all Greeks in Cyprus who have
suffered the atrocities of terrorism and dictatorship:
bury with the past dark days the intercommunal
enmities and strife that were the making of those
same terrorists. Join hand in hand with your Turkish
brothers to speed up this victory and together build
a new, free and happy Cyprus.”

222. And now, in order to prove to you how misleading Makarios’ assertions can be, I should like to
give you a final piece of news that has just reached
me. Following the amnesty granted by the Government of Cyprus to the pro-Makarios
paramilitary
forces, at this very moment all Cypriots, united
without any exception, are valiantly and with high
patriotic spirit fighting against the invaders. Makarios’
isolation seems complete, at least as far as Cyprus is
concerned.

225. I would only add that the operation which has
taken place after more than a decade of insufferable
conditions
imposed on the Turkish
community,
conditions that culminated in the total disappearance
of all legality on the island, has been carried out with
the utmost restraint possible in the given icircumstances.

223. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
ish): I call upon the representative of Turkey.

226. The word “enclave” that was used many times
in the report made earlier in this meeting by the
Secretary-General
is an ample illustration, of the
abnormal situation in which Turks have lived for a
decade in what is-and
I know that Ambassador
Rossides agrees with me in this-their
own land.
The Turks at least had the hope of achieving through
peaceful negotiations an end to this abnormal situation.
When the take-over by the Nicos Sampson administration took place, with the dramatic
ousting of
Archbishop Makarios,
and when it became clear
that the invasion by Greece-and
“invasion”
is not
my word; it is the word used by Archbishop Makarios
to describe what Greece was doing-would
nut cease
despite protracted negotiations in various capitals and
in the Council, Turkey exercised its legal rights under
the Treaty of Guarantee, with the sole aim of returning
the island as a whole to constitutional
rule and
protecting the Turkish community’s
right within that
framework.

Span-

224. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I know how much time
and effort are required of the Secretary-General and
his dedicated team of assistants to make the kind of
presentation
he made this morning regarding the
military situation in Cyprus. Those efforts deserve all
the praises that have been extended by so many of
the speakers who preceded me. I merely join them. I
must take his word on the .details of the military
operation, which are not available to me. What I have
to say .will be limited to the political objective of the
operation accomplished by the Turkish armed forces.
I shall quote the Prime Minister
of Turkey,
Mr. Ecevit, who said:
“The Turkish armed forces have started a peace
operation in Cyprus this morning to end decades of
strife provoked by extremist elements. At the last
stage of the Cyprus tragedy, these extremist
elements had started massacring even their own
people, the Greeks.

227. I know how difficult it is for smaller nations to
have their rights respected and how infinitely more
difficult it has been for the Turkish community within
Cyprus to have its lawful rights respected. The events
of the past week have vindicated the Turkish representatives in all the warnings they have given on
innumerable occasions in this forum concerning the
plight of the Turkish community forced to live in an
atmosphere of disrupted constitutional legality.

“It is acknowledged all over the world that the
coup which recently took place was manufactured
by the dictatorial regime of Athens. In fact it was
much more than a coup: it was the forcible and
20

1
II

228. I should like on this occasion to remind
Mr. Rossides of some provisions which he neglected to
mention-I
suppose deliberately-in
his description
of the Turkish action. I would quote only this one:

military action” @r-u. 53 crhove] of Turkey. It is an
open military action, and what I am going to say is
not intended to draw any reply on his part; it is not a
criticism. I merely wanted to take this opportunity to
draw attention to the difference between overt military
actions and covert ones, not only in terms of juridical
grounds and legitimacy but also from the point of view
of the unique situation of Cyprus, where the Greek
invaders were a welcome fixture of the political scene
until they threatened the administration
of President
Makarios .

“In so far as common or concerted action may
not prove possible, each of the three guaranteeing
Powers reserves the right to take action with the
sole aim of re-establishing the state of affairs created
by the present Treaty3”.
That has been and still is the aim of the Turkish
Government.

233. There is one more point on which I should like
to dwell, not because of its importance but because
it touches on a matter to which I have often had to
refer. The representative pf Kenya, I am sure, had in
mind a quotation I gave from a speech by Archbishop
Makarios when he deplored the fact that Cypriots are
considered, not as a nation, but as the mere numerical
addition of two different ones.

229. Although I am not a member of the Security
Council, I would ask to be allowed to make some
remarks-they
are belated and will be to no avail,
but I should like to make them for the record-concerning the resolution adopted this afternoon.
230. I should like to raise some points in the form of
questions, the answers to which some of the members
round this table may know. During the process of the
negotiations held today and the adoption of this resolution, what happened to the legality in Cyprus? On
whom is it being conferred on the Greek Cypriot
side? Does the fact that “the combat ceased for want
of combatants” during the past few days make it an
accepted fait accompli, leaving only the resulting
action of the Turkish forces as a problem to be
resolved? Certainly, that cannot be what the Council
had in mind. And yet even the order in which the
various appeals are made in the operative paragraphs
of the resolution might give that erroneous impression.
I note that paragraph 3 seems to mention only
paragraph 1, forgetting the intervention clearly aimed
at destroying the constitutional
structure established
and guaranteed by international
agreements referred
to in the sixth paragraph of the preamble.

234. Anyone sitting where I sit has to be much more
attentive to what is said than anyone else. Therefore
I took note of the much greater time devoted by
Mr. Rossides in his speech to the territorial integrity
than to the independence of Cyprus. I hope this is not
indicative of the relative importance attached to enosis
and partition, which Turkey equally rejects.
235. I should like to address myself shortly to what
the representative of Greece has just said about my
country’s intentions with regard to Cyprus. I do not
even need to answer the allegations concerning the
object of the Turkish intervention. That has been done
in the Council by persons whose neutrality is beyond
doubt. I will not try to follow him in all the adjectives
he chose to use concerning this operation. I would
only refer anyone who is interested to what Archbishop
.Makarios-and
he cannot be accused of antiHellenism-said
yesterday when he talked -about the
frame of mind in which the Greek Government at
Athens’ finds itself right now. This kind of paranoiac
attitude is typical of that which any Fascist Government holds towards its own publie opinion and world
public opinion.

231. I had intended to be brief, and I hope I shall
be able to adhere to that intention and to refrain from
answering as they deserve to be answered the allegations made by the representative of Greece. Before
he spoke, I had made a note of some other remarks
that I wanted to make. I wanted to draw attention to
a situation which seems, at least to me, to be abnormal,
a situation to which many others have referred. I think
that I should ask for some clarification.
I found it
regrettable that the representative
of the United
Kingdom chose to refer to only one of the parties to
the Cyprus dispute within Cyprus; he did not mention
the Turkish side among those with whom he said his
Government intended to keep in touch. I hope that is
just a iapsus. Nevertheless, it needs to be corrected, as
it seems that the representative
of Australia, for
instance, also had the same impression, and certainly
Mr. Rossides made the point.

236.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion
from
SpurnThe representative of Cyprus has asked to be
allowed to speak, and I call upon him.

ish):

237. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus):’ I will not take up
much time but I think it is proper that I give my
friend and colleague Mr. Olcay areply on certain points
he raised.
238. First of all, with regard to his statement concerning the words in the Treaty of Guarantee: “In so
.far as common or concerted action may not prove
possible,” of course I do not for a moment think that
common and concerted action by the three guarantors
carries the meaning that these three would act together
by using their aircraft and battleships to invade Cyprus

232. During his explanation of vote the representative
of the United States made a reference to the “open
’ Ibid.,

p. 6.
21

and bomb it in order to protect its territorial integrity
and independence. Those words “concerted action”
mean lawful action, peaceful action, through measures
of representation, through the Security Council and
through other means, not through aggression, which
under the Charter of the United Nations is forbidden.
There should be no use of force except in selfdefence. Are these three guarantor Powers, not in selfdefence but to protect the independence of Cyprus,
going to abolish it by invading it? Therefore the
words “concerted action” must mean lawful action.
In consequence, when the Treaty, says, “when concerted action may not prove possible, each of the
three guaranteeing Powers reserves the right to take
action”, it means lawful action. It does not mean that
each of them has the right to invade Cyprus. Why is
there such a tendency to interpret the word “action”
as meaning invasion, as meaning violation of law? Does
“action” mean anything unlawful-bombing?
We have
just heard from the representative
of GreeceI did not know it-that
there were napalm bombs
used in Cyprus. Is that part of the action ofaguarantor?
239. I am very sorry that I have had to make this
reply; I did not want to open another discussion but I
could not let this idea stand that the Treaty of
Guarantee in Cyprus involves the very opposite of
what a treaty of guarantee means. I am really
astonished that such an interpretation is given to it.
240. In continuation of that, I should like to point
out that everyone spoke here in the same sense, and
the representative of the United States made it very
clear that the landing and
_ _ action of Turkey was wholly
“- .unjustified. I heard hrm very clearly. He- ‘said that
Greece bore a heavy responsibility for the action it had
taken, which had as a sequence the other action, but
also that the Turkish action was an unjustified violation
of international peace and security.
241. The representative
of Turkey is astonished
that I put such emphasis on territorial integrity. Really
he should not be astonished, because this has been a
recurring theme in the Security Council in regard to
statements made by Turkey-statements
that the
objective is partition and federation in the sense of
partition and so on. That has been said so many
times that he should not be astonished that we are
frightened when we see forcible intervention in Cyprus
by Turkey and feel that this is taking advantage of
the situation to move towards partition. We should
be very happy to have assurances to the contrary.
I hope that things may move in the right direction and
this idea may be abandoned. But it is still there in the
background,
because of other things that have
happened. I believe that the question of territorial
integrity has the greatest importance when we see the
tragedies that have occurred in the world as a result
of partition. Millions of people have been killed as a
result of the partitioning of India and Pakistan, where
there have been wars until recently, and of Ireland,
Palestine, Viet-Nam and Korea. In what country that

has been partitioned has there not been a bleeding
wound over the years, an unending wound? It is a
calamity for the country, for the world community
and for international peace.
242. Therefore, we want to emphasize it once more,
and on every occasion we emphasize this great
calamity in the world which has been realized. It was
not realized what partition meant 25 years ago.
Therefore, partition was tried as a means of solving
problems. But now everybody realizes what partition
means, and it is good to remind ourselves of it on
every occasion.
243. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): I think that
this afternoon all of us in the Security Council, and
perhaps many people outside, were waiting with a
great deal of interest to hear what the representatives
of Greece and Turkey had to say. At about a quarter
past five this afternoon, the Council, by IS votes in
favour and none against, adopted a resolution which
called upon various countries to do various things,
but which, if I may summarize it, had two principal
elements. One was a request that the fighting in Cyprus
should cease; the second was a request that Greece
and Turkey should join in the negotiations which the
United Kingdom has proposed.
244. I think it would be of great help and assistance,
certainly to’my country and possibly to the Council, if
the representative of Turkey, and the representative
of Greece if he so wishes, could deal with those two
points. Does the representative of Turkey accept the
need for a cease-fire? Is his Government prepared at
--this stage to respond to the unanimous wish ofthe
Council in that respect? Furthermore, may I ask both
him and his colleague from Greece whether they still
accept, either or both of them, the necessity for the
negotiations which we hope will soon take place?
245. I apotogize for speaking again, but it did seem to
me that the urbane discussion which was taking place
over the details of the Cyprus treaties was not directed
perhaps to the questions which certainly I, and perhaps
many more, wish to see answered.
246. The PRESIDENT
(inter-pretution
from
ish): I call on the representative of Turkey.

Spun-

247. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): 1 am sorry to ask for the
floor again. With regard to the representative of the
United Kingdom
not answering my question but
asking me to answer his, I would say that the only thing
that any representative around the table cansay at this
stage is that he has transmitted faithfully the text of
the resolution to his Government.
248. With regard to what was just said by
Mr. Rossides, I should like to tell him that each time
recourse to force has taken place in Cyprus on the
part of Turkey it has been in response to a vital threat
to the life of the Turkish community,
which Turkey

has a duty to protect. The name of the present ruler
at Nicosia is enough to warrant protective action by
the whole of the civilized world.
249. Again, responding to a point raised by the
representative
of Cyprus, I should have, protocol
allowing, asked His Beatitude, on the occasion of his
passage through these chambers, about his intention
of publicly denouncing enosis as Turkish statesmen
and, as their mouthpiece, I did and would denounce
partition.

250. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): The Security Council has unanimously
adopted a draft resolution which calls upon all parties
to the present fighting, as a first step, to cease
all firing and requests all States to exercise the utmost
restraint and to refrain from any action which might
further aggravate the situation. However, the situation
in the area remains very critical, and at this stage
it cannot be foreseen what action the Council may be
called upon to take on this issue.
The meeting

_

.

rose at 8.05 p.m.

-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

NATIONS
UNIES
L
Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprAs de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
A : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenAve.
EAfC

SE PROCURER

HOJIYPHTb

H3AAHHSi

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

OPI-AHU

3AqHW

3miax
aame~
HaqKR,

COMO

CONSEGUIX

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

in United

OGTbEAHHEHHbIX

OpraKK~suuw
06zenKKemibrx
Haqwft
10nmm
Kynkmb
X ~IWHTCTH~X
ao acex
patiomax
ampa.
HaBonwre
cnpaam
KA-HOY
~arasme
HIH nmn~~e
no anpecy
: Opra~mawm
Ce~quK
no npo~~axce
HJJIaHHR.
HbK)-L?opK
Km )fCeKeBa.

H3namix

Litho

DES

Nations,

New York

00400

NACIONES

HAI&UFf

s KK*XKLIX
mm-a06 HJLI~AHRX
a
06ZeAHKeHHblX

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y ~888s distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

74-82001-April1983-2,200
