S/PRST/2012/10

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6746th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 April 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its Presidential Statements of 3 August
2011 and 21 March 2012 and its Press Statement of 1 March 2012.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial integrity of Syria, and to the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the 2 April 2012
briefing of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, Kofi Annan. The Security Council notes that the Syrian
government committed on 25 March 2012 to implement the Envoy’s six-point
proposal.
“The Security Council calls upon the Syrian government to implement
urgently and visibly its commitments, as it agreed to do in its communication
to the Envoy of 1 April, to (a) cease troop movements towards population
centres, (b) cease all use of heavy weapons in such centres, and (c) begin
pullback of military concentrations in and around population centres, and to
fulfil these in their entirety by no later than 10 April 2012.
“The Security Council calls upon all parties, including the opposition, to
cease armed violence in all its forms within 48 hours of the implementation in
their entirety by the Syrian government of measures (a), (b), (c) above. The
Security Council further calls upon the opposition to engage with the Envoy in
this regard.
“The Security Council underscores the importance of an effective and
credible United Nations supervision mechanism in Syria to monitor a cessation
of armed violence in all its forms by all parties and relevant aspects of the
Envoy’s six-point proposal. The Security Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide proposals for such a mechanism as soon as appropriate,
after consultations with the government of Syria. The Security Council stands
ready to consider these proposals and to authorise an effective and impartial
supervision mechanism upon implementation of a cessation of armed violence
in all its forms by all parties.
12-28518 (E) 050412

*1228518*

S/PRST/2012/10

“The Security Council underscores the central importance of a peaceful
political settlement to the Syrian crisis and reiterates its call for the urgent,
comprehensive, and immediate implementation of all aspects of the Envoy’s
six-point proposal. The Security Council reiterates its full support for the
Envoy’s six-point proposal aimed at bringing an immediate end to all violence
and human rights violations, securing humanitarian access and facilitating a
Syrian-led political transition leading to a democratic, plural political system,
in which citizens are equal regardless of their affiliations, ethnicities or beliefs,
including through commencing a comprehensive political dialogue between
the Syrian government and the whole spectrum of the Syrian opposition.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the Syrian authorities to
allow immediate, full and unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to all
populations in need of assistance, in accordance with international law and
guiding principles of humanitarian assistance. The Security Council calls upon
all parties in Syria, in particular the Syrian authorities, to cooperate fully with
the United Nations and relevant humanitarian organizations to facilitate the
provision of humanitarian assistance. To this end, the Security Council calls on
all parties to immediately implement a daily two hour humanitarian pause as
called for in the Envoy’s six-point proposal.
“The Security Council requests the Envoy to update the Council on the
cessation of violence in accordance with the above timeline, and progress
towards implementation of his six-point proposal in its entirety. In the light of
these reports, the Security Council will consider further steps as appropriate.”

2

12-28518
