UNITED NATIONS

CIAL

RECORDS
:’ :

THIRTY-SEVENTH

,,

YEAR
‘4::

1-.i I
(2 :.,:t 1.

,,
1

,,1

,’ ~$~,

:,

,,

th
MEETING:

20 JANUARY

:
-*

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
1) , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda , . , . , , . , . . . , . , . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
((I) Resolution 497 (1981);
(6) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2329/Rev.

SlPV.2329

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srrpplmwrzts
of the Qf$c%rl RWW& of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolrrtions
c/m/
Dwisions
of the Security Coned. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2329th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 20 January

1982, at 4 p.m.

Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
t Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Prrsid~~nt:

Prcscnt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2329/Rev.

1)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

‘2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (1981);
(/I) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(0) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)

2. The PRESIDENT
(inteqwtrrtiotr
from Rttssirtn):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative
of Grenada in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

1. The PRESIDENT
(into.p~etcttiot~ .fiotn Rttssian):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [2322nd to 2325th crrzd 2327th tneetitzgs],
J invite the representative of Israel and the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to take places at
the ,Council table: I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic
Yemen,
the
German Democratic
Republic,
Greece, Hungary,
India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania,
Mongolia,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman,
Pakistan, Portugal,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam,
Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber: 1 invite
the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

4. I should like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to document S/ 14838 and Corr. I, containing the text of a note verbale dated I.5 January
from the representative of Cyprus to the SecretaryGeneral.

At the itu~itcrtion of the Pwsidcizt,
Mr. Blrttn (Istvel)
ctnd Mr. El-Fcrttcrl (Syrictn Arcth Rrptrhlic~) took pltrt*e.s
cr?the Corrrzc~il tzrhlc; Mr. ZrrEf (A~fshcrnistctr1), Mr. Bcd-

5. The first speaker on my list is the representative
of Grenada. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

3. The PRESIDENT
(intopsctution
,fiotn Rttssicw):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/l4832/Rev.l,
which contains the text of a revised
draft resolution sponsored by Jordan.

.I

6. Mr. TAYLOR (Grenada): Mr. President, I should
like to extend to you warmest felicitations
on YOUI
accession to the presidency of the Council for the
month of January. I am convinced that your diplomatic competence, your vast experience as a negotiator
and your profound attachment to the causes that are
just will serve the international
community
well in
this time of great danger and crisis. I should also
like to take this opportunity
to convey my delegations’s thanks to you, and through you to the members
of the Council, for having afforded me an opportunity
to address this body on the item now under consideration.

is perhaps the principal actor on stage in the perpc- :
tration of violence against the Arab people, its wp- !
porters and abettors are behind the curtain whisper-i@ ;
the next lines,
‘f
14. Zionism is perhaps the most visible actor. bul ‘/
we should note that the directors of this sordid story 1
are working frenetically backstage brushing up the i
costumes of death and are engaged in such activities 1
to ensure that the cast gives a perfect rendition. Thus 1
the Israeli crimes against the Arab peoples cannot bt :
adequately addressed until we vigorously denoLlncc I
those who are collaborating with Israel in the commis- I
sion of those hideous acts of violence,

7. I should also like to pay a well deserved tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda, for the
exemplary manner in which he performed his duties
as President for the month of December.

1.5. In his statement at the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Grenada, Mr. Unison Whiteman, stated:

8. I should also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Mr. Javier Pirez de Cuillar on his election
to the exalted post of Secretary-General.
We wish
him success in the discharge of his many onerous
tasks. We wish the outgoing
Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, all success in his future endeavours.

“Grenada,
in unhesitatingly
denouncing zionism
as a form of racism, denounces at the same time the
parties that equip Israel with the deadly, sophisticated weapons it utilizes to maintain the racist
system of Zionism and to perpetrate vicious acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people and the
sovereign independent States of the Middle East .“I

9. In the view of this delegation, many delegations
preceding us have condemned the most recent Israeli
monstrosity with appropriate language and zeal. Our
decision to speak, therefore, was not primarily to add
anything novel to the substance of this debate, but
because we believe that silence on a matter as grave
as the annexation of territory is tantamount to a sort
of suicide. Silence would most certainly encourage and
entice Zionism and its allies in their expansionist and
annexationist drives.

16. The United Nations is bound by its Charter to
expose and denounce the perpetrators as well as those
who condone the crime. My delegation therefore
reiterates the request of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries to the Council [S//4829, an/?e.r] to take
appropriate measures under Chapter VII of the Churtcr
of the United Nations, in order to oblige Israel lo
restore all Syrian occupied territories to the full SOVereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic and to withdl*uw
from all Arab territories, including Jerusalem. This is
a necessary prerequisite for the restoration of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people over its
national territory and for the establishment of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

10. Those of us whd are students of history have
witnessed over the past three decades the unfolding
of a tragic story in the Middle East, with each episode
acted out with more confidence, more arrogance and
more violence on the part of Israel. Every new scene,
every new act, brings the indiscriminate
murder and
destruction
of innocent Arab men, women and
children.

17. Mr. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA
(Zaire) lintw
May I first of all, Mr. President, congratulate you most warmly on your election
to the presidency of the Council for the month of
January 1982. We are familiar with your personal
qualities and devotion and the special interest which
the Government
of the Union of Soviet Socialist
RepubIics has demonstrated in the quest for effective
solutions to some of the major international problems
and the maintenance of international
peace and security, which lead us to believe that your presidency will
open up for the year 1982 an era of fruitful dialogue
and co-operation
based on trust in international
relations.

prctotion

1 I. Today we are forced to ask aloud: how many
more Arab villages must be razed to the ground before
Zionist Israel is censured? How many more innocent
women and children must die before we take firm and
decisive action to punish Israel for its misdeeds?
How many more cultures must be brllldozed away
before we act in defence of the victimized?
12. This delegation believes that we must act now,
for history warns us that the appetite of expansionists
and annexationists cannot be sated.

fiotn

French):

18. Quite naturally, I should also like to congratulate
your predecessor, Mr. Olara Otunnu, who presided
over the Council with great distinction and talent,
which earned him the admiration of his peers.

13. Today this delegation reaffirms its unflinching
support for the victims of Zionist aggression. We
reiterate without equivocation
that, whereas Zionism
2

19. I should also like most warmly to congratulate
the new Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier Perez de
CuelIar, on his unanimous election and assure him
of Zaire’s full support in the accomplishment
of his
task. It was with full confidence that Africa saw him
take up his functions as Secretary-General
and we are
convinced that we will have every reason to rejoice in
co-operating
with him throughout
his term in the
interest of the achievement of the objectives of the
United Nations. We are also happy to see a man of the
third world at the head of the Organization, for matters
of concern to him are of concern to us also,

representatives of the German Democratic Republic,
Mexico. Niger, the Philippines
and Tunisia. They
have established traditions of quality and a line of
conduct that Zaire will endeavour to follow.
26. My country occupies one of the three seats
allotted to Africa in the system of geographic distribution. May I therefore be permitted to extend special
congratulations
to our two African predecessors,
Mr. Idi Oumarou, of the Niger, and Mr. Taieb Slim,
of Tunisia.
27. It is a coincidence worthy of the many surprises
of history that Zaire succeeds, in the Council, Tunisia,
the country that brought it to the baptismal font of the
United Nations and that, because it represented our
interests, submitted to the Council, on 7 July 1960.
draft resolution S/4377, which became resolution 142
(19601, concerning the admission of the Republic of
the Congo, now Zaire, to the United Nations. This
coincidence is particularly
moving since I succeed
Mr. Taieb Slim, brother of the late Monji Slim, who on
7 July 1960, in this very forum, said:

20. May I now pay a warm tribute to his predecessor,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who in the last 10 years has made
a remarkable contribution
to the achievement of the
objectives of the United Nations. His perfect distinction and endless efforts for the maintenance of international peace and security and the reduction of tensions in the world will undoubtedly go down in history
as a major contribution to the global task of the United
Nations.
21. I should like to thank you, Mr. President, as well
as the members of the Council who have spoken before
me, for welcoming the delegation of Zaire as it takes
its seat at the Council table.

“The date 30 June 1960 will be remembered as
an auspicious one in the annals of African history.

22. The mandate conferred upon us by the General
Assembly, in the context of the United Nations, assigns
to us specific tasks and functions whose purpose is the
fulfilment of the responsibility
and main task of the
Council--that
is, the maintenance
of international
peace and security, For this purpose the Charter of the
United Nations authorizes us to act on behalf of all
the Members of the Organization and prescribes that,
in the accomplishment
of our mission, we work in
keeping with the goals and principles of the United
Nations,

“The many affinities and the brotherly friendship between the Tunisian and Congolese people
confer upon me the privilege of submitting the
candidacy of the Republic of the Congo in the hope
that the Council will favourably recommend it to
the [General] Assembly.” [872nd meeting, paru.s. 20
I/Id 22 ]
28. I shouid like to tell Taieb Slim that his extraordinary qualities of heart and mind, his patience and
tact will always serve as an example for us.

23, The people and Government
of Zaire, whose
traditions of openness, tolerance and dialogue, which
go back to the dawn of time, were confirmed in the
16th century when the Kingdom of the Congo maintained diplomatic
relations with the Netherlands, the
Holy See, Brazil and Portugal, took it upon themselves,
from 30 June 1960, to abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter as rules of conduct and are convinced that the most solid foundation for international
peace and security lies in the implementation
of these
principles. It is that conviction which will guide our
I activity in the Council.

29. Although only 21 years have passed since Zaire’s
accession to independence, my country is fully aware
of the responsibilities
entrusted to it by Member
States.
30. Therefore, to the United Nations in general, to
the Security Council in particular, to all those who
contributed inter crlia to the successful outcome of the
United Nations operation in the Congo and to make
of that operation a success, and especially to all those
who helped us and who lost their lives there, we say
from the bottom of our heart: thank you.

24. The delegation of Zaire will therefore uphold
and maintain the authority, prestige and respect of the
Council, for we know that the system of collective
security that is both the goal and the very IY~~SO~
d'Qrre of the United Nations is based upon its firm and
.constructive action.

3 I. We of Zaire are greatly devoted to the principles,
goals and objectives of the Charter. It is now more
than ever our intention to make our modest and objective contribution to the efforts of the United Nations
to safeguard and uphold international
peace and
security, It is in this spirit and also, in a way, out Of
gratitude and thanks that we requested membership
in the Council, and that is how we intend to fulfil our
term in the Council.

25. May I associate myself with the congratulations that have been addressed to the five members of
the Council whose terms have recently expired-the
3

36. Indeed. the Council could usefully draw Israel’s
attention to the provisions of article 3 of the Definition
of Aggression contained in resolution 3314 (XXIX).
in particular paragraph CJ, in .fitw, which considers
also as an act of aggression the extension of the presence of the armed forces of one State which are
within the territory of another State and which remain
there beyond the termination
of the agreement, all
the more so if the receiving State-in the present case.
Syria-is not in agreement with the dc,fircto stationing
of foreign armed forces on its territory and if there
exist Security Council resolutions requesting the
occupying State to withdraw from the territory.

32. To come to the purpose of this meeting. under
the terms of its resolution 497 (1981) the Council:
“DecYdes that the Israeli decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration
in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights is null and void and without
international legal effect;
“Dctmonds that Israel, the occupying
should rescind forthwith its decision;

Power.

“Determines that all the provisions of the Geneva
Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ continue to apply to the Syrian territory occupied by
Israel since June 1967”.

37. Hence, one can consider that the extension of
the illegal presence of Israeli armed forces beyond
the time-frame for withdrawal imposed by the Council and the illegal military occupation of the Golan
Heights as a result of the use of armed force in violation of the Charter, coupled with the extension of
the laws, jurisdiction
and administration
of Israel to
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, an extension
equivalent to annexation, have all the characteristics
of an act of aggression and are, in any event, contrary to international
law and a threat to peace and
security in the region and throughout the world.

33. That resolution,
which echoes resolution 36/
226 B, adopted on the same day by the General Assembly, which reflected the unanimity of the universal
disapproval, condemnation and rejection of the Israeli
annexationist
measure as null and void, is in all
.respects fully in keeping with article 5 of the annex to
resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, wherein
the General Assembly formulated fundamental principles concerning aggression, a resolution to which the
Secretary-General drew the attention of the members
of the Council in his letter of 3 I January 1975 [S/l /613]
as a guide to determining,
in accordance with the
Charter, the existence of an act of aggression by
examining each case and each specific circumstance.
The annex to that resolution, in its article 5, stipulates
in particular:
“No consideration
political,
economic,
serve as a justification
LL . . .

38. On the basis of this analysis, we understand the
approach and the legitimate claim of those who feel
they must ask for sanctions against Israel because of
a threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of
aggression, in keeping with Article 39 of the Charter
and who, therefore, interpret in terms of sanctions
“appropriate measures in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations” provided for in resolution 497
(1981) in the event of non-compliance by Israel.

of whatever nature, whether
military or otherwise, may
for aggression.

39. The protagonists of this thesis take comfort in
the negative character of Israel’s reply to the unanimous request of the Security Council, as can be seen
very clearly from the Secretary-General’s
report of
2 I December [S/14805], particularly in paragraphs 3,4
and 5, and in his report of 3 I December 198 I [S//482 I 1.

“No territorial acquisition or special advantage
resulting from aggression is or shall be recognized
as lawful.”
34. The emotion and concern that have arisen
throughout the world-especially
in the present situation of international
tension, acts of aggression and
other threats to international
peace and securityexplain why aggression must be considered a crime
against international
peace and should entail international responsibility.

40. With regard to principles, we share the conviction that the request for sanctions is well founded and
receivable. But, at the same time, we cannot remain
insensitive both to the concern of avoiding regrettable
excesses and dangerous unilateral actions which may
stem from the absence of a firm and unanimous position of the Council and to that of not jeopardizing
the
chances of arriving at a comprehensive,
just and
lasting solution of the Middle East conflict. We cannot
accept that the fate of a resolution-one
whose terms
or contents the Council will not have the opportunity
freely to consider in the obvious interest of the maintenance of international peace and security-be
used
as a pretext or a goal to create the conditions for a
new war in the Middle East. We cannot accept that
the rejection of an attitude which could be imposed on
the Council by Israel or by the Syrian party or any
other Arab party to the Middle East conflict be used

35. While the Council in its resolution 497 (1981)
did not state specifically that the extension of the
laws, jurisdiction
and administration
of Israel to the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights constituted annexation or an act of aggression, it is nevertheless true that
it was able to draw on the ample provisions of resolution 3314 (XXIX) and of Article 39 of the Charter
to declare this measure to be null and void, as called
for, in such cases, by the above-mentioned
resolution, and to call upon Israel, in keeping with Article 40
of the Charter, to rescind forthwith its decision.
4

as a pretext or a goal to create the conditions
new war in the Middle East.

of a

41. It is this concern which prompts us to wish to
build on the headway made by the unanimous adoption of resolution 497 (198 I), and it does not seem to
us that the Council has yet exhausted all means it has
at hand to compel Israel to rescind its decision.
42. We believe that the Council can devise and adopt,
at this stage, concrete and effective measures designed
to obtain the annulment of the Israeli decision to
annex, while at the same time it can decide to request
Member States-and
obtain from them-that
they
refrain in all areas from any co-operation which might
encourage Israel to pursue its policy and practices of
annexation This concern is founded on the following
facts.
43, First, paragraph 4 of resolution 497 (1981) stipulates that, in the event of non-compliance
by Israel,
the Council would meet urgently, and not later than
5 January 1982, “to consider taking appropriate measures in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations”. To be specific, this means that this resolution gives the Council the freedom to consider, in the
light of the report of the Secretary-General,
the best
ways and means to find an appropriate response to the
problem without excluding a specific measure and
without insisting on any specific measure. Indeed,
nothing in resolution 3314 (XXIX) should be interpreted as affecting in any way whatsoever the scope
of the provisions of the Charter as regards the functions and powers of United Nations organs. And this
is quite clearly recalled in the preamble of the Definition of Aggression, The fact that resolution 3314
(XXIX) exists does not eliminate the Council’s power
of evaluation.
44. Secondly, it would be highly prejudicial to our
common undertaking and to our patient efforts to find
a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the
Middle East crisis for the negative impact of international focal points to influence the course of the
deliberations
and conclusions of the Council concerning the annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights.
1

i

45. Thirdly,
any division in the Council on the
means-rightly
or wrongly subject to controversywould unfortunately disrupt the Council’s unanimity
on the rejection and condemnation of the decision to
annex and would further complicate, in the present
circumstances, the resumption of initiatives designed
to settle this problem and to seek a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution of the Middle East crisis.

quite rightly, on the occasion of the annexation of the
Golan to be dragged into the search for a capitulationpeace and into the process of negotiation of the question of the Middle East which, not taking into account
the Palestinian dimension, would not lead to a lasting
solution. And it has declared itself in favour of a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the conflict.
48. This logic should lead the Council, at the same
time as it must find an effective response to the specific question of the annexation of the Golan, to seek
the best ways and means and to determine the timeliness of a useful discussion in order to encompass all
the aspects of the problem and to seek an effective
way of finding a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution, especially in the light of General Assembly ,
resolutions 181 (II) and 194 (III), Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and all the other
positive elements contained in the initiatives and
undertakings made in good faith existing at the present
time to find a definitive solution to this problem.
49. In our opinion, any undertaking following resolution 497 (1981) should seek to build on what has been
achieved and is embodied in the unanimity of the
Council and the international community against the
Israeli measure to annex-that
is to say-on the need
to promote any solution or any realistic initiative likely
to further the search for a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution of the Middle East problem.
50. The problem of the illegal occupation or annexation of occupied Arab territories derived from a much
broader dispute-the
Arab-Israeli dispute between
Arabs and Jews-a dispute whose basis is the profound
divergence of views between Arabs and Jews on the
status of Palestine and, more specifically, on the
partition of Palestine contained in resolution 181 (II)
of 29 November 1947, which provided for the partition of Palestine into a Jewish State of Palestine
-Israel-and
an Arab State of Palestine, which has yet
to see the light of day, and in which the international
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem was established.
5 1. However effective the solution that the Council
may find to the specific problem of the illegal occupation and annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights, the
heart of the problem will not thereby be resolved, And
the heart of the problem of the Middle East is the
question of Palestine.

46. Fourthly, a unanimous position of the Council,
despite all appearances, would have enormous moral
weight internationally
which Israel could not disregard
because of its increasing isolation.

52. There is also an urgent need for the Council,
above and beyond specific solutions reserved for a
phenomenon such as the annexation of the Syrian
Golan Heights, to begin new efforts or necessary undertakings for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the conflict, a solution which takes the Palestinian dimension into account and which will centre
around the following guidelines.

47. Fifthly, Syria, like other States parties to the
Middle East conflict, does not wish, undoubtedly

53. First, the necessity for the creation of a Palestinian Arab State, or the right of the Palestinian people

59. We must note that while. formally. Israel has not
carried out the provisions of Council I-eSOlUtiOll
497
(lY8l), it cannot but be aware of the impact of universal condemnation as regards both intensifying its
isolation and the evaluation by the international community and the States of the world of that country’s
foreign policy and of its role in international
relationS.
as a Member of the United Nations.

to create an independent, sovereign State-in
this
connection, the Palestinians ought to be helped to
become the masters of their fate; secondly, the right
of Israel to exist: thirdly, the evacuation of all the
occupied
Arab territories; fourthly. the right of the
Palestinian refugees to return; fifthly, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force or by
war; sixthly, mutual recognition by all the States of
the region; and seventhly, recognition of and respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence
of each State of the region and its right
to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries. Mr, President, you will have noted that this
means a solution based on all the positive elements
found, itIter NI~L~, in General Assembly resolutions
18 l (II) and 194 (III), Security Council resolutions 242
(lY67), 338 (1973), 476 (1980) and 478 (l980), and
General Assembly resolution ES-7/2 adopted at the
seventh emergency special session of the General
Assembly devoted to the question of Palestine: all
these resolutions must be looked upon as an entity.

60. Bravado is one thing, but Israel cannot g0 on
indefinitely giving the impression of wishing to humiliate and defy all the States of the world and the whole
of the international community, whether spiritually.
intellectually or by force, by jeopardizing
the V~IJCS
of Peace, understanding, harmony and trustful COoperation represented by the norms of behaviour
fashioned and accepted by all the peoples and GO+
ernments of the universe, in order to place international relations on a solid foundation and to prevent the
holocausts of the Nazi era.
61. On 22 December 1981, at Brussels, Mr. Menathem Savidor, Speaker of the Knesset, stated that
the annexation of the Syrian Golan was not a .fhit
rrccompli, that the decision of the Israeli Government
was not irreversible and, finally, that the door remained
open for negotiations.

54. Thus, we consider that, for the promotion of the
human cause-especially
the cause of peace-a
patched-up arrangement might be better in certain
circumstances than a complete process. It is our duty
to attempt everything that can serve the good of man
and mankind and that falls within our power.

62. In the Secretary-General’s
report of 31 December [ihid.], we read, in the ninth paragraph of the
quotation contained in paragraph 3, that:

55. We must put an end to the cycle of offensive and
defensive violence in the world, and especially in this
region which has been ravaged by irrational actions
and intolerance as well as by totalitarian notions, and
we must apply to the disputes that give rise to violence the methods and principles for peaceful settlement and dialogue contained in the Charter.

“The Government of Israel wishes to reiterate
that it is willing, now as always, to negotiate unconditionally with Syria, as with its other neighbours,
for a lasting peace, in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The Golan Heights Law
does not preclude or impair such negotiations.”

56. The United Nations must not become the highway leading to the triumph of totalitarian notions and
intransigence-nor,
certainly, should the Security
Council.

63. The Council should therefore be able to rely on
the good faith of all the parties concerned-Israel
and
the Arab States-and on their firm political will to
create conditions favouring the holding of such negotiations, in the spirit of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and to consider positive joint initiatives
which could lead to a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict.

57. Of course, offensive action justifies, legitimizes
or provokes defence or self-defence, but destruction
of all kinds, loss of life and property, and harm to the
‘values which peoples, like individuals, hold so dear,
thus causing the exercise of the right of defence or
self-defence, build up deep frustrations and cause
reactions which would foster latent violence.

64. What we must seek here is the effectiveness of
concrete action by the Council aimed to meet all the
senseless challenges hurled at it and to permit the
negotiated settlement of the problem in the interests,
of course, of all the States of the region, including
those of a Palestinian Arab State.

58. A person who, in self-defence, murders your
father remains for you your father’s murderer, and it
is certainly not with congratulations on his unimpeachable exercise of his right to self-defence that
You would greet him. What is true for defence is even
more justifiably true for offensive action and for the
losses and mutilations
it brings about. Thus, the
spirit of dialogue and peace must replace the spirit
of confrontation. This holds for all the parties to the
Middle East conflict, both for Israel and for the Arab
side.

65. As I said during the Council debate on this question in December 1981, it is absolutely
indispensable
for all the States of this region to demonstrate
the
restraint and patience which are a part of any great
achievement, in order resolutely to take the COU~SC
of Peaceful settlement of disputes, and of the recognition of the Political independence, sovereignty and
6

territorial integrity of ail the States of the region and
of their right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries [23/8rh meeting, ptrrrr. 381.

settlement of the Middle East conflict. When we consider the positions taken and the statements made by
many Governments of Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin
America, we find three constant themes.

66. Because of those considerations,
we cannot
accept the explanation Israel attempts to give in the
Secretary-General’s
report [S//482/] in order to justify
the annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights. Indeed,
in the fifth paragraph of the quotation contained in
paragraph 3, Israel describes its laws of annexation
as “legislation
which seeks, in the absence of peace
or even of negotiations aimed at reaching peace, to
normaiize the situation in the area in question”. In
the seventh paragraph of the quotation we can read
that:

73. First, the decision to annex the’Golan runs counter to Council resolutions 242 ( 1967) and 338 ( 1973),
to relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
to international law. It is null and void, and Israel
should rescind it.
74. Secondly, that decision places new obstacles in
the path of a peaceful, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict.
75. Thirdly, that decision contributes
tension and instability in the region.

“In the view of the Government of Israel, recent
Syrian acts and declarations have made it urgently
necessary to bring to an end the anomalous situation
regarding the Golan Heights”.

to increasing

76. The Council should therefore respond with ail due
dispatch to the aspiration of the overwhelming majority of the members of the international community to
find a peaceful, comprehensive and lasting solution
to the conflict of the Middle East.

67. That attitude tends to contradict and weaken the
spirit and will to negotiate that Israel also refers to in
the same report and which should be demonstrated
by all the parties interested or concerned in the Middle
East conflict. There is not a shadow of doubt that the
annexation of Jerusalem and that of the Golan are not
measures that favour initiatives likely to settle this
conflict through negotiations.

77. The question of sanctions, on which the Council
is unfortunately often divided, should not serve the
purpose of evading the main issue and indefinitely
prolonging the crisis. The Council must Bind concrete and effective measures or actions to meet the
requirements of Article 39 of the Charter of the United
Nations. It would be quite easy in the end to take
refuge behind the question of sanctions to conceal
a desire to get even, a lack of political will to contribute to the search for a negotiated solution, the concern of prolonging the crisis in the hope that time
would act in one’s favour, or reasons or considerations which have nothing to do with the substance
of the problem before us, matters to which we are
strangers, matters which are not germane to the real
concerns of those suffering in the Middle East.

68. Moreover, taking such a position tends to show
that Israel could have the intention of imposing upon
the world a unilateral solution to the Middle East
conflict, whereas, in the spirit of a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the crisis, any effective
and lasting solution to the question must be both
Israeli and Arab.
69. Finally, if taking such a position tends to suggest
that by unilateral action Israel might be seeking to
impose a solution whose scenario would be the integration into the Israeli entity, through the annexation
of the Arab territories occupied since June 1967, of
a Palestinian minority which would constitute a sort
of autonomous entity with certain rights within Israel,
the Security Council should immediately
discourage
and condemn such an approach.

78. The territory of a State is inviolable and cannot
even temporarily be militarily occupied or subject to
other measures imposed by force by another State in
violation of the Charter. Acquisition resulting from
such measures or the threat thereof cannot be accepted. This situation is so serious and the responsibilities of the Council so important that the Council
should not be called upon to tackle the matter by
means of a sort of prism which distorts reality.

70. That would .be an Israeli solution to the Paiestinian problem which would depart from the spirit
and letter of ail the General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions on the matter. The Security Council should, thus, unequivocally
re.ject such a notion
and such an approach, for it would only perpetuate the
Middle East conflict.

79. The increasingly widespread opinion that, in the
face of Israel’s steadfast refusal to abide by these
decisions, the Council cannot come to an agreement
on the application of sanctions or any other effective
enforcement measure and that this situation encourages Israel in its intransigence, unquestionably saps
the Council’s authority, prestige and credibility.

7 I. Likewise, there is not a shadow of doubt that the
rejection of the guiding principles and the positive
stipulations
contained in Council resolutions
242
(1967) and 338 (1973) by other Arab parties to the
conflict does not favour a negotiated, comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of this conflict.

80. Rejection of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) by any party to the dispute in the Middle East
also undermines the authority, prestige and credibility

72. The annexation
of the Golan makes it more
urgent than ever to find a comprehensive and lasting
7

ArLlb
territories
is quite
clear.
They arc Arab territories which belong to States other than Israel.

of the Council and further complicates the search fol
i~ compr*&ensive
and lasting solution of this conflict.

84. Therefore
a)1 decisions
01’ lJIIi~~lt~l’~l~
WtiOlIS
11)’
Israel designed, under one pretext or another. to present the international community with Ll,fifff ~MYwlf/di
must be rejected.

f-31. Above and beyond the matter of the annexa-

.

tion of the Syrian Golan, the elements Of a definitive
solution of the problem of the Middle East which will
take into account the legitimate intereStS
of all States
of the region, including Israel and the Arab State of
Palestine, under resolution 181 (II), as well as the
interest of the world at large, that is to say, the interest of international peace and security, do exist. The
framework for such a solution exists. The institutional
framework exists. It is the political will of the protagonists that is required to lead to a solution. And that
is where the United Nations as a whole and the Security Council in particular, as well as the international
community, surely have useful tools. The dimensions
of a very complex problem cannot be reduced to a
simple matter of imposing or not imposing sanctions,
as though that in itself represented a goal. Therefore,
while supporting the legitimacy of the call for sanctions to preserve respect for the Charter and the principles of positive international law, we believe that the
Council should be able to assess the best manner of
proceeding, for there are reasons for being apprehensive about the timeliness of a measure whose fate
is predictable in present circumstances. This involves
the Council’s role of arbiter in international situations that might endanger international peace and
security. While supporting the legitimacy of the call
for sanctions, we believe we must remind the protagonists and non-protagonists of these sanctions that
the latter are not an end in themselves but merely
a means to attain an objective.

85, The Council could declare that the continued
of the Syrian Golan Heights since June
1967 and their annexation by Israel on 14 December
1981 threaten international peace and security, or at
least peace and security in that region.

occupation

86. While condemning Israel for its refusal to abide
by resolution 497 (1981), the Council could reiterate
that the Israeli decision to extend its laws. jurisdiction and administration to the Syrian Golan Heights is
null and void and without international legal effect. and
that any action on the part of Israel to implement its
decision of annexation is illegal and without validity.
87. The Council could call on all Member States to
refrain from all actions that might imply recognition or
support of the Israeli decision to annex the Golan
Heights.
88. To rescind the illegal annexation measure adopted
by the Knesset would demonstrate to the world Israel’s
proclaimed unconditional desire to reach a negotiated
settlement of the conflict. But this delicate question
of the annexation and illegal occupation
of Arab
territories cannot have a final solution unless it is
obtained by action in accordance with relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, that is
to say, an approach designed to achieve a comprehensive settlement of the problem, and thus one which
will, as it must, include the Palestinian dimension.

82. If the objective we seek here is peace, stability,
security for each State of the region and the return
of territories illegally occupied and annexed, it is the
duty of the Council and all the members of the international community to choose an approach and means
that will be effective and will in no way jeopardise
the search for the objective that we seek. Once sanctions have been decreed they will have to be applied
,and if we permit sanctions as provided for under the
Charter, and requested for highly important reasons,
to be flouted in any way, ignored and not even partially applied, that may lead to a deterioration of the
situation and comfort those who display intransigence
on both sides.

89. For that reason, apart from the need to solve the
problem we are discussing, the Security Council
should consider, by special decision, no doubt, the
possibility to entrust either the Secretary-General
or
a committee established in accordance with Article 25)
of the Charter with the task of undertaking renewed
efforts designed to achieve a just and lasting over-ntl
settlement of the Middle East crisis.
90. In conclusion, I should like to say that these are
the considerations which will guide us in our assessment of the positions of the various parties to the conflict and which will determine our position on the
present debate and its conchlsions.

83. Many Council resolutions to which I have aheady
referred establish the objective foundations for a
lasting Peace in the region. We reaffirm that all the
States Of the region have the right to exist and to live
in Peace within secure and recognised boundaries, We
reaffirm Our full support of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force or war. Israel must
withdraw from all Arab territories occupied in 1967,
The Council must reject any measures designed to
modify the status of the Arab territories occupied
by
had as a redt of the 1967 war. Despite the situation
of occupation Or annexation, the legal status of those

91: It is in the light of everything I have stated that
we will assessdraft resolution S/14832/Rev. 1 which has
been submitted and under whose terms the Security
Council
“Lhid~~t- that all Membet Stat& should consider
applying concrete and effective measures in order
to nullify the Israeli annexation of the Syrian
GoIan
8

extended to me during the month of December. The
spirit of unity and common purpose demonstrated by
all members made it possible for the Council to accomplish its task during the month of December. Once
again, Mr. President, to you and to all the delegations,
I extend my sincere sentiments of deep gratitude.

Heights and to refrain from providing any assistance
or aid to and co-operation with Israel, in all fields,
in order to deter Israel in its policies and practices
of annexation”.
This draft resolution is also the outcome of intensive
efforts at compromise in the Group of the Non-Aligned
Countries at the Security Council. It is also in this
spirit that we must view this draft resolution.

97. The PRESIDENT
(inlerprptrrtiorz ,f?om Hllssicln):
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.

92. However, I cannot conclude my statement without once again reiterating to the delegation, people and Government
of Syria the assurances of our
complete solidarity.
Just as we have always lent
Zaire’s support to the Arab-Palestinian
cause in the
Middle East conflict, I should like to assure the plaintiff that it is in the same spirit that we shall deal with
the draft resolution that has been submitted and that
we support it.

98. The Council has been compelled to reconvene
since Israel refused to comply with resolution 497
(1981), unanimously adopted on 17 December last
year, In that resolution, the Council decided that

93, Mr. OTUNNU
(Uganda): Mr. President, my
delegation has already expressed its views on the item
under discussion. However, I have asked to be allowed
to speak in order personally to express to you my
warm congratulations
on your accession to the presidency of the Council for this month. You are a seasoned diplomat whose contribution to the work of the
Council over the years is already well recognized by
all of us. The Council is very fortunate during these
difficult and uncertain times to work under the leadership of a man of your calibre, a man of such political
acumen, diplomatic
skills and ready wit.

The Council also demanded that “Israel, the occupying
Power, should rescind forthwith its decision”. Finally,
the Council envisaged that in the event of non-compliance by Israel, it would “consider taking appropriate measures in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations”.

“the Israeli decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights is null and void and without international
legal effect”.

99. Hence, this time the Council has a quite specific
task, It is to consider which specific measures should
be taken in respect of Israel as a State which has
blatantly disregarded a Council resolution that was
unanimously adopted.
100. The delegation of the Soviet Union has listened
with a great deal of attention to the statement that
was made on 6 January [2322nd wanting] by the representative of Syria, We have listened also to statements
by Council members, the representatives of the Arab
and many other countries, as well as the observers
from the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
League of Arab States. The overwhelming majority
of those statements show one very clear kitmotiv,
and that is that the Council should discharge the responsibility entrusted to it and in respect of Israel adopt
sanctions as provided by the Charter of the United
Nations.

94. I take this opportunity to extend a word of welcome to the new Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier Perez
de Cuellar. We take a special pride in the fact that
this distinguished
diplomat hails from Peru, a fellow
non-aligned and third-world country. You, Sir, combine so well the qualities of professional competence,
diplomatic
experience and, above all, a personal
commitment
to the principles and objectives of the
United Nations. These qualities make you eminently
qualified for the responsibilities you have just assumed.
ln your endeavours to fulfil your onerous responsibilities, you may be assured of the full and constant
co-operation of my delegation.

101. Indeed, by annexing the Golan Heights, Israel
has undertaken a qualitatively
new unlawful step in
consolidating
the fruits of its unabated aggression
against the Arab States. Now even the staunchest
supporters of Israel should have not even the slightest
illusion about the essence of its policies. Israel’s
policies-and
now this is quite clear-are to seize
ever more Arab lands and virtually to refuse to conduct negotiations on an honest and just basis regarding
a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict and gradually to annex occupied territories, and
thus integrate them into Israel. As was emphasized by
Arab representatives, the recent action of Israel in
annexing the Golan Heights does not mark the limits
of the Israeli leaders’ expansionist ambitions. On the

95. I should like also to welcome most warmly my
colleagues, the representatives
of Guyana, Jordan,
Poland, Togo and Zaire, which joined the Council at
the beginning of this month. I look forward to working
closely with them in our common efforts to reduce the
areas of tension in our present world.
96. Finally, I wish to express my sincere gratitude
to you, Mr. President, to my colleagues and to all the
delegations who addressed the Council during the
present debate for the very kind and generous words
addressed to me and to my country. I am most grateful
to my colleagues for the ready co-operation they
9

108. With regard to the recent action by Israel in
respect of the Golan Heights, it virtually received the
mandate for their annexation from the United States,
however much the latter might try with symbolic
“reprimands”
to dissociate itself from Israel’s expansionist course.

contrary,

unless this exparsipn is stopped now the
Arab lands wdl In the future be used as
a springboard for further territorial acquisitions.

appropriated

102. People who are prepared to look at things objectively must recognize the validity of these serious
warnings, The history of Israel over the last three
decades is proof of this, but today there is no need
to go so far as that. It suffices to look at the “service
record” of the Israeli Government for the IaSt yea1
or two to see the truth of that.
103. Today Israel
continUeS
to OCCUpy
portion of the territories of neighbouring

109. Officially Washington pretends that it was not
informed of Israel’s intention to annex the Golan
Heights, but, according to what was published by the
Wtrshingtorr
Post, the United States Ambassador to
Israel gave prior warning to Secretary of State Haig
that Tel Aviv was planning to give notice of this action.
On the other hand, the Israeli newspaper Ho’ar~tz
wrote of a secret letter which was sent, back in 1975,
to the United States Administration
by Israeli leaders.
The letter spoke of the United States’ duty to support
Israel’s claims to the Golan Heights.

EI Significant

Arab States,
and not merely to occupy
them, but also to hold the
indigenous
population under mOSt rUthkSS
military
control and to subject it to permanent repreSSiOn.
104, In the summer of 1980, the Knesset adopted a
law proclaiming Jerusalem as the united, indivisible
and eternal capital of Israel. In other words, the eastern Arab half of that city was annexed-which,
as is
well known, is part ofthe Arab ancestral lands occupied
by Israel in 1967.

110. The verbal acrobatics surrounding the revocation of the strategic co-operation memorandum do not
alter the essence of the relationship between Washington and Tel Aviv, Staged emotions and pseudoquarrels cannot mask the increasing action by the
United States and Israel to forge a military strategic
alliance in the Middle East.

105. In June I98 I, the Israeli air force carried out a
bandit-like attack on the nuclear research centre in
Iraq, a country that does not even have a common
boundary with Israel and is hundreds of kilometres
from it. In July last year, the Israeli military clique
undertook a new large-scale venture into Lebanon.
As a result of that, in Beirut alone about 300 people
died and many hundreds were wounded, Israel has
been trying to arrogate to itself the right arbitrarily to
violate the airspace of Saudi Arabia.

I 11. In fact, what can we say of the policy of a Government which on 17 December voted in favour of
a Council resolution which provided for the adoption
of appropriate measures in the event of Israel’s refusal
to rescind its legislation regarding the annexation of
the Golan Heights, yet when Israel refused to comply
with the Council’s resolution, it does not exert steady
pressure on that State, but sends its Secretary of State
to Jerusalem who states that the aim of his journey
was further to strengthen relations of friendship and
co-operation between the two countries? Moreover,
as Israel Radio said, President Reagan, in his message
sent to Prime Minister Begin, stated that there were no
further differences of opinion between the United
States and Israel. It would seem that Israel is not the
only one who scorns Council resolutions, even those
that are unanimously adopted.

106. In addition, the aggressive and expansionist
ambitions of the ruling circles of Israel in respect of
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have become eve1
clearer and they may, in the near future, become the
next target for annexation by Israel,
107. One thing is clear, and this has been empha‘sized by many participants in the present deliberations:
Israel could not pursue such a policy so defiantly, a
policy which runs counter to all norms of international
law and the principles of the United Nations, were it
not supported by the United States. As was emphasized in the statement published by TASS on 18 December 1981, the ruling circles of the Soviet Union
consider that:

112. As regards the position of the Soviet Union, as
has been stated before, it vigorously condemns the
action undertaken by the Government of Israel. We
consider that it will lead to an even more dangerous
exacerbation of the situation in the Middle East and
will push that region in effect towards war. It is well
known that people will reap what they have sown.

“This latest aggressive act of Israel is closely
linked to the militaristic policy of the United States
of America and is the direct consequence of the antiArab Camp David accord and the policy of making
separate deals. It is a tangible example of the United
States-Israel ‘strategic co-operation’,
the result of
the merging of the imperialistic
interests of the
United States and the expansionist ambitions of
krael.”

[S//48/3,

113. Speaking on 15 January, at the reception in
honour of the Deputy Chairman of the Council of
Ministers and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria,
Mr. Haddam, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko, stated:
“In the struggle for the protection of their sovereign rights and for a comprehensive
an’d just
Middle East settlement,
the Arab countries and

MVWX]

10

peoples can continue firmly to rely on the support
of the Soviet Union. For us this is a policy of principle.”

very great experience and very particular skills and
abilities. Already in his first weeks in office he has
given evidence of his qualities and his capacity. We
wish him every success during his term of office and
my country and my delegation pledge him our fullest
support in all his efforts on behalf of the Organization.

114. In the circumstances in which the Council finds
itself, according to the delegation of the USSR the
most effective and decisive measures should be
adopted in respect of Israel, that is, sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter. It is high time to put an
end to the perverse practice whereby they say “we
want peace and negotiations”
but in actual fact do
exactly the opposite: they resort to appropriating
more territory and try from a position of strength to
impose their conditions on others. Now it is imperative
to call Israel to account, to force it to abide by the
judgement of the Organization and that of the overwhelming majority of the members of the international
community,
otherwise we shall soon be compelled to
reconvene to consider yet another act of anuexation
of part of the Arab territories.

122. The composition
of the Council itself has
changed somewhat since 1 last spoke here. I should
therefore also like to pay tribute to the outgoing members, the German Democratic
Republic, Mexico,
Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia. We enjoyed very
good relations with all of these countries and cooperated closely with them in the Council last year
and we extend to them our very best wishes.
123. I should also like to welcome the new members
who have joined us-Guyana,
Jordan, Poland. Togo
and Zaire. For the remaining year of our own term as
a non-permanent member we hope to work closely
with them and with all our colleagues in co-operation
and harmony.

115. The draft resolution
submitted
for voting
Is1/48321Rev.1] is of course not enough. It does not
provide, as was necessary, for decisive measures
against Israel. Nevertheless, my delegation considers
that under these conditions in the Council in respect
of consideration
of this agenda item, the adoption
of even this draft resolution would be positive and
would be in the interests of Syria and other Arab
countries that have been subjected to Israeli aggression.

124. In face of the many complexities of the Middle
East situation, Ireland has always held firmly to one
basic idea-the
need to achieve, by a negotiation
involving all parties, a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace settlement. The principles set out by the Council
I4 years ago in resolution 242 (1967), taken together
with those of resolution 338 (1973), are in our view
fundamental to any such negotiation-although
we
believe that they are not in themselves sufficient.
They must be supplemented and completed on a
number of points if full account is to be taken of all
aspects of the problem and in particular of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.

116. I shall now resume my function as PRESIDENT.
117. It is my understanding that the Council is now
ready to proceed to vote on the revised draft resolution which is before it. Unless I hear any objection,
I shall put it to the vote.
118. The representative of Ireland
statement before the voting.

125. Resolution 242 (1967) established two basic
principles: first, that it is not admissible to acquire
territory by war and accordingly that Israel should
withdraw from occupied territories, and, secondly,
that there should be an end to all states of belligerency
and full respect for the territorial integrity of all States
and for their right to live in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries. The Israeli decision of 14 December in regard to the Golan Heights runs directly
counter to both of those principles.

wishes to make a

119. Mr. DORR(Ireland):
Mr. President, even though
we are proceeding to the voting, as this is my first
statement in the Council I hope you will permit me to
begin by offering some courtesies and congratulations.
I wish to offer you personally my good wishes on your
assumption of the office of President. Those of us who
have worked with you in the Council know well your
courtesy and good humour as well as your diplomatic
skill and we are glad to have your guidance as President for this month.

126. We are not, of course naive. We know that the
achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting
peace settlement in the Middle East too often seems
a very distant goal. Certainly, after listening to this
debate it is difficult to be optimistic. But however
distant the prospect may now seem, we will continue
to press for such a comprehensive peace settlement
and, for its part, Ireland, when called upon to judge
the actions of the parties to the conflict, will do so
according to whether those actions advance or set
back further the prospect of achieving such a settlement.

120. I should also like to express once again our good
wishes and thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Otunnu
of Uganda, who guided us through the difficult days
of December with exceptional skill and ability.
I2 I. One of the best decisions which the Council took
under his able guidance last month was its decision
to recommend to the Assembly the appointment to high
office of the new Secretary-General.
He is a man of

127. Judged by that standard, we believe that we
must unreservedly censure and condemn Israel’s deciI1

132. We simply cannot see in any of those points
a justification for the Israeli decision in effect to annex
a territory first occupied some I4 years ago or for
its refusal to rescind that decision as demanded by the
Council.

sion of 14 December to extend its laws, jurisdiction
and administration
to the occupied Syrian territory
of the Golan Heights, In our view that decision was
both wrong and dangerous-all
the more So because
it must be seen against the background of a similar
decision in the case of East Jerusalem, the Continuing
occupation of other territories except for the Sinai, the
settlement policies and statements which imply at
least that much of the occupied territories may be
permanently retained. We believe that that decision
is wrong because it is tantamount to annexation, and
we do not accept the right to annex territory in this
way; and it is dangerous because it greatly increases
existing tensions in the region and because it challenges
so directly the two principles 1 have mentioned, which
are basic to any settlement. That challenge simply
could not go without response. The validity of those
principles must be upheld, not least in the long-term
interest of Israel itself.

133. As to the first point, we are well aware of the
hostile relations between Syria and Israel, which are
unfortunately fully evident from statements made in
this debate. But that is no justification for the annexation of territory in breach of the principle of the territorial integrity of States as well as of the principle that
the acquisition of territory by war is inadmissible. That
step will make bad relations even worse, and it will
set back further than ever any possibility there might
ever be of a negotiation which Israel claims to favour.
134. The second point made by Israel is that it was
necessary to normalize the situation in a territory
already occupied militarily for some I4 years, a territory which, of course, remains rightfully Syrian. Does
this imply that similar measures may be taken in other
occupied territories to “normalize”
the situation there
too? And how can any such measures and the increased
tension which must inevitably result possibly bring the
situation of the inhabitants of the Golan Heights or of
any other occupied territory any closer to normal?

128. It was right, therefore, that, following the
Israeli decision of 14 December, the Council should
be urgently seized of the question. With all due respect
to the representative of Israel, who has pointed to
other world problems, this matter is indeed a very
serious one. The Middle East conflict presents great
danger to world peace, and an action which so greatly
aggravates existing tensions in the region and which
so clearly flouts principles basic to a future peace
settlement there must rightly be a matter of the most
serious concern to the Council.

135. The third point made by Israel is that it remains
willing to negotiate unconditionally for a peace settlement in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). It says that the Golan Heights law does
not preclude or impair such negotiations.
Does that
mean that Israel, despite a decision which amounts to
annexation, would still be ready to consider a negotiated withdrawal from the territory as part of an
eventual comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle
East? If so, then that is all to the good. But, as I said
earlier, although we consider resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) to be basic, and we consider that they
remain valid, they do not in themselves set a wholly
adequate framework for a truly comprehensive
peace
settlement. There are issues not covered in those
resolutions that will simply have to be taken into
account also if any settlement is to be just and lasting.

129, A first and necessary step was to declare the
Israeli decision null and void and to call on Israel to
rescind it. This the Council did in its resolution 497
(198 I). Ireland stated its position at that time, and we
voted for the resolution. We are glad that it was adopted
unanimously. This showed very clearly the united will
of the international
community
on a fundamental
issue notwithstanding the many divisions among us on
other international problems.
130. That resolution set a time-limit
and called for
a report by the Secretary-General.
We have now
received the report [S/14821]. It is clear that Israel has
not rescinded and will not rescind its decision as the
Council requires it to do.

136. Nevertheless,
we should welcome any implication, if that was indeed intended, that Israel does not
consider its decision of I4 December as absolutely
unalterable.
But whatever credit it might claim for
implying that it would still be willing to negotiate one
day about the territory is more than offset by the
effect of its present decision to consolidate its hold
on it. That decision makes bad relations between Israel
and Syria even worse, and so long as it is maintained
it must be a continuing obstacle to any effort to get
a negotiation under way.

13I I The Secretary-General’s
report
contains
Israel’s formal reply to the Council decision. On the
basis of that reply and of Israel’s statements here it
appears, if I may summarize, that Israel answers the
question by emphasizing three points, It says, first,
that Syria has regarded itself as being in a state of war
with Israel since 1948; secondly, that the annexation
was necessary to bring an end to what is called an
~~~~a]O~S
SitUatiOn
so as to “normalize”
the situation in the Golan Heights area; and, thirdly, that
Israel nevertheless remains ready to negotiate unconditionally with Syria in accordance with resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (19731, a negotiation which it says is not
precluded by the recent decisions of the Israeli Government and Parliament.

137. It will be clear from what I have said that Ireland
considers Israel’s response to resolution 497 (198 I)
unacceptable. Israel has not complied with paragraph 2
of that resolution, which called on it to rescind its decision. What, then, should the Council do?
12

138. For its part, Ireland believes that action by the
Council should be firm and if possible unanimous in
this second phase of its consideration of the issue, as
it was in the first phase, in December [23/&h IO
231Yth rnc~tings]. But we also believe that the Council’s action should be precise and clear and matched
to the actions which have evoked it. That is to say
we do not want to see a call on States to consider a
series of general but rather imprecisely worded measures designed to punish or to deter Israel. What we
want to see are clear decisions, decisions that would
be much more specifically directed to the Israeli claim
to have annexed the territory and which would ensure
that that decision is without international legal effect.

144. Operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution,
echoing one of the preambular paragraphs, contains
a formulation determining that the Israeli measures
constitute an “act of aggression”, For our part. we
strongly condemn those measures and we do regard
them indeed as threatening to international peace and
security. The complexities of the concept of aggression, however, are such that we would consider it
more appropriate in this draft To have the Council
determine that the Israeli measures were a threat to
international
peace and security, thus echoing the
preamble. We do not feel that we can fully endorse
the present wording of operative paragraph 2.

139. The purported
Israeli annexation
measures
were legal and administrative
rather than military
in character. To say that is not of course to minimize
them, since such measures can be more serious in
many ways than direct action on the ground. Those
measures sought by a legal act to establish a temporary occupation as a lasting political reality. What the
Council should now do in our view is to counter those
measures by specific legal decisions of its own, prescribing certain specific measures to ensure that no
recognition is given by any State to that supposed
reality.

145. Operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution is
complex in its formulation and not wholly precise in
its content. We appreciate indications informally from
the sponsor of the draft that it is intended that the
non-mandatory
character implied
by the phrase
“should consider applying” would cover all provisions of the paragraph, even though this is not wholly
clear from the English text. We appreciate, too, that
the drafters of the draft have modified somewhat the
original formulation so as to make it generally nonmandatory in character.
146. However, as a member of the Council voting on
a draft resolution, Ireland takes very seriously what is
ig effect the law-making function of the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We would want to see the wording of any Council
decision made compjetely clear and precise so that the
international community as a whole may know precisely the nature and extent of the obligations imposed
or recommended to it by such a decision. We regret
that the wording of the paragraph, despite the efforts
of the drafters, does not, in our view, meet this requirement.

140. This would mean, in our view, that the Council
should, first, reiterate that the Israeli decision is illegal and void; secondly, determine formally that States
must give no recognition, direct or indirect, to it; and,
thirdly, decide in a clear-cut way that it shall be incumbent on all States to review all their relations with
Israel to ensure that no such recognition is given or
implied. The Council should then decide further to
keep the matter actively on its agenda and so ensure
that the Israeli decision does not come gradually to be
regarded as a fZt rrcvvtnpli.
141. My delegation worked with other like-minded
delegations to seek a draft resolution on these lines.
We did so first because we thought that such a draft
resolution would be the right response from the Council and, secondly, because we believed that such a
draft offered the best hope of maintaining that unanimity which was shown by the Council when it
adopted resolution 497 (1981).

147. Furthermore-and
perhaps more important-we
note that the actions urged on Member States in the
second part of the paragraph would require them, if
they comply with it, to refrain from co-operating with
Israel in all fields in order to deter it from its annexation policies.
148. We find this formula too broad and extensive
in character. It calls for action against Israel in all
fields-action
which would be broadly punitive or
deterrent in character. In the present context, whether
mandatory or not, we consider these measures to be
too broad and sweeping. What we could have accepted
instead would be a formulation calling on all States to
refrain from aid or co-operation with Israel which
would encourage it in its policies of annexation, Such a
formula would meet the need for a firm response by
the Council but it would be precisely focused on what
we consider important--to
ensure that States give no
encouragement to Israel in its annexation policies,

142, We regret that it has not so far proved possible
achieve agreement among all members of the Council on such an approach, Instead, we have before us
the draft resolution proposed by Jordan (S/14832/
XCY./]. It is to this draft that we must now address
ourselves,
to

143. 1 should like to say first that Ireland for its part
agrees with many aspects of this draft resolution.
In particular, we agree with the strong condemnation of Israel, in operative paragraph I, for its failure
to comply
with the decisions of the Council, On the
other hand, we find ourselves in a dilemma, as we have
difficulties with a number of aspects of the present
draft.

149.
muMiOn

I3

It is true, as I have said, that the present foris apparently intended to be non-mandatory,

despite the certain imprecision which I mentioned
earlier. It would therefore be open to all States, including my own, to decide whether or not to apply it
if it were to be adopted. But, as I said, we feel that
we must take very seriously our responsibility as a
member of the Council commending or prescribing
measures to all States and, indeed, to States nonMembers of the United Nations. We do not think that
it would be in accord with that responsibility to vote
here in favour of a draft resolution commending to
all States a series of measures which are, in our view,
too broad and extensive and which for that reason
we ourselves do not wish to apply.
150. We have some difficulty with other aspects of
the draft resolution but, granted our very strong feeling
on the Israeli action, we might have been able to
accept these other formulations. However, taken together with the important
points I have just mentioned, we have decided, after the most careful consideration, to abstain in the vote on the text before us.
151. There is perhaps some reason to think that, if
this draft resolution is pressed to a vote here today,
it may not receive the necessary support in the Council. I think it would be regrettable if the Council should
now fail to agree on the further measures to be taken.
But if that does happen, I believe also that Israel should
not regard such a failure of the Council to agree about
what steps to take as representing a real division in the
international
community
about the basic principle
involved in its purported annexation of the Golan
Heights. The Council has already shown in its unanimous adoption of resolution 497 (198 1) one month ago
the general agreement in regard to that principle and
in regard to Israel’s action taken in breach of it. It has
also shown clearly that, however the international
community
may be otherwise divided, it is united in
considering the Israeli decision as null and void and as
a serious obstacle to the search for a comprehensive
peace settlement in the Middle East.
152. For its part, Ireland will continue to act in full
accord with the terms of resolution 497 (1981), which
we consider to be valid for ourselves and for all Member States.
153. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): Mr. President, I should like to begin, as everyone else has, first by congratulating
you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council: secondly,
by expressing my personal gratitude and that of my
Government
for the distinction and skill with which
the previous President of the Council conducted the
office and performed his duties: and, thirdly, to express
once again our congratulations to the new SecretaryGeneral and our congratulations to the United Nations
itself for having been fortunate enough to find so
distinguished
and experienced a Secretary-General
in whom to entrust the management of our affairs.
154. Again like so many who have spoken before me,
I should like to reaffirm for the public record our deep

gratitude to Mr. Kurt Waldheim for his long years of
dedicated, devoted and extremely constructive service to the Organization.
I think that our collective
debt to him is very large and I do not doubt that we
shall develop such a debt to the new Secretary-General,
President Reagan has already had the opportunity
personally to express to the new Secretary-General
his congratulations
and the special pleasure of the
United States at the accession of a citizen of this distinguished member country of the Western Hemisphere to this distinguished office.
155. Like those who spoke this afternoon, I should
also like to welcome the new members to membership
in the Council and to say that I shall truly miss most
of those non-permanent
members that have retired.
I think that all of us enjoyed the company of, as well
as profited in the Council by associating with, the
representatives of Mexico and Tunisia and the other
members of the Council which have just retired.
156. To come to the business at hand, my country
opposes the draft resolution sponsored by Jordan for
reasons which are of importance not only as regards
the proper disposition of the current matter before us,
that of Israel’s Golan Heights legislation, but also out
of concern for the future of the United Nations and
the ability of the Security Council to perform a positive role in the maintenance of world peace and security.
157. The draft resolution with which we are confronted today constitutes, we believe, an aberration
-even a perversion-of
the very purpose which the
Security Council is called upon by Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations to perform. Article 39
of the Charter vests in the Security Council the responsibility to deal with activities that threaten world
peace and security. The role the Council is called upon
to perform is by definition, then, a constructive role:
to prevent “an aggravation of the situation”.
This
draft, we believe, would do the opposite; far from
preventing aggravation, it would become a source of
aggravation.
Indeed, it has already succeeded in
exacerbating the terribly difficult problems of the
Middle East, in dividing people whose co-operation is
needed to solve problems, in sowing suspicions and in
feeding hostilities. A flood-tide of invective has flowed
through this chamber, threatening day after day to
overwhelm the spirit of reason and compromise with
hatred and cynicism.
158. The United States has tried hard to demonstrate
its determination
to be fair and reasonable in confronting the situation in the Golan Heights. We have
refused to be drawn into vicious exchanges or distracted from the search for real solutions that will
render more safe and secure the real lives of actual
people in the region. We will not be deterred from our
course. We will continue to search for constructive
means to achieve peace for Israel and its neighbours.

159. We believe that a good place to begin is, indeed,
with the implementation
of the resolutions of the
Coun,cil. We believe that resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 ( 1981) can serve as the basis of that
constructive search. We urge the implementation
of
all three.
160.

.ness: I warmly hope that the reverse will be the case
next month.
165. I should also like, not for the first time, to
extend the warmest thanks of my delegation and
myself to my good friend Mr. Olara Otunnu of Uganda
for the wholly admirable way in which he conducted
our affairs last month.

On this occasion, and in this place where there

has been so much talk of aggression, repression and the

166. Furthermore, I should like, on behalf of myself,
my delegation and my Government, to congratulate
with great warmth and to welcome the new SecretaryGeneral, Javier PCrez de Cuillar. I know him well, and
I have long admired him as a friend and greatly respected him as a colleague, a diplomat and an administrator. I can tell him that he has already acquired a
special place in the heart of the British people: in that
venerable organ of journalism, The Times of London
of 19 January, there was a pen and ink sketch of him
to commemorate his birthday. That is, in British terms,
a welcome in itself.

desire of peoples to live in peace, I cannot forbear
from mentioning the problems of another people in the
world who are just now being denied peace and selfgovernment. What an extraordinary institution this is,
that in the more than a month since the massive, brutal
repression of the people of Poland got under way there
has been no mention here of the violation of their
human rights and the violations of the Charter of the
United Nations,
the Helsinki
Final Act-l and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights4 that have
occurred there- We should like on this occasion to
express our solidarity with the people of Poland as
well as with those of the Golan, and to affirm the commitment of my Government to work for the rights of
all peoples currently denied freedom, self-determination and self-government.

167. In his absence, I should like to say a very fond
farewell to my very old friend and close colleague,
Kurt Waldheim, who gave IO years of selfless and
utterly dedicated service to the Organization, a sad
farewell to those non-permanent
members of the
Council which have left us and a very sincere welcome
to those which have joined us.

161. We do not approve of Israel’s annexation of the
Golan Heights: indeed, we do not even believe that
annexation has occurred. We believe we should get
on with negotiations which will demonstrate that fact.

168. My Government has already made its position
regarding the Israeli decision to extend the laws,
jurisdiction and administration
of the State of Israel
to the Golan Heights clear. As I stated to the Council
on 16 December 1981, the territory of one State is
not to be acquired by another by the use of force
[23/&h wweting, pclrn. 741. We totally reject and
condemn the unilateral initiative by Israel to change
the status of the Golan Heights.

162. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jwrn Russiunj: I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document S/l4832/Rev. 1.

Ill .,~?IIYXII’: China, Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Spain,
Togo, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Zaire
Agtrinst:

United

169. Together with the other members of the Council, we joined in unanimous support for the adoption
of resolution 497 (1981). As stated in that resolution,
we consider the Israeli decision to be null and void
and without international
legal effect. Similarly,
we hold that all the provisions of the fourth Geneva
Convention, of 12 August l949,l continue to apply
to the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since June
1967. We strongly condemn Israel’s failure to abide
by resolution 497 (1981) and to rescind its decision.

States of America

Ahstuining:
France, Ireland,
Japan, Panama,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland

170. Against that background, it will be evident that
my Government agrees with much of the thinking
behind the draft on which the Council has just voted;
indeed, there is much in it that we can support. We are
only too willing to make clear to the Government of
Israel the complete unacceptability
of its action in
extending Israeli jurisdiction
to the Golan Heights.
We can in no way condone such action. which we
regard as both provocative and seriously damaging to
the objective of promoting lasting peace and security
in the Middle East. Our patience and that of the international community have been sorely tried. If Israel

163. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion
from Russifinj: I now call on representatives who wish to make
statements after the voting.
164. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
I should like to start by extending to you my warmest
compliments on your accession to and conduct of the
presidency of the Council. As usual, it depresses me to
have to follow you after such a hectic month of busi15

by such actions continues to distance itself furthet
from accommodation
with its neighbours it cannot
expect to escape the consequences indefinitely.

176. I should be grateful if you would be so kind as
to transmit our thanks and congratulations
to your
predecessor, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for the brilliance and
effectiveness with which he discharged the functions
of President for December.

171. At the same time, my Government would have
wished the Council to have built on the basis of its
earlier unanimity.
From the outset we have urged on
delegations the need for the Council to proceed by
consensus if we are to achieve the objective-which
my Government
shares-of
bringing Israel to rescind
its decision and to refrain from any similar action in
the future. We regret that our advice was not taken.
The draft resolution on which we have just voted
clearly did not provide the basis for such a consensus.
This was one reason why we decided to abstain.

177. I also welcome the presence in our midst of
Mr. Javier Pkrez de CuCllar. I wish him every success
in his post of Secretary-General
and should like to
assure him that the French Government is determined
to give him full support.
178. Finally, I am very happy to take this opportunity to welcome the new members of the Council:
the representatives of Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo
and Zaire.

172. We also had certain reservations on the text.
We are dubious, for example, about the Council
making a determination
under Article 39 of the Chartel
that the Israeli action constitutes an “act of aggression”. We would regard such a determination
as the
most serious and far-reaching of all those determinations which the Council is empowered to make. We
note that even at the time of the Korean war, in which
hundreds of thousands of lives were lost, the Council did not go beyond a determination
in resolution 82
(1950) that the events in question constituted a breach
of the peace.

179. The refusal of the Israeli Government to comply with the provisions of Council resolution 497
(1981), adopted unanimously on 17 December 1981,
has led this body to resume its debate in order to consider appropriate measures under the provisions of that
resolution. The decision taken by Israel to impose its
laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights is indeed a particularly serious
matter on which the French Government has already
spoken. I would merely recall in this respect the
text of the communiqui
of the Council of Ministers
of 16 December 1981 and the statement by the representative of France in the Security Council, also made
on 16 December, in which he said the following:

173. We believe that the Council should instead,
in the present case, have sought a consensus that
would have, without making a Chapter VII determination, called upon all States to refrain from any acts
or dealings which would imply recognition of, or lend
support or assistance to, Israel’s decision. The Count cil could also have required that all Member States
should refrain from providing Israel with any assistance that would be used specifically in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights; that Member States should
refuse to have any contact with Israeli institutions there
and that they should not participate in any events or
activities organized there by the Government of Israel.
That is not an exhaustive list. For our part, my Government is considering
which of such measures it
should take on a unilateral basis.

“The
French Government
firmly condemns
this act, which is tantamount to annexation and is a
direct attack on the sovereignty of Syria over a territory which belongs to it and was occupied by Israeli
forces in 1967. This act is contrary to international
law and to United Nations resolutions. It constitutes a violation of the principle of the non-acquisition of territory by force which is laid down in resolution 242 (1967) of the Council.”
[23/7th meeting,
palw . 901
180. The Council has just taken action on the draft
resolution
contained in document
S/14832/Rev. 1.
France abstained for several reasons. First of all, it
would have preferred that draft to have been the
subject of in-depth negotiations so that a consensus
might have been reached. It would also have wished
to cast its vote in favour of a text which would have
permitted progress towards a negotiated settlement.
But the draft resolution as put to the vote did not cover
those concerns which, for our country, were basic.

174. Finally,
my Government
believes that we
shouId not regard the Council’s inability on this occasion to reach consensus as a failure, but rather as
a temporary
set-back.
My Government
remains
willing on this issue to work for a true consensus
within the Council which, we believe, would provide
fhe best means to achieve our common objective of
getting the Government
of Israel to rescind its illegal
act.

181, In that spirit, the French delegation was certainly prepared to associate itself with appropriate
measures. It was a question of stating the invalidity
of the law adopted by the Israeli Parliament and consequently of drawing all the necessary consequences
in respect of relations between Member States and
Israel regarding the. occupied Syrian Golan. Working
documents were drafted by some Council members,

175. Mr. LOUET
(France) (intopretcrtion
ji-orn
Fwwi~):
It gives me pleasure to welcome you,
Mr. President, a seasoned diplomat whose experience
and objectivity
will be particularly useful to the Council for the successful conduct of its work in difficult
circumstances.
16

and some of the suggestions
tally with our ideas.

contained

in them did

sentative and, more recently, as Under-SecretaryGeneral for Special Political Affairs. He has consistently discharged his responsibilities in a way that
has earned him the admiration, respect and trust of
his colleagues throughout the United Nations. We
regard it as particularly fortunate that at this time the
reins of leadership have been passed to a representative of Latin America, a continent whose importance
in world affairs will continue to grow in the coming
years. As a country which enjoys friendly relations
with Peru, Japan heartily welcomes Mr. PCrez de
CuCllar to his new post. He can be assured of my
delegation’s full support and co-operation as he seeks
to carry out the myriad responsibilities of his high
office,

182. A really constructive resolution, in the view of
the French delegation, should have, inter rr/irr, recalled
the need for withdrawal from territories occupied by
Israel in 1967.
183, This text also should have included provisions
opening the way to a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East established on the basis of
the relevant resolutions of the Council, a peace which
should also include recognition of the rights of the
Palestinian people.
184. At the conclusion of this debate, the French
Government would like to reaffirm that it considers that
the law adopted by the Israeli Parliament is null and
void and hence cannot in any way modify the status of
the Golan. The French Government once again appeals
to Israel to abide by the principles of international
law and to refrain from impeding peace in the Middle
East.

190. Finally, I welcome this opportunity to express
my Government’s
sincere appreciation to Mr. Kurt
Waldheim for his outstanding leadership during the
10 years he served as Secretary-General,
Mr. Waldheim guided the United Nations through a difficult
decade with unswerving devotion to the service of the
international
community and with unshakable commitment to the cause of peace, justice and co-operation among nations.

185. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): This being the first time
I have spoken this month, I wish to extend to you,
Mr. President, my heartiest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. YOUI
exemplary record in the United Nations has earned
you the esteem, friendship and distinction that you so
richly deserve. 1 wish you every success in your
important task.

191. I turn now to the item before us. My Government’s basic position on this matter was made clear
in a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Japan on I5 December 1981 [S//4797]. In my statement before the Council on 16 December, I reiterated
that position [23/7th nweting, prrra. 531.
192. The steps taken by Israel to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration in the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights flagrantly violate international law, as
well as Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Japan cannot condone such measures and demands
that Israel rescind them immediately.

186. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Olara Otunnu of Uganda, for the outstanding
manner in which he handled the duties of this high
office last month.
187. At this time I should like also to extend a very
warm welcome to those members of the Council which
have been elected for the years 1982 and 1983-our
good friends from Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and
Zaire. All of them are well known to us and have
already been actively engaged in our deliberations.

193. The internationaf
community
has repeatedly
censured Israel for its numerous violations of international law and relevant resolutions of the United
Nations. I refer specifically to its annexation of East
Jerusalem in the summer of 1980 and its bombing of
Iraqi nuclear facilities in June 1981. The fact that Israel
ignored those warnings and undertook its latest action
in the Golan Heights constitues a grave challenge to
the international community. Thus it would seem there
are grounds for the consideration of punitive action of
some kind against Israel.

188. Allow me to express my delegation’s sincere
thanks as well to our five colleagues which left the
Council at the end of the past year, namely, the representatives of the German Democratic
Republic,
Mexico, Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia. All of them
deserve high praise for the contributions
they made
throughout
their tenure. My delegation sincerely
appreciates the kind assistance, co-operation
and
friendship that they extended to us.

194. Nevertheless, inasmuch as the present problem
is rooted in the unstable situation prevailing in the
Middle East, we still cannot help but question whether
draft resolution S/14832/Rev. 1 would in fact contribute to a real solution of the problem. My delegation was therefore obliged to abstain in the voting on
this draft resolution.

. 189. It is also a great privilege to offer, on behalf
of my Government,
our sincere congratulations
to
Mr. Javier Pirez de CuCllar on his appointment to the
post of Secretary-General.
A statesman of proven
wisdom and integrity, Mr. P&-ez de Cukllar has a long
and distinguished association with the United Nations
beginning in 197 I with his appointment as Peru’s repre-

195. The PRESIDENT
,yicrn): The representative
and I now call on him.
I7

(interprettrtion

from

Rlrs-

of Israel has asked to speak

196, Mr. BLUM (Israel): In my statements in the
course of this debate I have repeatedly pointed out
that a balanced approach required in the deliberations
on any aspect of the Arab-Israeli conflict cannot be
.achieved in the contentious atmosphere prevailing in
the Council. Israel’s adversaries view the Council
-and, for that matter, the United Nations in generalmerely as a forum to promote their confrontational
approach and seek all along to exploit the Council’s
proceedings in their relentless and ongoing warfare
against my country.
197. 1 cannot but express astonishment that certain
members of the Council, and especially certain permanent members, should have seen fit to abet the
campaign waged by Israel’s enemies in the Organization by abstaining on a draft resolution that studiously and deliberately avoided any reference to a
negotiated and peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict and that instead singled out for condemnation Israel, the target of Arab aggression. Irrespective
of their motives-be
it indifference,
expediency
01
any other motive-one
cannot but wonder whether
these countries which have remained on the sidelines
of the entire peace process in the Middle East are
genuinely interested in its success.
198. The time has surely come for all here to recognize that exercises of this kind do not and cannot
contribute to the promotion of peace in our region.
That &jective can be attained only through honest
dialogue and negotiation and not by deliberations
conducted in anatmosphere of incitement and rancour.
199. It is in this spirit that I appeal once again to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of
the Government of Israel to abandon the path of
confrontation and hatred and to face up at long last to
the realities of the region, I express once again Israel’s
readiness to start immediately and without any prior
conditions negotiations to settle all the outstanding
issues between our two countries within the framework of Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Israel sincerely hopes that this time our appeal will not
fall on deaf ears and wilt not go unheeded.
200. The PRESIDENT
(interpretution
frwrn RLLSsitrn): The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
has asked to speak and I call on him.
201. hlr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
The annals of the Council should register the veto cast
today by the United States of America as a supreme
act of irony, a clear dichotomy between words and
deeds, between obligations
undertaken
under the
Charter of the United Nations and the non-observance of those same obligations. The outcome of this
voting has totally and fully unmasked the real face
of the United States which, along with other States, is
entrusted to act as guarantor of the Charter, protector
of the Charter and of the international
system and, if
l may use the word of the representative
of Zaire,
as arbiter.

202. To abuse the power of veto, to aim at ilggra*
Wing a situation the consequences of which threaten
the very foundation
of world order is to alert th’e
world at large that there exist in this very Council-in
this case the United States-members
whose task is to
perpetuate the partition of the United Nations into
dominators
and dominated.
By protecting the aggressor against its victims, by flouting fundamenta!
principles of international
law for which the United
Nations was purposefully created, by procrastinating
the efforts to devise mandatory
measures under
Chapter VII against the aggressor, these same Council members
are openly demonstrating
negligence,
not to say a degree of irresponsibility,
in evading the
compact that they have signed and ratified, in good
faith, I hope.
203. We have seen the same outrageous behaviour.
by the United States particularly,
with regard to the
just struggle of the African people against ~/pc~/hc*id;
we have witnessed it in the case of Namibia: we have
witnessed it in the case of aggression against Angola:
and now we are suffering it ourselves in this most
recent Zionist act of aggression against our sovereignty
and territorial
integrity, aggression sustained by the
United States. No wonder we, the peoples of the world
-1 am using the words of the Charter-can
become
cynical about the role of the Council and doubt its
powers, sincerity, good faith and credibility, pal-ticularly after the veto of the United States.
204. Despite the United States veto and the hesit*
tions demonstrated
by others to punish an act of a!$gression which they had previously considered as “null
and void” and requiring appropriate
measures and
which they had previously agreed to challenge-despite all that we take this opportunity to pay homage
to those non-aligned members whose painful colonial
experiences were vivid enough for them not only to
condemn the Israeli aggression, but also to identify
with our grievances and thus express their full solidarity and support and this not only for the sake of the
Syrian Arab Republic, by upholding, defending and
articulating
the pertinent provisions of the Charter in
this and similar situations. Our vetoed resolution
embodies the joint efforts of those same members
whose deep sense of justice and whose commitment
to the Charter prompted them to devise the appropriate
measures against Israel.
205. If we have not lost all hope in the United Nations
system and in the Council in particular, it is because
the non-aligned
countries, the Islamic countries, the
socialist countries and China have been consistent in
upholding
a principled
position against aggression.
We are likewise highly gratified and impressed bY
the consistent and principled position of Spain which,
whenever faced with a world problem, has never failed
to stand on the side of justice.
206.
lution

And yet our resolution-and
I consider it a resoand the American veto does not count, the

-

majority of world public opinion is with us-today
stands vetoed and that primarily thanks to the United
States whose influence, intrigues and pressures were
only too obvious, too oppressive for any but a few to
miss and few resisted them. It is true that the United
States voted in favour of resolution 497 (1981) of
December last. Need we thank the United States for
conceding that annexation of territory by force is
inadmissible
and that that is a cardinal principle of
international
law? The question of the annexation of
the Syrian Golan Heights surely does not rest on that
recognition, but rather on the will of the United States
to join in collective measures in order to eliminate both
the Israeli occupation and annexation. Instead of
condemning
the act and punishing it, the United
States is now claiming that, since it was carried out
without the use of force, that annexation does not
deserve the sanctions, for in its distorted logic it does
not constitute an act of aggression but an ordinary
legislative act.

does not reflect the mood of the rest of the world, nor
should it set the tone in the Council. We have learned
to regard United States-Israeli bickering as private
-that is, until such time as the United States and every
single American citizen will curse the day.
211, The suspension of the strategic agreement between the United States and Israel on the ground that
Israel had violated the spirit of that agreement did not
fool us, nor did it hurt the Israeli establishment, for it
did not for a single day deprive Israel of anything.
Concomitant with that act, the United States reaffirmed
that it would continue to support Israel with assistance
that amounts to $2.5 billion a year-and that is official
assistance. Had the United States really wished to
punish its vassal entity to regain some credibility in
our region it would have abrogated outright the strategic agreements, particularly since all Arab States
have condemned it because the alliance is meant to
constitute a framework for aggression against the
Arab nation in general and those Arab countries that
are determined to safeguard their freedom, independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity against
Israel’s so-called expansionist
and annexationist
policies.

207. Yet those who are today trying to absolve
Israel-and
in this case the United States-of most
of its recent acts of aggression are in fact helping it
‘to legitimize
and prolong its occupation not only of
the Syrian Golan Heights but of other occupied Arab
territories. If the Israeli occupation of the Golan, of the
West Bank and of Gaza has lasted for I5 years, is that
the fault of the victim or of the Israeli policy of territorial aggrandizement?

212. The so-called suspension turned out to be a
device through which t.he United States attempted to
absorb for a while the wrath of the Arab people and
their Governments as a result of the Israeli annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights. Furthermore, the
United States’ deceptive manoeuvres had no effect
on Arab determination
to exert all efforts to liberate
their occupied territories in Palestine and outside it.
The organic ties between the United States and Israel
are today as strong as ever. Did not the Secretary
of State, Mr, Haig, respond to Begin’s insulting words
“You have no moral right to preach to us about civilian casualties” by stating, “Israel has been, is today
and will remain a close friend of the United States”‘?
He said that on CBS television. That is Mr. Haig’s
answer to Mr. Begin’s insult. Haig added that President Reagan, probably more than his predecessors,
understood the “vital importance of our obligations
to the people of Israel and guarantee to the survival of
that State”. In the same CBS interview he said, “The
long-standing
United States policy towards Israel
has been in the interest not only of Israel but of the
United States of America”.

208. To our astonishment, not to say our horror, the
United States delegation is reported to have claimed
that the Israeli answer to the Secretary-General
contained a positive element since in that reply Israel
claims that the Golan Heights law “does not preclude
or impair negotiations”
[S/1482/, ptrrtr. 31. I would
ask the members of the Council which country on
earth can accept blackmail from an enemy that has
annexed its territories, which are under occupation.
209. We have repeatedly stated that Syria will never
capitulate to diktat nor shall we rest until we liberate
all pccupied
Arab territories,
including Jerusalem
and the Golan Heights. The United States delegation’s argument that annexation is a legislative act
converts the principle of the non-acquisition of terri. tory by force into a negotiable principle in violation
of all norms. Therefore, both the United States and
Israel are blackmailing
Syria to make it surrender its
rights as well as those of the people of Palestine to a
colonial entity born of aggression and violence. It
suffices to remind the Council of the Camp David
conspiracy,
of the Camp David system, which is
stained with our blood and the blood of the Palestinian
people.

213. We wonder: who is the vassal? To solve this
dilemma we would quote an editorial of The Ne~tj
I’o& Tiww.s of 22 December 1981 on the very soulsearching sub.ject of reaching the point of double
loyalty. ” ‘You are trying to make Israel a hostage,’
Mr. Begin cries. The fact is that Israel and the United
States are hostages each to the other”.

210. The family quarrel between the United States
and Israel is by now resolved, forgiven or forgotten.
It has escalated at times and Washington, acting as
the adult partner, has continued to turn the other
cheek. Whatever these family members may opt to do

214. In the light of this veto, I should like to state
the following. It has been claimed that the United
States has 99 per cent of the chances to establish a just
peace in our region. But what we know to be the truth
19

is that the United States actually has 99 Per cent of the
chances to create conditions to trigger, through Israel,
another conflagration. It has been claimed that the
United States was to follow an even-handed Policy.
But the net result of this claim was manifested in the
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East.
JeruSa]em, the Iraqi nuclear reactor, the savage armed
Zlttack against civilian targets, particularly the raid
against Beirut, and, last but not least, the annexation
of the Syrian Golan Heights, point to the fact that
that even-handedness is a ploy in a vacuum where no
United States policy is a policy.
215. At no time in the Council did I hear a statement
by the representative of the United States on the
question
before us. I was only told that the United
States had taken note of my statement last week
[Z.QKI!~ u7wtinLys pa,vr. IY.51. But everyone present here
has a duty to take note of what I say: I am the victim.
I should like to remind the representative of the United
States of ;I statement made at the Twelfth Convention
of the Hebron Movement on 12 January 1975 by no
less a person than Begin. He said in his statement that
“Churchill, a great friend of Roosevelt, used to say:
‘One must always realize where the focus of power
and decision in the United States is.’ We can say
today from our observations and experience that it is
not true that, if we stand firm and act wisely, out of
love for the Jewish people and the land of Israel,
out of love and liberty and peace, we shall be in
conflict with America.”
Begin went on to say:
“From Israel’s viewpoint, one may say, if I may
borrow a phrase, that there are three Americas.
There is the State Department and in the State
Department there are the Arabists. They are prepared to sacrifice Israel’s security and future for
their theories. But, in addition to that America
-and it is a very small one-there are two other
Americas. One is represented by the two Houses of
Congress-the elected representatives of the great
American people. Since the State of Israel came into
existence. there has not yet been a Congress whose
two Houses have been more favourable to us than
this one. And then there is a third America-perhaps the America that matters most-the public
opinion Of a free country that is involved in crises
of human freedom and always overcomes them.”
216. We have read articles in which the United
States divides the world into two sectors; the free
world and the totalitarian and authoritarian world
1 wonder in which category Israel-a country whit{
occupied three Arab countries and the people and the
territory

Of Pa]eStine-fa]]S?

1 Shall answer

217. The PRES]nENT
(intr~./“‘c’ftttifJl~
./hJtJ!
f?tt.\,sio,T); The Secret;lry-General
has requested to make
;, statement and I have much pleasure in calling tjn
him.
218, The SECRETARY-GENERAL
(i/lfc’,p/‘r[~,ficlrr
,fiom Spani.vh): Mr. President.
I wish at the conclusion of this d&ate to express very special th:lnks
to you, Sir, and to all the members of the Council :ind
the other Speakers for the kind words of encouI’a&ment addressed to me. In reply. 1 wish to give the
Council every assurance that I shall do my utmost to
justify the trust placed in me and to fulfil my mand:itc
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

219. As a member of the Council in the past, 1 h:t\*c
had the experience of participating
in its deliberations
on various occasions, I am therefore fully aware of
the importance of the relationship between the COWIcil and the Secretary-General.
I shall endeavour
tr)
strengthen that relationship and do everything
passible to help the Council fulfil the fundamental
role
given it by the Charter. The letter and spirit of Chc
Charter will guide me in this undertaking.
220. I sincerely wish the Council success in resolving
the complex and difficult questions before it. This wish
is founded on the fervent yearning for peace which
inspires all human beings. I am convinced that, hy
preserving and enhancing its authority and effectivcness, the Council will be able to make a crucial contribution to the strengthening of the structure of peace.
221. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtntion
~5~77
/<ussio4: I thank the Secretary-General
for his statement.
1 should like to take this opportunity
to congratul:rtc
him on his birthday and to wish him every success anrl
good health.
222. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): I wish to assuage any
fears on the part of my colleagues by assuring thcnl
that 1 have no intention of making an additional statement on this occasion, since it would be fortuitous
and would overtax the precious time of the Council
at this late hour,
223. However, I wish to propose and request th;tt
the Council continue consideration of the item befc)re
us and that the next meeting be convened after fLirther.
consultations which the President may wish to car-ry
out at his discretion. This is prompted by overriding
considerations,
Thr

177erting

I’OW

at

7.20 p.,n.

NOTES

that for

You. Israel falls into the category of liberal occupytion or democratic Occupation according to your tradition and to Your Position, of which you are proud-and
You claim that YOU are the ally of Israe] and Israel is
your puppet.

’ (?ffiicicitrl Rrrw~I.s qf :iw Getwtr/
A.s.sc~III/~/~. Thirty-.vlc/h
sir?, f~wry
Mwtings,
33rd meeting,
para. 253.
Umted Nations, Twrrry Swk,~, vol. 75, NO. 973, p. 287.
.’ Final Act of the Conference
on Security
and Co-operation
Europe. signed at Helsinki on I August
I 975.
-I General Assembly resolution
217 A (III).

20

.YC \ -

in

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde enrier. Inrormez-vous
aup&
des ventes. New York ou Gcnkve.

sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agcnces
de votre libraire ou adresscz-vous
B : Nations

IiAK

OITAHH3.41[UW

COMO

HO:I.Y’lHTI~

CONSECUIR

NBAAHMII

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
tdas
pmcs de1 mundo. Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

DE LAS

OI’,‘I>EAHHEHHJdX

NACIONES

dbpositaires
du
Unies, Section

HAlIMlFi

UNIDAS

Unidas estan en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en
a su librero o dirijase a: Nacioncs
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas,
