General Assembly-Forty-second Session

246

42/79.

Question of New Caledonia

The General Assembly.
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,n
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 41/41 A of 2 December
1986 by which the Assembly considered that, in the light
of the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter of the
United Nations and General Assembly resolutions
1514(XV) and 1541 (XV), New Caledonia was a NonSelf-Governing Territory within the meaning of the
Charter,
Noting the decision adopted by the Special Committee
on the question of New Caledonia on 17 March 1987, 30 as
well as the resolution adopted hy the Special Commi1tee
on 14August 1987,3 1
Noting also the section relating to New Caledoma in the
communique issued at the conclusion of the eighteenth
South Pacific Forum. held al Apia on 29 and 30 May
1987, 32 and in particular the call for a United Nationssponsored referendum in the Territor\ consistent with the
universally accepted principles and practices of self.
determination and independenct:,
Noting further the provisions concerning New Caledonia contained in the Political Declaration adopted by the
Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries. held at Harare from I to 6 September 1986, 13
Conscious ,if the responsib1hty of the administering
Power to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples in respect of New Caledonia,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaming the situation in the small
Te~ritories an? considering I hat the possibility of sending
a v1s1tmg m1ss1O11 to New Caledonia at an appropriate time
should be kept under review.
I. ,1pproves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Ne\\
Caledonia;
2. R~affirms the inalienable nght oft he people of Ne\\
Caledoma to self-determ111at1on and mdependence in conformity with the Declarat10n on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countrie, and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms that an obligation exists on the part of the
Government of France to transmit information on New
Caledonia under Chapter XI of the Charter of the U111ted
Nations and requests that Government to transmit to the
Secretary-General such information as is called for under
Chapter XI and in the related decisiom of the General A,sembly;

30 Officiul Record, rf Ilic (Jcn(n1/ ,1\wmhlv Fortv-1,ecomi .)'n,w11
Suffle,ment No. 23 (A/42/21), char IX, rara _i,
•
For the text, set' Official Rfford, ,>/ the (,,•11cr,,I A11,·mhlv, Fortv
1econd.Snsion.S11ppleme111 \11 23,/\.4'.211,,hap IX.para (2X.draf1

re,olut1011 I.
32 See A/42/417, anne,
)l A/41/097-S/18.192, ,m11,·, "'' I I'""'' I~<J l'i:'

4. Regrets that the Government of France has not re~ponded to the request to submit such information and
calls upon it to do so;
5. Considers that, consistent with the principles laid
down in its resolution 1514 (XV), the peaceful transition
of New Caledonia to self-determination and independence
should be undertaken in a manner which guarantees the
rights and interests of the people of New Caledonia;
6. Declares that progress towards a long-term political
solution in New Caledonia requires a free and genuine act
of self-determination consistent with United Nations principles and practices of self-determination and independence;
7. Emphasizes that such an act of self-determination,
in which all options should be made available, should be
preceded by a comprehensive programme of political education in which all options are impartially presented and
consequences fully explained;
8. Calls upon the Government of France to resume dialogue with all sections of the population of New Caledonia in order to facilitate rapid progress towards such an
act of self-determination in which all sections of the community participate;
9. Affirms the responsibility of the administering
Power to promote economic and social development and
calls upon the administering Power to institute programmes designed to benefit all the people throughout the
Territory;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a visiting mission to New Caledonia at
an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987

42/80. Question of Anguilla
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Anguilla,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 34
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Anguilla, including in particular General Assembly resolution 41/17 of 31 October 1986,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting that the Constitutional Review Committee,
which was appointed in October 1985, held a series of public meetings in 1986 in the Territory and with Anguillians
residing in the United States Virgin Islands, and noting
that the territorial Government recognizes the need to replace the outdated edition of the laws pertaining to the
Territory.

14 Ojji,·,al Records 1>/ tlie General Assemblv. Forty-second Se.uion
Supplement llio. 21 (A/42/2.1). chap,. Ill, IV and IX.

VII.

247

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering
Power to promote the economic and social development of
the Territory,
Noting that the economy of the Territory grew in 1985
mainly as a result of an expansion in tourism, and that,
while recommending restriction-; on foreign investment
and tourism, the Government of Anguilla recognizes the
importance of balanced sectoral growth and continues to
give the highest priority to the development of the Territory's economic and social infrastructure,
Expressing its concern at the illegal operation of foreign
fishing vessels within the territorial waters of Anguilla and
its offshore fishing banks and welcoming, in view of the
importance of the fishing industry to the diversification of
the economy, the intention oft he Government of Anguilla
to introduce appropnatc legislation to conserve the Territory's fish stocks,
Emphasizing the importance of elaborating an appropriate strategy for the efficient production and marketing of
salt,
Underlining the need for effective instruments to regulate the commercial banking system and noting in that
connection the Territory's decision to join the Eastern
Caribbean Central Bank,
Noting with satisfaction the contributions of the United
Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
to the development of the Territory,
Noting the continued participation of the Territory m
the Caribbean Group for Co-operation in Economic Development,
Recalling the dispatch in 1984 of a United Nations visit-·
ing mission to the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and considering that the possibility of sending
a further visiting mission to Anguilla at an appropriate
time should be kept under review,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantmg of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Anguilla;28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Anguilla to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to Anguilla;
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in Anguilla as will enable its people to exercise freely and without interference, from a well-informed standpoint as to the
available options, their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV), and all other relevant rcsolutmns of the
General Assembly;

5. Reaffinm that it is ultimately for the people of Anguilla themselves to determine freely their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration and, in
that connection, reaffirms the importance of fostering an
awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them in the exercise of their right to selfdetermination and independence;
6. Culls upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the Government nf Anguilla, to continue to
strengthen the economy of the Territory and to increase
its assistance to programmes of diversification;
7. Crges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue the assistance necessary to increase employment of the local population in the civil service, as well as in managerial, technical and other sectors of the economy;
8. Reiterates its request to the administering Power to
continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, as
well as other regional and international bodies, in the development and strengthening of the economy of Anguilla:
9. l 'rges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to take effective measures to safeguard, guarantee and ensure the rights of the
people ,if Anguilla to own and dispose of their natural resources and to establish and maintain control over their
future development;
10. Requests the administering Power to continue to
make every effort to facilitate and encourage the participation of the Territory in regional and international organizations. including the Economic Commission for Latin
Amenl·a and the Caribbean;
11
Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Anguilla
at an appropriate time and,in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third -;ession.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987

42/81.

Question of Montserrat

/'he General Assembly.
Hav111g considered the question of Montserrat,
Havmg examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,3 4
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Montserrat, including in particular General Assembly
resolution 41/21 of 31 October 1986,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
hearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Recalling the view of the Government of Montserrat
that independence was both inevitable and desirahlc, pro-
