S/PRST/2002/2

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 January 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4465th meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 January 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
The Security Council expresses its appreciation to H.E. Mr. Amara Essy,
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), as well as the
Ministers who participated in the Public Meeting on the “Situation in Africa”
on 29 January 2002 for their invaluable contributions to the debate on the
“Situation in Africa”.
The Security Council reaffirms the principles of political independence,
sovereignty, and territorial integrity of all States and their obligation to settle
their dispute by peaceful means.
The Security Council, recalling its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security as well as the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, underscores the importance
of partnership and enhanced coordination and cooperation, based on
complementarity and comparative advantage, between the United Nations, the
OAU and subregional organizations in Africa in the promotion of regional
peace and stability. It welcomes the decision of the OAU Summit held in
Lusaka in July 2001 to undertake a review of the structures, procedures and
working methods of the Central Organ of the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution (CPMR). It emphasizes the
importance of enhanced cooperation and of ensuring better coordination
between the United Nations and the OAU with the view to achieving a lasting
solution to conflicts. In this regard, it requests the Secretary-General to
encourage the United Nations Liaison Office to the OAU in Addis Ababa to
interact more closely with the OAU Mechanism for CPMR on the conflicts in
Africa. The Security Council expresses its readiness to deepen its cooperation
with the OAU and subregional organizations and invite them to inform it at the
earliest possible stage over their decisions and initiatives that could have
implications relating to its responsibilities under the Charter.
The Security Council calls on the United Nations system to intensify its
cooperation, including assistance within existing resources, to the OAU and
subregional organizations in Africa in the field of capacity-building,
particularly in early warning conflict prevention and peacekeeping. It also
02-23871 (E) 310102

*0223871*

S/PRST/2002/2

stresses the importance of effective interaction between the United Nations
system and the OAU and subregional organizations through the exchange of
information and analysis at the conflict prevention stage; coordination and
clear understanding of respective roles in forwarding peace processes; and
coordinated support to national and regional peace-building efforts. In this
regard, the Security Council welcomes the establishment of the United Nations
Office in West Africa and requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
measures for that Office to be fully operational.
The Security Council notes with satisfaction that good offices missions
carried out by prominent political leaders of Africa facilitated significant
progress in the political settlement of certain conflicts; it encourages the OAU
and subregional organizations, taking into account the specific situation of
conflicts, to seek appointment of such figures as Special Envoys as well as to
employ where appropriate the traditional methods of conflict resolution
including the establishment of Councils of Elders; the Security Council
stresses the importance of the preventive character of such efforts and
emphasizes the need for their proper coordination. The Security Council
stresses the specific needs of women and children in peace processes and
encourages the strengthening of the role of women and youth in the search for
solutions to conflicts in Africa.
The Security Council encourages the ongoing efforts undertaken by the
international community in addressing the root causes of conflicts in Africa as
indicated in the Report of the Secretary-General on the Causes of Conflicts and
the Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa
(A/52/871-S/1998/318). The Security Council, bearing in mind the linkages
between conflicts in Africa and inter alia poverty and development, the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, the problems of refugees and
internally displaced persons, the illegal exploitation of natural resources and,
social exclusion as a source of intra-State conflicts, reaffirms its continued
commitment in addressing these problems and encourages the OAU as well as
subregional organizations and international financial institutions to do
likewise. The Security Council stresses that the early resumption of
international cooperation and development aid to countries where a peace
process is being implemented is of critical importance for the success of this
peace process and further stresses the importance of the role of the donor
community and international financial institutions in this regard.
The Security Council stresses that good governance, democracy, rule of
law, and the respect of human rights and the fight against poverty are essential
for peace, stability and sustainable development in Africa. It also stresses the
importance of national reconciliation through dialogue in respective countries.
It expresses its strong support to the decisions of the OAU Heads of State and
Government at the Algiers Summit held in 1999 denying recognition to
Governments that come to power through unconstitutional means and notes
with satisfaction that this decision is being implemented. It reaffirms that
resolution of conflicts in Africa requires, above all, the political will and
courage of the parties themselves to seek peace.
The Security Council expresses concern over the effects of conflicts on
civilian population including violations of human rights, in particular those

2

S/PRST/2002/2

affecting the most vulnerable groups such as the elderly, women and children.
It emphasizes the responsibility of States concerned to put an end to impunity
and prosecute those responsible for such acts.
The Security Council underlines the need to address the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons which in addition to humanitarian
consequences constitute a burden on the affected countries and which may
become a source of conflict. It notes the shortfall in funding for refugee and
internally displaced persons programmes in Africa and reiterates its call upon
the international community to provide such programmes with the necessary
financial resources, taking into account the substantial needs in Africa.
The Security Council, recalling its resolution 1308 of 17 July 2000, inter
alia recognizing that the HIV/AIDS pandemic is also exacerbated by the
conditions of violence and instability and constitutes a potential risk to
stability and security, reiterates that the pandemic, if unchecked, may pose a
risk to stability and security. The Council urges the international community
and donors to coordinate their efforts in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
The Security Council reiterates the importance of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) in the process of conflict resolution
and post-conflict peace-building, and notes the lack of adequate resources for
effective reintegration programmes. In this regard, it urges the international
community to support such programmes, including through the implementation
of quick-impact projects.
The Security Council notes that African States can contribute to peace
and security in the continent by implementing transparency and confidencebuilding measures. In this regard, the Security Council reiterates its call on all
States to implement the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects.
The Security Council welcomes the participation of the Economic and
Social Council (ECOSOC) to its Public Meeting on the Situation in Africa on
29 January 2002. It reaffirms the importance of strengthening its cooperation,
through greater interaction, with the ECOSOC, in accordance with Article
LXV of the Charter of the United Nations, in the area of the prevention of
armed conflicts, including in addressing the economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian problems. The Security Council, taking note of the time it
devotes to discussing African conflicts and the specificity of the problems of
Africa, underlines that economic rehabilitation and reconstruction constitute
important elements in the long-term development of post-conflict societies and
the maintenance of lasting peace and calls for greater international assistance
in this regard. The Security Council expresses its resolve to seek to establish
the political conditions for non-recurrence of a particular conflict before
withdrawing any peacekeeping operation.
The Security Council commends and supports the efforts of African
countries within the framework of the fight against international terrorism.
The Security Council welcomes the ongoing transformation of the OAU
into the African Union and encourages and supports the principles of the New
Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) to create the conditions for

3

S/PRST/2002/2

development and to enhance economic integration in Africa. It recognizes that
sound economic policies will further enhance peace and stability in the region.
It calls upon the donor countries and the Bretton Woods institutions to
continue assisting Africa in implementing the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
initiatives and to work with African governments, through the NEPAD, to
create necessary conditions to attract and mobilize public and private sector
resources in support of economic growth and poverty reduction.
The Security Council notes the usefulness of its meeting with the
Secretary-General of OAU and stresses the importance of holding such
consultations on a regular basis, at least once a year, in the future.
The Security Council recognizes the need for adequate measures to
prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa, and will consider the setting up of an
ad hoc Working Group to monitor the above recommendations and to enhance
coordination with ECOSOC.

4
