A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/166
30 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 155
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/52/654)]
52/166. A m e n d m e n t t o a r t i c l e 1 3 o f t h e s t a t u t e o f t h e U n i t e d N a t i o n s
Administrative Tribunal
The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General dated 17 September 1997 entitled "Amendment
to article 13 of the statute of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal",1
Noting the proposal of the International Court of Justice referred to in that note that the statute of the
Tribunal should be modified to provide for the exercise of its competence in respect of the staff of the
Registry of the International Court of Justice,
Recognizing that the competence of the Tribunal in United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund cases, as
approved by the General Assembly in resolution 955 (X) of 3 November 1955, is not reflected in the statute
of the Tribunal,
Noting the proposal of the Secretary-General, set out in the note, to amend the statute of the Tribunal
by providing that its competence may be extended to international organizations and entities participating in
the common system of conditions of service,
Desiring to amend the statute of the Tribunal in accordance with the proposals referred to in the note
by the Secretary-General,
Convinced of the desirability of reviewing more generally the provisions of the statute of the Tribunal
at an early date,

1

A/52/142/Add.1.

98-76483

/...

A/RES/52/166
Page 2

1. Decides to amend article 13 of the statute of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal, with effect
from 1 January 1998, as follows:
(a) The following new paragraphs shall be added as paragraphs 1, 2 and 4:
"1. The competence of the Tribunal shall be extended to the staff of the Registry of the
International Court of Justice upon the exchange of letters between the President of the Court and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations establishing the relevant conditions.
"2. The Tribunal shall be competent to hear and pass judgement upon applications alleging
non-observance of the regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund arising out of the
decision of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board submitted to the Tribunal by:
"(a) Any staff member of a member organization of the Pension Fund which has accepted the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal in Pension Fund cases who is eligible under article 21 of the regulations
of the Fund as a participant in the Fund, even if his employment has ceased, and any person who
has acceded to such staff member's rights upon his death;
"(b) Any other person who can show that he is entitled to rights under the regulations of the
Pension Fund by virtue of the participation in the Fund of a staff member of such member
organization.
"4. The competence of the Tribunal may also be extended, with the approval of the General
Assembly, to any other international organization or entity established by a treaty and participating
in the common system of conditions of service, upon the terms set out in a special agreement
between the organization or entity concerned and the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Each
such special agreement shall provide that the organization or entity concerned shall be bound by
the judgements of the Tribunal and be responsible for the payment of any compensation awarded
by the Tribunal in respect of a staff member of that organization or entity and shall include,
inter alia, provisions concerning its participation in the administrative arrangements for the
functioning of the Tribunal and concerning its sharing the expenses of the Tribunal.";
(b) The text of former article 13 shall become paragraph 3 of amended article 13;
2. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session an item entitled "Review
of the statute of the Administrative Tribunal of the United Nations".
72nd plenary meeting
15 December 1997
