VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

41/103.

Status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and
ratification the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its
subsequent resolutions on the status of the Convention,
Reaffirming its conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principies of the Charter
of the United Nations, a gross violation of human rights
anda crime against humanity, seriously threatening international peace and security,
Alarmed by the aggravation of the situation in South
Africa, in particular the further escalation of ruthless
repression by the Fascist-like apartheid régime, including
the use of the armed forces against the opposing people
and the imposition of virtual martial-law conditions intended to facilitate the brutal oppression of the black
population,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued policy of
apartheid and its continued illegal occupation ofNamibia,
as well as its policy of destabilization, including numerous
acts of aggression against Angola and other African
States,
Mindful of Commission on Human Rights resolution
1986/7 of 28 February 1986, 31 in which the Commission
expressed its conviction that the crime of apartheid is a
form of the crime of genocide,
Condemning the continued collaboration of certain
States and transnational corporations with the racist
régime of South Africa in the political, economic, military
and other fields as an encouragement to the intensification
of its odious policy of apartheid,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid, racism and colonialism and for the effective exercise of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
demands more than ever ali necessary support by the intemational community and, in particular, further action
by the Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations,
Underlining that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and the implementation of its
provisions without delay are necessary for its effectiveness,
and therefore will contribute to the eradication of the
crime of apartheid,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the status of the lnternational Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;42
2. Commends those States parties to the Convention
that have submitted their reports under article VII
thereof;
3. Appeals once again to those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or to accede to the Convention without
further delay, in particular those States that have jurisdiction over transnational corporations operating in South
Africa and Namibia and without whose co-operation such
operations cannot be halted;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Group of Three of the Commission on Human Rights, established in accordance with article IX ofthe Convention,
4 2 A/41/512.

167

and, in particular, of the conclusions and recommendations contained in that report; 43
5. Draws the attention of ali States to the opinion expressed by the Group of Three in its report that transnational corporations operating in South Africa and Namibia must be considered accomplices in the crime of
apartheid, in accordance with article 111 (b) of the Convention;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to intensify, in co-operation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid, its efforts to compile periodically the
progressive Iist of individuals, organizations, institutions
and representatives of States deemed responsible for
crimes enumerated in article II ofthe Convention, as well
as those against whom legal proceedings have been undertaken;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
above-mentioned list to ali States parties to the Convention and ali Member States and to bring such facts to the
attention of the public by ali means of mass communication;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the States
parties to the Convention, the specialized agencies and
non-govemmental organizations to provide the Commission on Human Rights with relevant information conceming the forros of the crime of apartheid, as described in article II of the Convention, committed by transnational
corporations operating in South Africa;
9. Notes the importance of measures to be taken by
States parties in the field of teaching and education for
fuller implementation of the Convention;
10. Appeals to ali States, United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and intemational and national nongovernmental organizations to step up their activities in
enhancing public awareness by denouncing the crimes
committed by the racist régime of South Africa;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts, through appropriate channels, to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
view to promoting further ratification of or accession to
the Convention;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution
3380 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/104.

Status of the lnternational Convention on the
Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolution
40/26 of 29 November 1985,
Expressing its satisfaction at the entry into force, on
3 December 1982, of the competence of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to receive and
consider communications from individuals or groups of
individuals under article 14 of the Intemational Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, 3

4 3 E/CN.4/1986/30, sect V

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

168

l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination; 44
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the number ofStates that
have ratified the Convention or acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification
of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and
implementation ofits provisions are necessary for the realization of the objectives of the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination; 45

4. Requests those States that have not yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Calls upon the States parties to the Convention to
consider the possibility of making the declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session a report concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance with
Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/105.

Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and resolution 41/104 of 4 December 1986 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of Ali Forms ofRacial Discrimination, 3 as well as its other
relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,46
Mindful of the obligation of ali States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Aware of the importance of the contribution of the Committee to the implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and to the elimination of ali forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin,
Further aware of the need to intensify the struggle for
the elimination of racism and racial discrimination
throughout the world, especially the elimination of apartheid in South Africa and Namibia,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General
concerning the work ofthe Committee, 47 which states, inter alia, that the Committee was unable to hold its thirtyfourth session in August 1986 as planned because of the
lack of financia! means, as a consequence of the failure of
many States parties to the Convention to pay their contributions under article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention,
Recalling the appeal made at the tenth meeting of the
States parties to the Convention 48 to States parties to honour their financia! obligations under the Convention, as
well as other appeals on the same subject,
1. Expresses its grave concern that, for the above reason, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Dis-

44 A/41/508.
4 5 Resolution 38/14.
46 /bid., annex.
47 A/41/561 and Add.l.

48 See CERD/SP/24.

crimination was unable to hold its thirty-fourth session
and to carry out its obligations in the course of 1986 and
that, consequently, it could not submit an annual report to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
2. Commends the Committee for its work in the past
with regard to the implementation of the International
Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial
Discrimination and the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
3. Calls upon States parties to comply fully with their
obligation under article 9, paragraph 1, ofthe Convention
and to submit in due time their periodic reports on measures taken to implement the Convention;
4. Appeals urgently to States parties to fulfil their financia! obligations under article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention so as to enable the Committee to resume its work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To consider making an urgent appeal, by telex, to
States parties to fulfil their financia) obligations with regard to the Committee in order to enable it to resume its
work;
(b) To transmit notices of assessment for 1987 to
States parties as soon as possible, urging them to pay their
contributions;
(e) To explore ali appropriate avenues to enable the
Committee to meet in 1987, even iffor a shorter duration
and at a reduced cost;
(d) To consider convoking, if necessary and within
available resources, a meeting of States parties during the
first regular session of 1987 of the Economic and Social
Council, so that they can take stock of the level of assessed
contributions and make recommendations on the future
work of the Committee;
(e) To report on the situation to the General Assembly
at its forty-second session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/106.

lmplementation of the World Programme of
Action concerning Disabled Persons and
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its pertinent resolutions, including resolution 37 /52 of 3 December 1982, by which it adopted the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons,49 and resolution 37/53 of 3 December 1982, by
which, inter alia, it proclaimed the period 1983-1992 the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 40/31 of 29 November 1985 and
reaffirming ali of its relevant provisions,
Noting with satisfaction the concrete measures already
carried out by the Governments of Member States, the
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations to implement the objectives of the World Programme of Action within the
framework ofthe United Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the United
Nations system and by non-governmental organizations

40
A/37/351/Add.l
recommendat1on 1 (IV)

and

Add.1/Corr.l,

annex.

sect. VIII,
