S/PV.7125

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7125th meeting

Monday, 3 March 2014, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Ogwu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-25046 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1425046*

Ukraine

S/PV.7125

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.

General expressed grave concern about the continuing
tense situation that could compromise the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
He reiterated that it was critical to restore calm and
proceed to an immediate de-escalation of the situation
and asked for cool heads to prevail. The SecretaryGeneral appealed to President Putin to urgently engage
in direct dialogue with the authorities in Kyiv.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

03/03/2014

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Since the briefing by the
Deputy Secretary-General to the Security Council on
1 March 2014 (see S/PV.7124), the situation in Ukraine
has continued to evolve rapidly. We understand that
there is a continuing build-up of Russian troops in
Crimea and that a number of Ukrainian military bases
have been surrounded by Russian troops. In addition,
the situation in eastern Ukraine remains fluid, with
reports of demonstrations in certain cities and attempts
by local groups to seize control of some official
buildings.

As members of the Council know, the SecretaryGeneral has repeated emphasized that it is critical
that full respect for and preservation of Ukraine’s
independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity be ensured. He has underscored the utmost
importance of restoring calm in order to de-escalate
tensions immediately through dialogue. He has stressed
that, in the spirit of the United Nations Charter, we
should all adhere to the principles of the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
Following the Security Council’s consultation on
Saturday and given the developments on the ground
in Ukraine, the Secretary-General asked Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson to travel to Ukraine
on Sunday. While in Ukraine, the Deputy SecretaryGeneral will be personally apprised of the facts on
the ground and will subsequently brief the SecretaryGeneral on the next steps the United Nations could
take to support the de-escalation of the situation. The
Deputy Secretary-General arrived in Kyiv today and
has already begun his meetings. Robert Serry, who
briefed the Secretary-General yesterday in Geneva on
his recent mission to Ukraine, joined Mr. Eliasson in
Kyiv today.

On Sunday, 2 March, Ukraine’s Parliament urged
Russia to fulfil immediately the terms of the agreement
on its Black Sea fleet’s temporary presence in Ukraine’s
territory and called for the rapid withdrawal of Russian
troops to their bases. The Russian position on events
was articulated by Foreign Minister Lavrov in remarks
made today in the Human Rights Council. Foreign
Minister Lavrov stated that Russia’s actions in relation
to Ukraine were “a question of defending our citizens
and compatriots and ensuring human rights”.

Over the past 48 hours, the Secretary-General has
spoken to a number of key people, including Prime
Minister Cameron, President Hollande, President Putin,
European Union High Representative Ashton and the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Burkhalter,
as well as OSCE Secretary General Zannier. He also
met with Foreign Minister Lavrov today in Geneva.
In all these calls and meetings, the Secretary-General
reiterated the urgent need for coordination in support of
a stable and united Ukraine.

The Secretary-General has remained closely
engaged on the situation in Ukraine. In the latest
telephone conversation with President Putin over the
weekend, on 1 March, the Secretary-General told him
that he was closely following the serious and rapidly
unfolding developments in Ukraine. The Secretary-

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call for dialogue to de-escalate the tensions
immediately. As the Secretary-General has underscored
in his calls to world leaders, all of us share the urgent
responsibility to assist in finding a peaceful resolution
in a collaborative effort.

2/20

14-25046

Ukraine

03/03/2014

The President (spoke in French):
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation initiated the
convening of today’s meeting of the Security Council
because events in our brotherly neighbour Ukraine
raise deep concerns for us. The crisis provoked by the
State coup in Kyiv as a result of the armed takeover by
radical extremists continues to deteriorate and generate
very serious threats to the future of that country.
Today in Geneva our Minister for Foreign Affairs
Lavrov spoke in detail about the situation in Ukraine. We
are convinced that any internal crisis must be overcome
through a dialogue held among all political forces and
ethnic and denominational groups in a constititional
framework and in accordance with international
obligations, including most importantly those related
to international humanitarian law, in defence of human
rights and the rights of national minorities.
We must decisively sideline those extremists seeking
to take control of the situation through illegal methods,
violence and open terror. We all know who unleashed
the crisis in Ukraine. By disputing the unequivocally
legal actions of the legitimate authorities, some of
our partners have chosen to support anti-Government
statements and encouraged participants to move to
forceful aggression by capturing and setting fire to
administrative buildings, attacking the police, stealing
from warehouses, mocking regional officials and
launching crude attacks against churches. The centre
of Kyiv and many towns in western Ukraine have been
overrun by armed national radicals chanting extremist
anti-Russian and anti-Semitic slogans.
On 21 February, almost three months after the
onset of the unrest and excesses, an agreement was
reached between the President of Ukraine and the
opposition. It was signed by the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs of Germany, France and Poland. The authorities
have refused to declare a state of emergency. They
have removed the law authorities from the streets. The
opposition has done nothing. They have not surrendered
their illegal weapons. The civic buildings and streets
of Kyiv have not been restored to order. The radicals
continue to control the towns.
Instead of the promised establishment of a
Government of national unity, a so-called Government

S/PV.7125

of victors has been formed. The Parliament of
Ukraine took a decision limiting the language rights
of minorities; they have disbanded the judges of the
Constitutional Court and insisted on their criminal
prosecution. Demands have been made to limit or
criminalize the use of the Russian language, to ban
undesirable political parties and to make examples of
them. The victors wish to exploit the fruits of their
victory to trample the rights and basic freedoms of the
people.
All of this has alarmed the authorities of eastern
and southern Ukraine and the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea, home to millions of Russians who do not wish
to see such developments in their regions. In a situation
of ongoing threats of violence by ultranationalists
against the security, lives and legitimate interests of
Russians and all Russian-speaking peoples, popular
self-defence brigades have been established. They have
already put down attempts to take over administrative
buildings in Crimea by force and to funnel weapons and
ammunition into the peninsula. We have information
about the preparation of new provocations, including
against the Russian Black Sea fleet in Ukraine.
In such circumstances, the legitimately elected
authorities of the Republic have asked the President
of Russia to help them to restore calm in Crimea.
Such assistance is entirely legitimate under Russian
law, given the extraordinary situation in Ukraine and
the threat posed to Russian citizens, our compatriots,
and the Black Sea fleet of the Russian Federation in
Ukraine. The President of Russia therefore went before
the Federation Council to request that the Russian
armed forces be permitted to deploy in the territory of
Ukraine until the civic and political situation there has
been normalized. On 1 March, the Federation Council
supported that appeal, which we hope will sideline
the radicals. I repeat, the issue is one of defending our
citizens and compatriots, as well as the most import
human right — the right to life.
Today, I am also authorized to say that the President
of Russia has received the following request from
President Yanukovich:
“As the legitimately elected President of
Ukraine, I wish to inform you that events in my
country and capital have placed Ukraine on
the brink of civil war. Chaos and anarchy reign
throughout the country. The lives, security and
rights of the people, particularly in the southeast and in Crimea, are under threat. Open acts

14-250463/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

of terror and violence are being committed under
the influence of Western countries. People are
being persecuted on the basis of their language
and political beliefs. I therefore call on President
Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin of Russia to use the
armed forces of the Russian Federation to establish
legitimacy, peace, law and order and stability in
defence of the people of Ukraine.”
The letter is signed by President Yanukovich and dated
1 March. For all who may wish to see it, I have with me
a photocopy of the original letter from the President of
Ukraine to the President of Russia.
Those who seek to interpret this situation as a
form of aggression and are threatening sanctions and
boycotts of all kinds are the very partners who have
consistently encouraged political forces close to them
to engage in ultimatums, to reject dialogue, to ignore
the concerns of southern and eastern Ukraine, and
ultimately to polarize Ukrainian society. We call on
them to adopt a responsible approach, to set aside
geopolitical calculations and to place the interests of
the Ukrainian people above all else. The obligations
undertaken in the 21 February agreement, including
the launch of a constitutional reform process with the
participation and full consideration of the opinions
of all regions of Ukraine, must be honoured, and
their outcome submitted for approval in a national
referendum, as well as the establishment of a legitimate
Government of national unity that takes the interests of
all political forces and regions of Ukraine into account.
The Russian position has been and remains
consistent and open. While the Ukraine is merely a
geopolitical playground for some Western politicians,
for us it is a brotherly country to which we are bound by
many centuries of common history. Russia is interested
in a stable and strong Ukraine where the legitimate
rights and interests of the Ukrainians, our compatriots
and all citizens are protected. In this extraordinary
situation, which is not of our making and in which the
lives and security of the inhabitants of Crimea and
south-eastern Ukraine are under genuine threat from
the irresponsible and provocative acts of gangs and
ultranationalist elements, we emphasize once again that
Russia’s actions are entirely appropriate and legitimate.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Listening
to the representative of Russia, one might think that
Moscow had just become the rapid response arm of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. So many of the assertions made
4/20

03/03/2014

this afternoon by the representative of the Russian
Federation are without basis in reality. Let us begin
with a clear and candid assessment of the facts.
It is a fact that Russian military forces have taken
over Ukrainian border posts. It is a fact that Russia has
taken over the ferry terminal in Kerch. It is a fact that
Russian ships are moving in and around Sevastopol. It
is a fact that Russian forces are blocking the mobile
telephone services in some areas. It is a fact that Russia
has surrounded or taken over practically all Ukrainian
military facilities in Crimea. It is a fact that, today,
Russian jets entered Ukrainian airspace. It is also a
fact that independent journalists continue to report that
there is no evidence of violence against Russian or proRussian communities.
Russian military action is not a human rights
protection mission. It is a violation of international
law and of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the independent nation of Ukraine and a breach of
Russia’s Helsinki commitments and its United Nations
obligations. The central issue is whether the recent
change of Government in Ukraine constitutes a danger
to Russia’s legitimate interests of such a nature and
extent that Russia is justified in intervening militarily in
Ukraine, seizing control of public facilities and issuing
military ultimatums to elements of the Ukrainian
military.
The answer of course is no. The Russian military
are secure. The new Government in Kyiv has pledged
to honour all of its existing international agreements,
including those covering Russian bases. Russian
mobilization is a response to an imaginary threat.
A second issue is whether the population of Crimea
or other parts of eastern Ukraine are at risk because
of the new Government. There is no evidence of that.
Military action cannot be justified on the basis of threats
that have not been made and are not being carried
out. There is no evidence, for example, that churches
in eastern Ukraine are being or will be attacked. The
allegation is without basis. There is no evidence that
ethnic Russians are in danger. On the contrary, the new
Ukrainian Government has placed a priority on internal
reconciliation and political inclusivity.
Acting President Turchynov has made clear his
opposition to any restriction on the use of the Russian
tongue. No one has to explain to Ukraine’s new
Government the need to have open communications
not only with leaders of the country’s Russian ethnic

14-25046

03/03/2014

Ukraine

majority in the Crimea and elsewhere but also with its
neighbours. That is why, when the current crisis began,
the Government sent its former chief of defence to the
region to try to defuse the situation. A second emissary
was prevented from entering the Crimean Verkhovna
Rada to engage in discussions. It is why the Ukrainian
authorities have repeatedly reached out to Russia.
Russia needs to reciprocate and to begin to engage
directly with the Government of Ukraine.
I note that Russia has implied a right to take
military action in the Crimea if invited to do so by
the Prime Minister of Crimea. As the Government
of Russia well knows, that has no legal basis. The
prohibition on the use of force would be rendered moot
were subnational authorities able to unilaterally invite
military intervention by a neighbouring State. Under
the Ukrainian Constitution, only the Ukrainian Rada
can approve the presence of foreign troops.
If we are concerned about the rights of the Russianspeaking minorities, the United States is prepared to
work with Russia and the Council to protect them.
We have proposed and wholeheartedly support the
immediate deployment of international observers and
monitors from the United Nations or the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to
ensure that the people about whom Russia expresses
such concern are protected from abuse and to elucidate
for the world the facts on the ground. The solution to
the crisis is not difficult to envision. There is a way out,
and that is through direct and immediate dialogue by
Russia with the Government of Ukraine, the immediate
pull-back of Russia’s military forces, the restoration
of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and the urgent
deployment of observers and human rights monitors,
not through more threats and more distortions.
Tonight, the OSCE will begin deploying monitors
to Ukraine. Those monitors can provide neutral and
needed assessments of the situation on the ground.
Their presence is urgently necessary in Crimea and in
key cities in eastern Ukraine. The United States calls
upon Russia to ensure that their access is not impeded.
The leadership in Moscow may well be unhappy
about former President Yanukovych’s decision to
flee Ukraine and move in with them. Russia may be
displeased with the new Government, which was
approved by Ukraine’s Parliament by an overwhelming
majority, including members of Yanukovych’s own
party. Russia has every right to wish that events in
Ukraine had turned out differently but it does not have

S/PV.7125

the right to express that unhappiness by using military
force or by trying to convince the world community
that up is down and black is white.
Russia’s calls to turn back time so as to implement
the 21 February agreement ring hollow. It was
Yanukovych who failed to abide by the terms of that
agreement, fleeing Kyiv and ultimately Ukraine. The
United States categorically rejects the notion that the
new Government of Ukraine is a Government of victors.
It is a Government of the people and one that intends
to sheppard the country on 25 May towards democratic
elections that would allow Ukrainians who would prefer
a different leadership to have their views heard. The
United States will stand strongly and proudly with the
people of Ukraine as they chart out their own destiny,
their own Government and their own future.
The bottom line is that for all of the self-serving
rhetoric that we have heard from Russian officials in
recent days, there is nothing that justifies the Russian
conduct. As I said at our last meeting (see S/PV.7124),
Russia’s actions speak much louder than its words.
What is happening today is not a human rights
protection mission or a consensual intervention. What
is happening today is a dangerous military intevention
in Ukraine. It is an act of aggression. It must stop. That
is a choice for Russia. Diplomacy can serve Russia’s
interests. The world is speaking out against the use of
military threats and force. Ukrainians must be allowed
to determine their own destiny.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): As I
said, during the consultations on Saturday, there is a
prevailing feeling of consternation when we see what
is happening in Ukraine and when we hear what our
Russian colleague has just said. It is in fact the voice
of the past that we have just heard. I was 15 years
old in August 1968, when the Soviet forces entered
Czechoslovakia. We heard the same justifications,
the same documents being flaunted and the same
allegations. We hoped that, with the building of Europe
and the collapse of communism, we would awaken
from such nightmares. We had hoped that we would
have replaced the dangerous logic of the balance of
power with cooperation in respect for the identity and
the independence of each.
Now we are brought back to a world where force
prevails over the law, where every crisis must have
a victor and a vanquished, and where propaganda
denies the reality. Let us first recall the facts that no

14-250465/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

manipulation can hide in the age of television and the
Internet.
The facts are straightforward. The Russian army
is occupying Crimea, Ukrainian territory, against the
will of the Ukrainian Government and in violation
of international law. The reasons invoked are blatant
untruths. No one is killing anyone in the streets of
Kyiv today. No one is threatening the Russian-speaking
populations in Crimea or elsewhere. Those are only
excuses, which even those voicing them cannot believe,
so crude they are.
By occupying Crimea, Russia has taken a territorial
bet. The goal is clear — to bring the authorities of Kyiv
to heel, to bring them back into the sphere of influence
of Moscow and to remind them that their sovereignty
is limited, as Mr. Brezhnev once said after invading
Czechoslovakia. In short, Russia is taking Europe back
40 years. It is all there: the practice and the Soviet
rhetoric, the brutality and the propaganda.
France does not want to play this ridiculous game,
which does not serve the interests of anyone, and
certainly not the Ukrainian and Russian people. That is
why, at the very beginning of the crisis, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France, along with his German and
Polish colleagues, went there to negotiate an agreement,
which Russia has refused to endorse until now, only to
invoke it today.

03/03/2014

immediate cantonment, disarmament and dissolution
of paramilitary elements and other groups with illegal
weapons, monitored by international observers; thirdly,
the Ukrainian Parliament’s re-establishment of the law
on regional languages; fourthly, the establishment of a
high council for the protection of minorities; fifthly, the
implementation of constitutional reforms; and sixthly,
the organization of presidential elections on 25 May
under the aegis of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). These are simple
principles, the implementation of which international
mediation should be able to negotiate with all the parties
concerned. The Secretary-General of our Organization,
together with the European Union and the OSCE, has a
central role to play in that area.
But let there be no mistake — the will to find
a negotiated solution that meets the requirements
of international law, safeguards the rights of all
Ukrainians, and makes it possible to stabilize a
democratic and unified Ukraine in its regional context,
cannot accommodate the persistent violations of
international law perpetrated by Russia. France wants
to cooperate with Russia, with which we have a long
common history, but not at any price and not in violation
of our principles and values.

When events — the President’s flight and the
Parliament’s about-face — made it impossible for the
agreement to be implemented, France continued to
defend its spirit — reconciliation through the formation
a Government of national unity and the holding of
elections under international supervision. That is what
is being proposed today by the Prime Minister, who is
being stymied by the refusal of the Party of Regions to
join the Government. That is what the acting President
is seeking; he has refused to sign a law that, rashly
and unfortunately, diminished the role of the Russian
language.

The denial of reality, the scorn for international
law and the renunciation of any discourse that protects
national sovereignty that we have heard today do not
inspire optimism. Russia seems to be returning to its old
ghosts, playing outmoded roles in an outdated setting
on the stage of a bankrupt theatre. If it continues to
misread the mindset of the new times and to place more
trust in force than in dialogue, it is with regret but with
determination that France, with its European partners,
will draw consequences in its relations with Russia.
Russia alone would be responsible for that setback.
France, its partners and the international community
as a whole ask only for respect for international law
and Ukrainian sovereignty, which Russia is clearly and
brutally violating.

In line with the position of seeking a reasonable
solution that respects everyone’s interests and
sensitivities in the framework of Ukraine’s
independence and territorial integrity, there are six
points that should be the basis for putting an end to
the crisis. These six simple points should be accepted
by all parties who respect international law: first,
the return of Russian armed forces to their bases,
verified by international observers; secondly, the

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
pretense is now over. The world can see that Russian
military forces have taken control of the Crimean
peninsula, part of the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
That action is against the express wishes of the
legitimate Ukrainian Government. It is a clear and
unambiguous violation of the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, and is a flagrant
breach of international law.

6/20

14-25046

03/03/2014

Ukraine

We can see absolutely no justification for those
actions. We have heard from Russia that their forces are
in Ukraine to protect minorities from armed radicals
and anti-Semites. We hear claims of interference in
the affairs of the Orthodox Church. We hear claims
of hundreds of thousands of refugees. But Russia has
provided no evidence of any of that. It is clear that the
claims have simply been fabricated to justify Russian
military action.
In assuming control of a sovereign part of Ukraine
on a trumped-up pretext, the Russian Federation
has contravened its obligations as a member of the
international community. It has violated Article 2 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which prohibits the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. It has failed to honour its
international commitments as a founding member
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and as a signatory to the 1975 Helsinki
Final Act. It has reneged on its obligations under the
1997 bilateral Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation
and Partnership between Russia and Ukraine and the
1994 Budapest Memorandum.
The
Russian
representative
claims
that
Mr. Yanukovych has called for Russian military
intervention. We are talking about a former leader
who abandoned his office, his capital and his country;
whose corrupt governance brought his country to
the brink of economic ruin; who suppressed protests
against his Government leading to over 80 deaths; and
whose own party has abandoned him. The idea that his
pronouncements now convey any legitimacy whatsoever
is far-fetched and in keeping with the rest of Russia’s
bogus justification for its actions. The Government
in Kyiv is legitimate and has been overwhelmingly
endorsed by the Ukrainian Parliament.
In the twenty-first century, no country should be
acting with such blatant disregard for international
law. Those actions will be met with a strong and united
response from the international community. Russia
should not be surprised that its political and economic
reputation have already suffered. The ruble has fallen
and the Russian stock market is now down more than
10 per cent.
Just as we condemn the Russian Federation for its
confrontational acts, we commend the Government of
Ukraine for refusing to rise to provocation. That is a
wise decision. We urge the Ukrainian Government to
continue to act calmly and to avoid actions or rhetoric

S/PV.7125

that would inflame tensions or provide a further pretext
for further military action.
We call on the Russian Federation to immediately
cease all military action in Crimea and to refrain
from any interference elsewhere in Ukraine. Russia
should withdraw its forces to their bases and return to
force levels previously agreed with the Government
of Ukraine, as part of the Black Sea Fleet basing
arrangements.
If Russia is genuinely concerned about protecting
minority groups and upholding the human rights of
Ukrainian citizens, then armed intervention is not
the way to address those concerns. Instead, Russia
should open up a direct dialogue with the Ukrainian
Government in Kyiv and not simply pick and choose
individuals with whom it wishes to engage. It should
respond to requests by Ukraine and other signatories of
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum to hold consultations,
as specified by paragraph 6 of that Memorandum. It
should engage constructively in the debate taking
place in the OSCE and other institutions concerning
the deployment of a fact-finding mission and an
international observer mission to Ukraine. Such a
mission could establish the real facts on the ground,
monitor the situation and, indeed, provide any necessary
reassurances and guarantees through peaceful means.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to
send the Deputy-Secretary-General to Kyiv today.
I hope that he will also go to the Crimea and eastern
Ukraine. We call on the Secretary-General to use his
good offices to their fullest extent to help to de-escalate
the current situation.
This is not 1968 or 1956. The era in which one
country can suppress democratization in a neighbouring
State through military intervention on the basis of
transparently trumped-up pretexts is over.
We stand ready to work with Ukraine, Russia and
all our international partners to support a stable, united,
inclusive and economically prosperous Ukraine. The
United Kingdom urges Russia to uphold its obligations
under international law, including under the Charter
of the United Nations; to act in a way that promotes
stability, rather than to destabilize the region through
the promotion of new frozen conflicts; and to support
democratic processes and the rule of law, not to subvert
or suppress them.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Lithuania strongly
condemns the clear violation by the Russian Federation

14-250467/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The military actions we are witnessing on Crimean soil
defy the fundamental principles of international law,
the Helsinki Final Act, the Budapest Memorandum
of 1994, the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation and
Partnership between Russia and Ukraine of 1997, and
the legal framework regulating the presence of the
Russian Black Sea fleet in Crimea. This blatant breach
of the Charter of the United Nations has no place in the
twenty-first century, and for too many in our part of the
world evokes the memories of the darkest pages of the
twentieth century. It is a threat to international peace,
security and stability, and must be qualified clearly as
such.
Such violations of international law must also
entail international responsibility. Nothing — none
of the events — in Ukraine merits a military invasion
such as we are witnessing from the Russian side.
The will of the Ukrainian people to pursue a path of
democratic transformations and rebuild the rule of
law in their country must be respected. We call on
the Russian Federation to withdraw its forces back to
their permanent bases and to refrain from any further
intervention or interference in Ukraine. osc
Let me stress that the international community
has a wide array of instruments that can and must be
used to resolve existing differences and de-escalate the
situation through political dialogue and consultations,
especially as all of the major regional and international
organizations — the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
Council of Europe and others — are offering their
mediation and good offices to this effect. The presence
of Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and OSCE
representatives on the ground testify clearly to that.
We welcome the proposal of the OSCE to send a
monitoring mission to Crimea and other regions of
Ukraine. We urge the Russian Federation to respond
positively.
In the light of the international efforts, Russia
cannot continue forging ahead with military invasion,
especially as Ukraine has repeatedly offered
consultations with Russian counterparts. Consultation
mechanisms are also foreseen in the Budapest
Memorandum and must be used to de-escalate the
situation. All of these avenues should be utilized with
a sense of great urgency, including through bilateral
contacts, to move away from the brink of war.

8/20

03/03/2014

We stress once against the inadmissibility of the
threat or use of force in international relations. We
call on the international community to stand united in
support of Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. Efforts to destabilize the situation,
as well as to stoke radical action and separatism
in Crimea and elsewhere in Ukraine, are highly
dangerous. We commend the restraint shown by the
new Government of Ukraine and its determination not
to give in to provocation.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General
to defuse the crisis and welcome the proposals, as I
said before, to send monitoring missions. We would
welcome any other bodies and missions that may help
to ease the situation. We urge the Russian Federation
to respond to these efforts and to seize the opportunity
before it is too late.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): The situation in Ukraine,
in particular the Crimea, is alarming and may pose a
threat to international peace and security. We stress the
need for all international actors to respect the Charter
of the United Nations and resolve their disputes in
conformity with existing bilateral and multilateral
agreements. We therefore strongly urge all parties and
stakeholders in the Ukrainian crisis to exercise extreme
restraint in order to de-escalate the tensions. We further
call for an inclusive political dialogue acknowledging
the diversity of Ukrainian society and ensuring the
protection of ethnic minorities, including the Russian
community.
Given the current situation, we believe more than
ever that the United Nations has a critical role to play.
We welcome the visit of Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson to Kyiv in an effort to find a diplomatic
and political solution to the Ukrainian crisis. We also
welcome initiatives of several capitals, including the
visits today by both the United States Secretary of
State and the United Kingdom Foreign Secretary to
Kyiv, as well as the efforts of the President of the Swiss
Confederation, in his capacity as Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, to convene a meeting of the international
contact group on Ukraine.
However, given the complexity and fragility of the
situation on the ground, we believe that it is important
to harmonize all of these international efforts. We
therefore reiterate the proposal we made in closed
consultations on Saturday to establish a quartet for
Ukraine, to be convened by the Secretary-General and
14-25046

03/03/2014

Ukraine

composed of the United Nations, the European Union,
the OSCE and the Russian Federation. We believe that
only the concerted and harmonized efforts of the main
stakeholders, aimed at ensuring the respect of the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, while
considering the interests of the Russian Federation in
Ukraine, would provide a lasting solution to this crisis.
As the world is commemorating the centenary
of the Great War, let me conclude by hoping that all
international actors have learned the lessons of that
War and its consequences for the European continent.
Although Rwanda is geographically remote from
Ukraine, we fear that the current tension, if not well
handled, could bring the entire planet back to the
darkness of history, aggravated by the increased
military and nuclear capabilities of the world’s Powers.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): Jordan wishes to express its deep
concern regarding the unfolding developments in
Ukraine, in particular in the Crimean region. We call
on all parties to exercise calm and self-restraint and
not to further escalate the situation by taking military
measures or by threatening the use of force.
Jordan reaffirms the need to respect the sovereignty
of Ukraine, its territorial integrity and its political
independence. We reaffirm the prohibition of the use
of force on its territory, or any part thereof, and of
the occupation thereof, including the Crimean region.
Jordan calls on all States concerned to respect the terms
of their agreements and treaties with Ukraine. In this
regard, we reaffirm the need to adhere to the provisions
of the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation of 1997.
Russia and Ukraine must embark on serious and
effective dialogue. This dialogue should lead to the
return of the Crimean region to Ukrainian control as
soon as possible. We call on Ukraine to take immediate
steps to resolve the causes of tension, both internally and
externally, and to respect human rights, in particular
of minority groups, and to revoke any measures that
have been taken which may undermine such rights.
At the same time, we stress the need to refrain from
interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine so that
the country may decide its political future for itself.
The Security Council must assume its responsibilities
regarding the situation currently prevailing in Ukraine.
We support the mediation efforts of the Secretary-

S/PV.7125

General and Mr. Serry, and their contacts with the
various parties in this regard.
We wish to receive further clarification from
the parties concerned regarding the situation on the
ground, and in the Crimean region in particular. This
would help the Security Council to address the situation
accordingly. We note the need for the Security Council
to investigate the crisis in the Crimean region, to look
into mediation and dispute settlement mechanisms that
could be used in the light of the information provided,
and to assess whether an active act of aggression is
being committed on Ukrainian territory.
In that regard, we would refer to General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX), which considers the use of
armed force by a State on the territory of another State
that is outside the scope of agreement between the two
countries to be an act of aggression. The same applies
to the deployment of irregular armed groups in order to
perform military acts in another State.
We welcome the efforts already taken and to be
taken within the framework of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to deal
with the current crisis and the establishment by the
OSCE chairmanship of a contact group and a factfinding mission. We call on the United Nations and
OSCE to coordinate their efforts in order to remove the
causes of tension and achieve a peaceful solution that
preserves Ukraine’s territorial integrity and enables a
return to stability and calm in the country.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned about the current situation in
Ukraine. We condemn the recent extreme and violent
acts in that country. We have urged all sides in Ukraine
to peacefully resolve their internal differences within
a legal framework and conscientiously to protect the
legitimate rights and interests of all peoples in Ukraine
so as to restore normalcy to the country as soon as
possible.
China consistently stands for the principles of
non-interference in the internal affairs of any country
and of respect for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
There are reasons why the events in Ukraine have
progressed to where they are today. China will follow
closely the developments on the ground and calls on all
sides to find a political solution through dialogue and
negotiations on the basis of respect for international

14-250469/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

law, the principles of international relations and the
maintenance of regional peace and stability.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing
this afternoon, and we welcome Ambassador Sergeyev’s
participation in this meeting.
The situation in Ukraine clearly continues to
escalate. Tensions continue to rise, and the potential
for military confrontation is obvious. Since the Council
met on Saturday (see S/PV.7124), Russian military
activity in Crimea has seriously intensified, and there
are reports of more Russian troop deployments on
Ukraine’s eastern and southern borders, violations
of Ukraine’s airspace by Russian fighter planes, and
Russian naval vessels blocking the exits of Sevastopol
Bay in Crimea.
We are seriously concerned about the escalation of
Russian military activity. Those actions, along with the
decision by the Russian Parliament to authorize the use
of force in Ukraine, are wholly unacceptable. Russia’s
actions are undermining the right of the Ukrainian
people to choose their own future, and are also contrary
to international law. They contravene the Charter of
the United Nations. They also contravene agreements
to which Russia itself is a party: the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum; the 1975 Helsinki Final Act; and the
1997 bilateral Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation
and Partnership between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine. Under those agreements, there is a specific
commitment to respecting the territorial integrity of
Ukraine, as well as to non-intervention and to refraining
from the use or threat of use of force.
The Australian Government, together with the
broader international community, which is speaking
loudly and with one voice, has urged Russia to
stand down, withdraw its armed forces, abide by its
international legal commitments and immediately take
steps to reduce tensions. Russia must engage in direct
dialogue with Ukraine in accordance with article 7 of its
own Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership
with Ukraine.
In the Council, Australia has already called for
Russia to respect Ukraine’s unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and we reiterate that call here
today. We also reiterate our earlier call to not just avoid
provocation, but to take proactive steps to de-escalate
the crisis. We commend the continued restraint shown
by Ukraine itself in the face of continued and very

10/20

03/03/2014

serious provocation. We support the efforts of the new
Government of Ukraine to deal with the crisis and
stabilize the situation in its country.
The international political engagement we have
seen to date on this issue has been essential and of
course must continue and increase. It is indicative of
the level of concern regarding Russia’s actions and
the extent of the determination on the part of the
international community to de-escalate the crisis. The
international community and the Council must support
all efforts towards de-escalation. That means exploring
and promoting all opportunities for mediation and
dialogue.
Australia would also strongly support the
deployment of a full monitoring mission to Ukraine,
and we are grateful to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for looking carefully at
that possibility. That would be the best way to address
Russia’s stated concerns about minority rights, and we
urge Russia to consider it. We welcome the news that
the OSCE will begin deploying some initial monitors
tonight.
We also welcome the engagement of the SecretaryGeneral and the visit of Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson to Ukraine. We urge all parties to cooperate
with the Deputy Secretary-General as he seeks to
promote dialogue and cooperation and see for himself
the facts on the ground. It is imperative that he be given
access to all parts of Ukraine.
To conclude, the situation should obviously be
resolved by peaceful means. There is no other option. As
Australian Prime Minister Abbott said in the Australian
Parliament yesterday, unprovoked aggression should
have no place in our world. Russia should stand down
and withdraw its forces from Ukraine in accordance
with its obligations, and the people of Ukraine ought to
be able to determine their future themselves.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
express our deep concern over the serious escalation of
the crisis in Ukraine, which must be urgently reversed.
We call for the greatest restraint and moderation.
We would once again reiterate, as we have stressed
previously, the obligation to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. Moreover, the parties involved must
refrain from taking actions in contravention of the

14-25046

03/03/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7125

Charter of the United Nations and international law,
especially the use or threat of use of force.

relevant regional organizations can play as provided for
in Chapter VIII of the Charter.

The Budapest Memorandum is clear. It represents
a commitment to respecting the independence,
sovereignty and current borders of Ukraine and to
refraining from the use or threat of use of force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
Ukraine. Those obligations must be complied with.

We echo the call of the Secretary-General on all
those involved to refrain from actions or statements that
may escalate tensions and initiate constructive dialogue
through peaceful means to find a way out of the current
crisis. All political players and their international
partners should heighten their efforts in order to find
solutions through inclusive dialogue in which all social
and political sectors of the various regions participate.
We believe that it is indispensable for authorities who
are responsible for leading in the transitional period
to enjoy the support and participation of all political
forces. We emphasize that it is the primary and
unavoidable responsibility and obligation of the State
to protect its population including all its ethnic and
linguistic minorities. It is therefore essential that any
action that can contribute to polarization, the rhetoric
of confrontation and the heightening of tensions should
be avoided.

The international community must continue to
provide support to reach a peaceful solution to the crisis.
In this context, we support the efforts in support of
international mediation or other mechanisms, including
those that could be used by regional organizations to
help resolve the crisis. We welcome the decision of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to send observers to the eastern part of Ukraine. Chile
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General, and we
welcome in particular the mission led by the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, who is at this very
moment in Kyiv. We also call for the Russian Federation
to consider undertaking consultations in the framework
of the Treaty on Friendship and Cooperation in order to
find a solution to the present crisis.
I wish to conclude by stressing the fact that it is up
to the people of Ukraine to define their own destiny
in an inclusive process that guarantees the rule of law,
human rights, fundamental freedoms and respect for
the rights of minorities.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would also like to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing. Through him, we would like to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General and other
United Nations officials for their efforts to promote a
negotiated solution in the situation.
Argentina is following with deep concern the latest
political developments in Ukraine, especially in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea. Argentina reaffirms
the Security Council’s responsibility to ensure that
international peace and security are maintained within
the framework of the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. In that vein, we recall the
obligation that all States must settle their international
disputes in a peaceful fashion in order not to endanger
international peace and security, in accordance with
the provisions of Article 33 of Chapter VI of the
Charter, respecting the principles contained in Article
2 of Chapter I and recognizing the significant role that

Argentina is convinced of the need to work for a
united Ukraine, honouring the principles of international
law and with full and unconditional respect for human
rights, which is the only way in which the Ukrainian
people can find a democratic way out of the crisis
presently affecting their country. The international
community must focus its efforts on supporting such
a process in order to cooperate and achieve political
agreements that will put an end to the current crisis that
Ukraine is facing.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): What began three months
ago as a political protest is increasingly taking on a
dimension that today can best be described as precarious.
We call on all concerned to abide by the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly Article
2, which calls on all States Members of the United
Nations to settle their disputes by peaceful means and
to refrain from the use of force against the territorial
integrity of any State.
The current situation in Ukraine, especially
in Crimea, represents a clear and potent threat to
international peace and security, and we would like to
see a rapid de-escalation of tension and hostile rhetoric.
The concerned parties must embrace dialogue as a means
of resolving the crisis and facilitate an expeditious
return to normalcy in Ukraine. The prerequisite for that
is mediation, as other speakers before me have pointed
out. We therefore call on the international community

14-2504611/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

and particularly those who can exert a constructive
influence over the concerned parties to intensify efforts
towards mediation in the crisis. We firmly believe that
the use of preventive diplomacy tools at such a time
represents the most expedient and effective option for
bringing about a peaceful resolution.
We want to reiterate our call on all concerned to abide
by the provisions of the 1994 Budapest Memorandum on
Security Assurances, which guarantees the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We note that the
provisions of the Memorandum call for the signatories
to consult when a situation arises that raises questions
concerning the commitments they undertook in the
document. That clause is even more relevant now and
indeed represents an opportunity to peacefully resolve
the current crisis.
We are encouraged by indications that the
Government of Ukraine is taking great strides to
ensure greater political inclusiveness in the governance
of the country. That, we believe, is a prudent way of
addressing one of the underlying causes of the dispute
and of ensuring an early return to peace and stability.
The call by the Secretary-General for cool heads
to prevail remains relevant under the circumstances,
and we urge all concerned to refrain from provocative
action that could precipitate now and in the future
unnecessary human suffering.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea remains deeply concerned over the situation
in Ukraine, particularly the escalation of tensions in the
Crimean region. Given the tense situation, we call on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and surmount
the crisis through dialogue. It is vital that the unity,
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Ukraine be fully respected in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. The Republic of Korea
hopes that the situation in Ukraine will be settled in a
peaceful manner. In that vein, we support the mediation
efforts of the international community, particularly
those of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
We hope that the Deputy Secretary-General’s visit to
Ukraine will help to explore all possible responses to
the situation.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad is
deeply concerned by the serious turn of the situation in
Ukraine despite the many appeals of the international
community for a de-escalation, calm and dialogue. Chad
believes that any conflict between States Members of

12/20

03/03/2014

the United Nations should find a peaceful solution
within the framework United Nations Charter and in
accordance with the principles of sovereignty, non-use
of force and peaceful settlement of disputes.
Given the deteriorating situation in Ukraine, Chad
reiterates its appeal for restraint and calm and calls upon
the international community to undertake a mediation
in order to bring about a dialogue between the parties.
In that regard, Chad supports all mediation efforts of the
international community seeking to bring the parties
concerned to settle their differences in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
commitments under the various agreements.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Luxembourg.
Luxembourg is deeply concerned about the recent
developments in Ukraine, in particular in Crimea. Our
position is reflected in the conclusion that the Foreign
Affairs Council of the European Union has just adopted
today during an urgently convened meeting. We strongly
condemn the violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity by Russian armed forces and the
decision taken last Saturday by Russia’s Federation
Council to authorize the deployment of Russian armed
forces on the territory of Ukraine.
Those actions are a flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act. I
would like to echo the appeal of the European Union
to Russia to withdraw its armed forces without delay
in order to meet its obligations under the 28 May 1997
Agreement between Russia and Ukraine on the Status
and Conditions of the Presence of the Russian Black
Sea Fleet on the Territory of Ukraine.
The crisis must be resolved peacefully. A first
critical step would be for Russia to accept Ukraine’s
offer to hold consultations without delay, as provided
for in the Memorandum on Security Assurances in
Connection with the Republic of Ukraine’s Accession
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, signed 5 December 1994 by Ukraine, Russia,
the United Kingdom and the United States, and under
the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership,
signed on 31 May 1997 between Russia and Ukraine.
We would like to believe that it is still pssible to
avoid the worst. Owing to its history, unfortunately,
Luxembourg is well placed to understand the threats

14-25046

03/03/2014

Ukraine

that a military escalation poses to the peace and security
of Ukraine and the region. We must therefore do our
utmost to start a de-escalation of the situation through
specific actions. We resolutely support the ongoing
efforts within the United Nations, in particular the good
offices role of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who
took the decision to dispatch the Deputy SecretaryGeneral to Ukraine.
The principles of the United Nations and the very
raison d’être of the United Nations are at stake. We call
on the entire international community to support the
efforts of the United Nations, together with those of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Council of Europe and the European
Union, to reach a political settlement of the crisis with
the parties concerned. We welcome the preparations
under way with a view to establishing an OSCE
observer mission to impartially assess the situation on
the ground.
A lasting political solution to the Ukrainian crisis
also requires an inclusive political dialogue, taking
into account the diversity of Ukrainian society, the
aspirations of all Ukrainians and the need to respect the
rights of all Ukrainians. Luxembourg supports the new
Government and Parliament of Ukraine, which have
taken steps to promote that inclusive political dialogue.
We encourage the Ukrainian authorities to appeal to the
expertise of the Council of Europe and the OSCE, in
particular with regard to the protection of the rights of
minorities.
In conclusion, we welcome the restraint shown by
the Ukrainian authorities in the face of the crisis, in
particular in Crimea. It is vital for all parties to respect
the unity, territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, and all
members of the Security Council for having given me
the floor and for your important remarks, where I heard
broad support for my country. Ukraine counts greatly
on the Security Council to exert all possible efforts
at the international level in order to guarantee the
protection of the Ukrainian people, the sovereignty of
my country and its territorial integrity.

S/PV.7125

(spoke in English)
At the beginning of this meeting, we listened to the
briefing of the representative of the Russian Federation
with great attention. Unfortunately, we have still not
received any compelling answer to the simple question
as to why the military forces of the Russian Federation
are illegally occupying the Crimea and brutally violating
international law and bilateral agreements. I would like
to recall that, according to the Budapest Memorandum
on security assurances signed in 1994 between Ukraine
and guarantor States, including Russia itself, my
country has given up its nuclear arsenal to Russia,
while Russia, inter alia, was obliged to refrain from the
threat of or use of threat of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of Ukraine. In that
regard, I want to underline that with this aggression,
the Russian Federation is specifically undermining
the regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in general.
I wish to brief the Council on the most recent
developments on the territory of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea, Ukraine. As of today, beginning
from 24 February, approximately 16,000 Russian
troops have been deployed in Crimea by military ships,
helicopters and cargo aeroplanes from the neighbouring
territory of the Russian Federation. The Russian troops
keep making attempts to seize, block and control
Ukraine’s crucial governmental and military entities
in Crimea — the Parliament of Crimea, all civil and
military airports, means of communication, radio
stations, customs services, military and coastguard
bases and the headquarters of Ukraine’s navy in
Crimea. All main roads are blocked.
The build-up of Russian Federation troops and
military equipment along the eastern border of Ukraine
clearly indicates Russia’s preparation for a possible
military intervention in Ukraine — the other parts of
our country. So far, the Ukrainian armed forces have
exercised restraint and refrained from active resistance
to the aggression, although they are in full operational
readiness.
The Russian Federation is performing active
information and psychological operations in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, as well as in the
south-eastern regions of Ukraine. Those are aimed
at discrediting the legitimate authorities of Ukraine
and misleading public opinion by calling the Russian
intervention a peacekeeping operation.

14-2504613/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

The Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine
announced today information about possible
provocative acts by the Russian side on the territory of
Crimea. Tonight, unknown armed persons are planning
to attack and possibly kill Russian soldiers, presenting
it as if the attack were committed by Ukraine from
within. That is going to be used as a pretext for the
ongoing armed intervention by Russia against Ukraine.
The Russian Federation is concerned about the
human rights and freedoms of the ethnic Russians on
the territory of Ukraine. I would like to inform the
Council that it is the obligation of our Government
and people to care about that. We do not need external
help. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs agreed with
the High Commissioner on National Minorities of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to provide an observer mission in Crimea.
Once again, we call upon Security Council
members to authorize an international mediation and
monitoring mission to Crimea to also monitor the
situation with regard to the human rights of ethnic
Russian and other ethnic groups and the so-called
Russian-speaking population. I, too, am a Russianspeaking person but I do not need any support. My
appeal to the Russian Federation is that it demonstrate
that it is still a respectful permanent member of the
Security Council. It should not undermine the authority
of, and confidence in, this universal body.
I know that in the media there are some Russian
companies and one Ukrainian television station.
Therefore, with the Council’s permission, I will
continue in Russian.
(spoke in Russian)
I would like to congratulate all Orthodox Christians
on the beginning of Lent and to call on all of Russia’s
Christians and their leaders to seek peace. Do not
provoke God’s wrath. Come to your senses. Pray for us
and hear us.
Unfortunately, the representative of the Russian
Federation has attempted to explain the presence of
Russian troops in Crimea by saying they are serving
as peacekeepers. As we have heard from many who
spoke today, those acts are seen as aggression and a
provocation of a large-scale armed conflict in Ukraine.
That is unacceptable for a State that is one of the
guarantors of our sovereignty and territorial integrity
under the Budapest Memorandum — and, moreover,

14/20

03/03/2014

for a permanent member of the Security Council, which
shares with other Member States the very important
function of supporting peace and stability throughout the
world. None of that representative’s reasoning about the
legitimacy of the invasion of Ukraine can be condoned
from the standpoint of the Charter of the United Nations.
All Russia’s arguments with regard to the protection of
the Russian population, for example, which supposedly
condone military intervention, are part of an issue that
is totally within the national purview of the Ukrainian
Government and its citizens and should be carried out
under our Constitution. All citizens, regardless of their
ethnicity or nationality, have equal rights. Under our
Constitution, only the Ukrainian Parliament can take
those decisions. Do we need military assistance to deal
with those humanitarian questions? I have already said
that we do not need that type of assistance.
The representative of the Russian Federation
continues to refer to the agreement of 21 February as
the basis for a settlement of the crisis in Ukraine. We
are very surprised by such reasoning. The Russian side,
which participated in the mediation talks in reaching
that agreement, together with our European partners,
refrained from signing the agreement and did not even
recognize it as such. Moreover, in the opinion of the
Russian representative, how could it be implemented in
the context that he is talking about, if one of the major
players — former President Yanukovych — left the
capital and in fact refused to implement his constitutional
functions?
The Russian representative continues to call what
happened in Ukraine a coup d’état. In the democratic
world, there is a more precise definition. What took
place was a revolution of dignity.
We have different understandings about human
rights. In November 2013, people of all nationalities
protested in the streets without any party officials
instructing them and without any pressure from the
West — contrary to what the Russian representative
asserted. People went out to defend their right to a
life of dignity against a wretched, corrupt system that
had brought about extreme poverty to mining regions
in the east and rural areas of the centre and south of
the country, as well as unemployment in the west.
Meanwhile, as the entire world saw on television, the
relatives of former President Yanukovych, who the
Russian representative is defending, lived in luxury.
The Russian representative reiterated today what
was already said in a statement by Minister Lavrov,
14-25046

03/03/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7125

namely, that the former authorities used absolutely
legitimate means in curbing unrest. That means that
the peaceful student protesters who were brutally
beaten by the police on the night of 30 November
and on 1 December, whose rights were violated, now
stand accused of violating rights. So, while in fact
the police beat them, now it seems that the protesters
were the ones at fault. And thus it was the protesters
who brought repressive laws to Parliament limiting
their constitutional rights of freedom of speech and
association and laws curbing the rights of the mass
media and the freedom of expression — laws that
Yanukovych was forced to nullify in the face of pressure
from public opinion.

contributing to the destabilization of our country. Many
examples have been given in the past few days. I do not
wish to repeat them. However, we would like to take
the opportunity afforded by this meeting to once again
call on our Russian partners to stop spreading false
information.

I think the Russian representative is saying that
something is wrong in his country. I am sorry that he
told an untruth about the Church. All denominations
have supported the people, including the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church, which is canonically related to
the Moscow Patriarchate. The highest official of the
Ukranian Church has called on Russian Orthodox
Christians to pause and pray for Ukraine, but not to get
ready to kill Ukranians.

The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to take the floor
again to make an additional statement. I give him the
floor.

The Russian side justified its decision to carry out
a military intervention in Ukraine by saying that the
Prime Minister of Crimea, Mr. Aksyonov, had requested
it. His appointment runs counter to the Constitution. He
is not a legitimate leader of the administrative territory
of Ukraine.
Allow me to recall that Ukraine is a unified State,
and Crimea, in line with its powers, is not a member
of the Federation. Without the central Government’s
authorization for troops to come in from Russia, we see
it as an unauthorized act of aggression. Even in Crimea
it is not supported by many of the people.
Therefore, in accordance with the call by the
Secretary-General, the people of the east were brought
into the Government’s work. Four ministers in
Ukraine’s current Cabinet were born in Russia, while
several governors and territorial leaders in the eastern
regions are also Russian-speaking.
In spite of the economic difficulties in the country,
the Government of Ukraine is continuing to provide
assistance to Crimea. The National Bank of Ukraine
provided support to the Crimean bank in the amount of
400 million hryvnias.
Unfortunately, I must note an unfair game played
by Russia in the area of misinformation, which is also

(spoke in English)
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to you,
Madam President, and to all members of the Security
Council, in particular those who expressed support for
Ukraine, who support the imperative to resolve all the
problems via diplomatic and political means and to stop
the aggression.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to welcome my
Ukrainian colleague, Mr. Sergeyev, with whom I have
been working for quite some time here at the United
Nations. I congratulate him on the fact that today
he spoke not only in English and French, but also in
Russian. It was the first speech that I can recall him
delivering in Russian. I should like to tell him, better
late than never! I hope we will hear other speeches from
my Ukrainian colleague in Russian, although, as we
heard, he is also very competent in English and French.
In the course of the statements made by Mr. Sergeyev
and other colleagues, I heard a number of strange and
even surprising claims. I will make some comments
on those. First, the statements made by my Ukrainian,
French and British colleagues, if I remember correctly,
included the claim that Russia is seeking to exert
pressure on Ukrainian democracy. But can a forcible
takeover be called democracy? What we are saying
is that there must be a normal constitutional process
that takes the interests of all regions and all people in
Ukraine into account. Is that not democracy? We are
calling for democracy, but others are trying to make it
seem that what we are calling for is not democracy.
Mr. Sergeyev brought up the very dramatic and
tragic events of the past three months, for which we
have expressed our great sympathy. There is no doubt
about that. There should be no doubt about whether
Russia understands that the basis of the political
crisis is dissatisfaction on the part of the masses with

14-2504615/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

Mr. Yanukovych’s actions as President. But let us be
honest about one thing — somewhere along the way,
perhaps after the break-up of the demonstrations that
was mentioned, laws were adopted under Yanukovych.
These laws were repeatedly criticized, although such
laws exist in many other countries. There was even
a point at which one could not cross the road during
a demonstration. Such measures have been taken in
many countries. Under French law, in 2009 if I am
not mistaken, it was forbidden to wear a mask on the
street during a peaceful political demonstration. There
may be some other currents at play, but it seems that
many elements under discussion also exist in normal
democratic countries.
That is not the important issue; it is a matter of
principle at play here. Why have my colleagues decided
that what we have in Ukraine now is democratic
governance? As Ambassador Sergeyev noted, we can
all recall what happened in 1917, when a democratic
revolution was followed by dictatorship. We remember
that all too well. We have the feeling that, in essence,
the Kyiv Government comprises nationalist radicals.
They could be replaced by others who might be more
presentable to the West, but what motivates them are
their backers — the ones who brought them to power.
Let us not be fooled into believing that any change
of Government, especially if it is violent, leads to
democracy. Some of our western colleagues seem to
think that this is the case. We would like to see the
process under way in Ukraine lead to the establishment
of genuine democracy in that country.
My colleague from the United States said that there
is a need to respect the Constitution of Ukraine. We
believe that that is indeed important. I am trying to
imagine what would happen if, while President Obama
was in California, Mitt Romney turned up at the White
House and the United States Congress, in one House
of which there is currently a Republic majority, all of a
sudden voted to impeach President Obama. How would
United States public opinion react to that? Would that
be a manifestation of democracy? That is exactly what
happened in Ukraine. Why did Mr. Yanukovich leave?
He was scared into leaving Kyiv for Kharkiv. He was
intimidated into signing the agreement of 21 February.
He was threatened that the presidential residence would
be stormed if the premises were not vacated by 10
a.m.. That is not democracy. That is not respect for the
Constitution.

16/20

03/03/2014

The situation in Crimea is very complex. The
Autonomous Republic of Crimea enjoys special status.
There was concern that the violent actions in Kyiv would
lead to a similar violent capture of the Administration
there. Someone came to power in Crimea and took
vigorous actions. He subordinated himself to all power
structures.
Some wish to make it seem that there are only
Russian armed forces in Crimea, but there are also the
Ukrainian armed forces who have sworn allegiance
to the new authorities in the Autonomous Republic
of the Crimea — for example, the Commander of the
Ukrainian Fleet, which is also based there; he too has
sworn allegiance to the new authorities. There are also
a number of self-defence militias, which were created
when the Crimean people were afraid that force would
be used due to the movement of armed contingents from
Kyiv. These people were armed and promised to look
for their so-called friends there — that is, militants to
restore the appropriate Government.
Then there is the presence of the Black Sea fleet. The
numbers are interesting. The Ukrainian representative
said that there are some 16,000 military personnel of the
Russian Black Sea fleet, but under our agreement up to
25,000 Russian troops can be stationed there. They are
there to protect sites and prevent extremists from taking
actions that could harm civilians or endanger their lives
and health. Perhaps our Ukrainian colleague views this
as excessive, but I fully agree with the authorities of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
I was also surprised to hear Ambassador Power
state that all of these concerns are fabricated. That
claim truly surprises me. I have the impression that
Ms. Power is taking her information from United
States television. Well, if she gets all her information
from United States television alone, then of course
everything in Ukraine must seem just wonderful. The
wave of democracy there was interrupted only when the
bad guy Yanukovych ran away.
There was an attempt to take over the Kyiv
Pechorska Lavra, which is as dear to me as it is to
Ambassador Sergeyev — perhaps even more. I am not
from Ukraine; I am from Russia. From the reports of
the American Ambassador and our own information,
I am sure that our media, like that of many other
countries, has portrayed events quite differently. What
about the wave of violence that swept through western
and central Ukraine? What about the armed attacks

14-25046

03/03/2014

Ukraine

against administrative buildings? What about the
municipal leaders who were dragged from their offices,
tied to pillars and mocked? Was that democracy? Is
that a normal political process? Would we see someone
dragged out like that in Chicago or in Bordeaux, for
example? I do not think so. I do not think we would deem
such actions admissible in any democratic country.
What, then, are we to make of the events in
Kyiv? Was that merely a made-up concern? Attempts
to take over administrative buildings in almost all
cities in eastern and southern Ukraine were not made
up. An armed group invaded and tried to remove the
Government and to set up its own undemocratic and
illegitimate authority.
I shall now turn to one of the key points I would
like to highlight. It is not only we who are concerned.
It is not important that we hold such concern. This
concern is shared naturally by people living in southern
and eastern Ukraine.
I now return to a point on which
Ambassador Sergeyev knows I am right. As I have
already mentioned, unfortunately the right-wing forces
in Ukraine are very strong. They cannot stand Russian
citizens or ethnic Russians. Let us recall how their
leaders aligned with Bandera and Shukhevych, who
fought under Hitler’s banner against the Soviet Union’s
Red Army component of the anti-Hitler coalition.
Those who share their ideology are unfortunately very
close to the Ukranian authorities; in fact, they carry
them on their shoulders. Can one therefore not find it
justifiable or imaginable that people living there would
have concerns — millions of people, with 1.5 million of
them in Crimea.
The key issue here is, does anyone really think that
Russia could allow a repeat of what happened there
in central and eastern Ukraine, where millions of
Russians live? I would recall that, years ago, the United
States took over Grenada. President Reagan said that
they were defending American citizens who resided
there. That was 1,000 people, and there was no threat to
those citizens from Grenada. We have millions living
there. They have concerns.
Our colleagues have referred to international
institutions — the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations.
Granted, those institutions might be used. We do not
deny that. But those of us working at the United Nations
understand very well what international institutions

S/PV.7125

are like. In Kosovo there were not just institutions, but
deployed NATO forces. What did they do in 2004 to
stop the repression and attacks that took place there,
which forced many thousands of Serbs to leave the
area? Nothing was done. Some here have called for an
OSCE observer mission to be sent to Ukraine. Do they
know what nationalist radicals think of such a mission?
They will not even hear of it. Also, it will take months
to make the preparations for such a mission, so who
knows what could happen there in the meantime?
Another very important point that I want to address
is the following. We called this meeting it. No one
should think that we called it to provide a fuller picture
of what is really happening from our view point. The
two previous meetings were somewhat spontaneous, it
is true. I would like to repeat that a decision by our
President, which was authorized by the Federation
Council, to deploy Russian armed forces on the territory
of Ukraine has not yet been taken. And the fact that
we are holding this meeting does not mean that such a
decision will be taken in the near future.
However, in order to avert something we all want
to prevent, it is essential to bring home to those who
happen to be in power in Kyiv and who control the
situation in vast areas of Ukraine, as well as those who
support them and influence them, that there should be
no continuation of a policy of faits accompli and the
seizure of power by force.
We talked about defensive language rights. Yes, a
lot of work will have to be done there, with the possible
participation of international agencies. But let us
understand one thing now: we must all refrain from
making any plans for, or falling back on the habit of,
violently imposing authority or a philosophy, culture or
world view on other people. That is undemocratic and
could have very dangerous consequences in Ukraine.
On a more practical matter, one of my colleagues
said that we cannot talk about the agreement of
21 February because Yanukovych left. Well, so what?
The point is that our task is not to return Yanukovych
to power. Is it not understood that Yanukovych will
never return to power, that he will never go back to his
residence in Kyiv and never rule the State — although
we continue to consider him the legitimate President of
Ukraine at present, for the reasons I have stated. The
point is that this is not a matter of Yanukovych or no
Yanukovych. The point is that democratic parameters
for resolving the crisis in Ukraine are set out in the
agreement. This is not about returning to one law out

14-2504617/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

of the blue; there should be constitutional reform. They
have been constantly changing the laws in Ukraine
for the past 15 years, which may be the reason for the
political turmoil. There should be a process between
the different regions and political forces.
The Party of Regions has been scared off, and so
they think it no longer exists. But it exists. It has huge
support in the western part of the country, which is
Ukraine’s main industrial centre.
That is what we are talking about. That is what
should be done, in addition to giving up force as a way
of solving problems.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United States has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): In response
to my Russian colleague’s comments, I would like to
make a couple of points. First, I would like to address
his point about the legitimacy of President Yanukovych
and his point about the February 21 agreement, which
he has made several times.
To be clear, we commend the work done by France,
Germany and Poland to mediate and negotiate that
agreement, with Russia very much in observance. We
would have been prepared to support the completion of
that agreement. Under its terms, President Yanukovych
had 24 hours to sign the first piece of action pursued
in the Rada: the changing of the Constitution pursuant
to the 21 February agreement. Not only did President
Yanukovych not sign it but, as my Russian colleague
reminds us, he left the city. Indeed he fled the city. He
packed up himself and his family and he left the seat of
the presidency vacant for two days while his country
was in crisis. He also left vast evidence of corruption
and vast evidence of the amounts that he had stolen from
the Ukrainian people. In that context, with 371 votes,
the democratically elected Rada voted Yanukovych out
of office, with his own party turning against him. That
is the history.
With respect to the present, what we have heard
today — with the exception of one member of the
Security Council, namely, the Russian Federation — is
overwhelming support for the territorial integrity of
Ukraine and for peaceful dialogue. There are so many
options available to Russia to safeguard the rights of
ethnic Russians and to address the concerns that have
been raised: so many options short of military action.
Therefore, the very simple questions for Russia today
18/20

03/03/2014

are the following. Why not support international
mediation? Why is that not part of their remarks today?
Why not support an observer mission? Why not engage
directly with the Ukrainian authorities who want to
resolve the crisis peacefully? Why not pull back their
forces instead of sending more? Why not?
When military intervention in the face of a crisis
like this is the first resort, it is hard to avoid concluding
that Russia does not want peace and does not want a
diplomatic solution. Why choose military action when
the consequences could be devastating? Only someone
who fears the truth would be fearful of monitors who
are deployed for the specific purpose of identifying and
reporting the truth. That is all.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of France has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): For four and
a half years I have had the honour to serve on the Security
Council. And for four and a half years I have had the
honour of working with the representative of the Russian
Federation. In that time, I have heard the representative
of the Russian Federation invoke whenever possible the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
another country. As soon as we talk about human rights
in a given country, the representative of the Russian
Federation says that there should be absolutely no
interference in the domestic affairs of another country.
I have just heard a statement that is nothing more than
pure interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine. I
am sorry to have to recall that there should be some
sort of coherence in the foreign policies that we should
be aspiring to. Everything that the representative of the
Russian Federation has just said is interference in the
internal affairs of Ukraine.
Secondly, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation has told us that the decision for the
Russian armed forces to enter Ukraine has not yet been
taken. Please, everyone knows that the Russian army is
controlling the Republic of Crimea. That is a fact. Of
course they had no need to enter Ukraine, since they
were already were there. At this hour, the Russian army
is occupying Ukraine. That is a fact. The Internet and
television do exist, and Russian soldiers are not even
hiding the fact that they are occupying Ukraine and
surrounding the army bases of the Ukrainian army.
Thirdly, there is a long-standing habit of always
calling one’s opponent a Nazi before getting rid of

14-25046

03/03/2014

Ukraine

him. The Soviets were good at that. No — not all the
demonstrators who were in the streets in Kyiv were Nazis,
and for the most part they were not from the far right
or radical nationalists. If members of the Council need
evidence of that, it is quite simple. Elections can be held on
25 May under international supervision — for example,
under the supervision of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Let the Ukrainians
vote. They will decide, under OSCE monitoring, what
future they want.
Finally, I am very touched by the Russian Federation’s
attachment to the 21 February agreement, which the
Russian Federation had previously rejected. I repeat — it
is an agreement that the Russian Federation had refused
to endorse and that it now invokes incessantly. It is better
to find the path of wisdom late than never.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make
further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Perhaps I should not comment on such
trivial things, but the statement made by my colleague
Ms. Power made it sound as if we oppose something that
we do not oppose. We are not excluding the role of some
international bodies, but I explained why that approach
might not be enough.
More importantly, I would like to ask my French
colleague not to engage in hyperbole. We do not need
hyperbole. Furthermore, I did not say that the majority
of those who protested in the streets of Kyiv were radical
nationalists. I did not say that. The minority of them may
have been, but the problem is that they were the ones
who not nly called the tune but also played along with the
band. They have now taken over Government authority
in Kyiv and are sending people to east and southern
Ukraine and to the territory of Crimea.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I do not
want to prolong today’s debate but I must take issue with
some of the things that the Russian ambassador has said.
Let us be clear about the facts of what has happened
in Crimea. The Russian forces have forcibly taken over
military and civilian airports and infrastructure. They
have set up roadblocks and pressured Ukrainian military
leaders to defect. They have given other Ukrainian units

S/PV.7125

ultimatums to surrender. They have blocked Ukrainian
ports and vastly increased their military forces all along
the Russian-Ukrainian border.
There is no justification for that military action in
international law or in the Agreement between Ukraine
and the Russian Federation on the Status and Conditions
of Presence of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian
Federation in the Territory of Ukraine, as article 6 of that
Agreement sets forth very clearly: “Military formations
shall respect the sovereignty of Ukraine, shall abide by
Ukrainian laws and shall not interfere in the internal
affairs of Ukraine.” What part of that Agreement justifies
the military action that we have seen Russian taking in
Crimea?
My Russian colleague has said just now that
the Russian Federation is not against the idea of an
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
monitoring mission to eastern Ukraine and Crimea. Can
he now confirm therefore that the Russian Federation
accepts the deployment of such a mission in the next few
days?
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make
further statement.
Mr. Churkin (spoke in Russian): We are not sitting
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). I cannot talk about the OSCE. We are
not talking about the OSCE. It has its own functions.
We supported Mr. Eliasson’s mission to Ukraine. As for
an OSCE mission, that has to be discussed. I support
what Mr. Sergeyev said early to the effect that there
is too much disinformation and too many statements,
particularly those that are not rooted in reality. Much of
what Sir Mark Lyall Grant said about what is going on in
Crimea is just not in line with reality.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): I am
speaking in Russian in order to be properly understood.
I support what Ambassador Churkin said with regard to
the need to speak openly and be extremely honest. I just
want to clarify a few issues he raised in his statement. I
will be clear.
First, as to the occupation or threat of occupation
of the Pechersk Lavra monastery in Kyiv, which is in
canonical relationship with the Moscow Patriarchate,

14-2504619/20

S/PV.7125

Ukraine

when the unrest began we received information that
there might be some kind of provocation against the
monastery. The monastery issued a statement that same
day and repeated it the next day to the effect that the
exterior of the monastery was being guarded by ordinary
people from the Maidan to prevent any provocation. That
is the entire answer. The demonstrators were defending
the monastery from possible provocations.
As to the Black Sea fleet, I have something to add.
Our Agreement provides for a numerical strength for
the Black Sea fleet of 11,000 people, including about
2,000 marines and 5,300 other military from the Russian
armed forces. Let us pay close attention — in December
2013, our Ministry was notified by the Russian side that
the Black Sea fleet would be maintained at a numerical
strength of 11,000.
I would now like to go back to statement made by
the representative of Jordan. He quoted the annex of
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), in which the
concept of aggression is defined. Article 3 of the annex
contains a non-exhaustive list of what would qualify as
an act of aggression. The list provides for the eventuality
that if within the territory of a State — for example,
Ukraine — the armed forces of another State — for
example, Russia, and in this case the Black Sea fleet — are
present with the agreement of the receiving State, and the
permitted number and location of the troops are specified,
and there is a violation of the specified number and
location of troops without the agreement of the receiving
country, that is an act of aggression. In that regard, I am
not even referring to the number of military forces that
infringed the airspace of Ukraine, namely, M-14 combat
helicopters that were not part of the Black Sea fleet, or
the many other transport aircraft that have infringed our
airspace. There has thus been an increase in the number
of Russian military within our territory, in violation of
all of our agreements. That is aggression.
There has been much speculation about language.
I and my Administration have explained to the press
and to many of my colleagues that the first law upon
Ukraine’s independence, promulgated in 1992, was the
law on national minorities, which guaranteed equal
rights and protection of the national interests of all ethnic
groups, including linguistic minorities. In principle, the
substantive law that was adopted in 2012 under pressure
by the former Ukrainian Government did not take into
account more than 2,000 amendments, and the opposition
did not participate in the vote.

20/20

03/03/2014

We did not need that legislation because it was
enough to have the 1992 law and the Constitution. I
would recall that when Ukraine went to the Council
of Europe, it took on an obligation to sign and to
ratify the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, not languages of minorities but minority
languages. The former Governments redid the Charter,
saying that it should apply not only to languages such
as Crimean Tartar, Karaim and others that need to be
protected, but to all languages of national minorities
that are protected by law. We have therefore now got rid
of that law. The Government said that the Parliament
would once again consider the ratification of the
Charter, which we undertook to ratify. We signed and
ratified it. Incidentally, to date, the Russian Federation
has not ratified the Charter. But we are ratifying it.
For languages that do not have a territory and have no
official definition, we will defend those languages that
would disappear because there are not many people
who speak them.
With regard to the Party of Regions, unfortunately
an untruth was said. The Party of Regions, the
former ruling party, was a large faction of the current
Parliament. Moreover, one of the leaders of that faction,
Mr. Tygipko, said that he would run for President. No
one heard that. The ruling party called Mr. Yanukovych
what he is, that is, a coward and a traitor. It was not
a comment about the Parliament. The Parliament was
elected legally for a long time, not in a revolutionary
way. It has all the power that it needs to appoint the
Government. It has the full range of powers to conduct
elections. Today, it was announced there would be
presidential elections on 25 May. Let us therefore give
that an opportunity to work and for us to learn how to
live together and how to govern.
I agree that we need assistance so that we can get
past this crisis, which has been going on for years, and
help the country to build its future in such a way that
people will not be ashamed to live there. We need that
assistance in order to form a civil society and, of course,
we invite all to come and help and to see how we are
doing that but not to bother us when we do not ask for it.
The President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded its consideration of the item
on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

14-25046
