United Nations

A/RES/65/182

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 February 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 27 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2010
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/65/448)]

65/182. Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/167 of 18 December 2002, in which it endorsed the
Political Declaration 1 and the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, 2
its resolution 58/134 of 22 December 2003, in which it took note, inter alia, of the
road map for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and its resolutions
60/135 of 16 December 2005, 61/142 of 19 December 2006, 62/130 of 18 December
2007, 63/151 of 18 December 2008 and 64/132 of 18 December 2009,
0F

1F

Recognizing that, in many parts of the world, awareness of the Madrid Plan of
Action remains limited or non-existent, which limits the scope of implementation
efforts,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the follow-up to the
Second World Assembly on Ageing as well as the current status of the social
situation, well-being, participation in development and rights of older persons, 3
2F

1.
Reaffirms the Political Declaration1 and the Madrid International Plan of
Action on Ageing, 2002;2
0H

1H

2.
Encourages Governments to pay greater attention to building capacity to
eradicate poverty among older persons, in particular older women, by
mainstreaming ageing issues into poverty eradication strategies and national
development plans, and to include both ageing-specific policies and
ageing-mainstreaming efforts in their national strategies;
Encourages Member States to strengthen their efforts to develop national
3.
capacity to address their national implementation priorities identified during the
review and appraisal of the Madrid Plan of Action, and invites Member States that
have not done so to consider a step-by-step approach to developing capacity that
_______________
1
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
A/65/157 and A/65/158.

10-52346

*1052346*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/182

includes the setting of national priorities, the strengthening of institutional
mechanisms, research, data collection and analysis and the training of necessary
personnel in the field of ageing;
Also encourages Member States to overcome obstacles to the
4.
implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action by devising strategies that take into
account the entirety of the human life-course and foster intergenerational solidarity
in order to increase the likelihood of greater success in the years ahead;
Further encourages Member States to place particular emphasis on
5.
choosing national priorities that are realistic, sustainable and feasible and have the
greatest likelihood of being achieved in the years ahead and to develop targets and
indicators to measure progress in the implementation process;
Encourages all Member States to further implement the Madrid Plan of
6.
Action as an integral part of their national development plans and poverty
eradication strategies;
Invites Member States to identify key priority areas for the remainder of
7.
the first decade of implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, including
empowering older persons and promoting their rights, raising awareness of ageing
issues and building national capacity on ageing;
Recommends that Member States increase awareness-raising of the
8.
Madrid Plan of Action, including by strengthening networks of national focal points
on ageing, working with the regional commissions and enlisting the help of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to seek increased attention for
ageing issues;
Encourages Governments that have not done so to designate focal points
9.
for handling follow-up of national plans of action on ageing;
10. Invites Governments to conduct their ageing-related policies through
inclusive and participatory consultations with relevant stakeholders and social
development partners, in the interest of developing effective policies creating
national policy ownership and consensus-building;
11. Calls upon Governments to ensure, as appropriate, conditions that enable
families and communities to provide care and protection to persons as they age, and
to evaluate improvement in the health status of older persons, including on a
gender-specific basis, and to reduce disability and mortality;
12. Encourages Governments to continue their efforts to implement the
Madrid Plan of Action and to mainstream the concerns of older persons into their
policy agendas, bearing in mind the crucial importance of family intergenerational
interdependence, solidarity and reciprocity for social development and the
realization of all human rights for older persons, and to prevent age discrimination
and provide social integration;
13. Recognizes the importance of strengthening intergenerational partnerships
and solidarity among generations, and in this regard calls upon Member States to
promote opportunities for voluntary, constructive and regular interaction between
young people and older generations in the family, the workplace and society at
large;
14. Invites Member States to ensure that older persons have access to
information about their rights so as to enable them to participate fully and justly in
their societies and to claim full enjoyment of all human rights;
2

A/RES/65/182

15. Calls upon Member States to develop their national capacity for
monitoring and enforcing the rights of older persons, in consultation with all sectors
of society, including organizations of older persons through, inter alia, national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights where applicable;
16. Also calls upon Member States to strengthen and incorporate a gender
perspective into all policy actions on ageing, as well as to eliminate and address
discrimination on the basis of age and gender, and recommends that Member States
engage with all sectors of society, including women’s groups and organizations of
older persons, in changing negative stereotypes about older persons, in particular
older women, and promote positive images of older persons;
17. Further calls upon Member States to address the well-being and adequate
health care of older persons, as well as any cases of neglect, abuse and violence
against older persons, by designing more effective prevention strategies and stronger
laws and policies to address these problems and their underlying factors;
18. Calls upon Member States to take concrete measures to further protect
and assist older persons in emergency situations, in accordance with the Madrid
Plan of Action;
19. Stresses that, in order to complement national development efforts,
enhanced international cooperation is essential to support developing countries in
implementing the Madrid Plan of Action, while recognizing the importance of
assistance and the provision of financial assistance;
20. Encourages the international community to enhance international
cooperation to support national efforts to eradicate poverty, in keeping with
internationally agreed goals, in order to achieve sustainable social and economic
support for older persons;
21. Also encourages the international community to support national efforts
to forge stronger partnerships with civil society, including organizations of older
persons, academia, research foundations, community-based organizations, including
caregivers, and the private sector, in an effort to help to build capacity on ageing
issues;
22. Encourages the international community and the relevant agencies of the
United Nations system, within their respective mandates, to support national efforts
to provide funding for research and data-collection initiatives on ageing in order to
better understand the challenges and opportunities presented by population ageing
and to provide policymakers with more accurate and more specific information on
gender and ageing;
23. Recognizes the important role of various international and regional
organizations that deal with training, capacity-building, policy design and
monitoring at the national and regional levels in promoting and facilitating the
implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and acknowledges the work that is
undertaken in various parts of the world, as well as regional initiatives, and
institutes such as the International Institute on Ageing in Malta and the European
Centre for Social Welfare Policy and Research in Vienna;
24. Recommends that Member States reaffirm the role of United Nations
focal points on ageing, increase technical cooperation efforts, expand the role of the
regional commissions on ageing issues and provide added resources for those
efforts, facilitate the coordination of national and international non-governmental
organizations on ageing and enhance cooperation with academia on a research
agenda on ageing;
3

A/RES/65/182

25. Reiterates the need for additional capacity-building at the national level
in order to promote and facilitate further implementation of the Madrid Plan of
Action, as well as the results of its first review and appraisal cycle, and in that
connection encourages Governments to support the United Nations Trust Fund for
Ageing to enable the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat
to provide expanded assistance to countries, upon their request;
26. Requests the United Nations system to strengthen its capacity to support,
in an efficient and coordinated manner, national implementation of the Madrid Plan
of Action, where appropriate;
27. Recommends that ongoing efforts to achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 4 take into account the situation of older persons;
3F

28. Decides to establish an open-ended working group, open to all States
Members of the United Nations, for the purpose of strengthening the protection of
the human rights of older persons by considering the existing international
framework of the human rights of older persons and identifying possible gaps and
how best to address them, including by considering, as appropriate, the feasibility of
further instruments and measures, and requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary support within existing resources for the duration of its mandate;
29.

Also decides that the open-ended working group shall:

(a)

Meet at United Nations Headquarters in New York;

(b) Decide on its calendar and programme of work by consensus at an
organizational meeting early in 2011;
30. Invites States and relevant bodies and organizations of the United
Nations system, including relevant human rights mandate holders and treaty bodies
and the regional commissions, as well as intergovernmental and relevant
non-governmental organizations with an interest in the matter, to make contributions
to the work entrusted to the open-ended working group, as appropriate;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-sixth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution,
including the situation of the rights of older persons in all regions of the world.
71st plenary meeting
21 December 2010

_______________
4

4

See resolution 55/2.
