General Assembly-Forty-third Session
11.

Guidelines for steps to be taken at the
international level

15. lnternational action will be necessary to support the activities of
countries in their endeavour to improve the housing situation of their
poor and disadvantaged inhabitants. Such assistance should support national programmes and use know-how available locally and within the
international community.
16. The goal of externa! assistance should be to enhance and support
national capabilities to develop and implement national action components of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000.
17. Mutual co-operation and exchange of information and expertise
bctween developing countries in human settlement work stimulate and
enrich national human settlement work.
18. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
will act as the co-ordinating agency in the implementation of the Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000, on the basis of biennial plans to be
drawn up with the involvement of experts working with Governments
and the Centre al the regional and subregional levels.
19. As the co-ordinating agency for the Strategy, the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) will stimulate international and
national action by incorporating the Strategy in its future medium-term
plans and biennial work programmes.
20. An inter-agency-level working arrangement will be made within
the existing budget to provide continuous co-ordination of the Strategy.
21. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
will prepare a reporting format to facilitate monitoring by the Commission on Human Settlement~ of progress achieved in the implementation
of the Global Strategy.

43/182.

Preparation of an international development
strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade

secretariats of the United Nations system to the formulation of the strategy.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/183.

Twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December
1964,
Noting that the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development intends to celebrate its twenty-fifth anniversary in 1989,
Noting a/so that the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development will use the occasion of its
twenty-fifth anniversary as an important opportunity to
inform and mobilize ali concerned, with a view to achieving its goals and objectives as contained in its mandate,
Expressing its appreciation of the important achievements of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in fulfilling its mandate,
1. Decides to observe, at its forty-fourth session, the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in a manner befitting the
role and achievements of that organ;
2. Invites the Trade and Development Board to contribute, as appropriate, to the celebration of that anniversary.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/193 of 11 December 1987
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1988/76 of
29 July 1988 on an international development strategy for
the fourth United Nations development decade,
1. Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole for the Preparation of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade, and requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit a progress report to the General Assembly for
consideration at its forty-fourth session, with a view to finalizing the strategy in time for its adoption in 1990;
2. Invites the Committee for Development Planning to
continue its activities related to the preparation of the
strategy in support of the work and consideration of the
Ad Hoc Committee;
3. Invitesthe United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the regional commissions and other organizations and specialized agencies ofthe United Nations system to include in their agendas, during 1989, items regarding their contributions to the preparation of the strategy;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the executive heads of the other organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to contribute effectively
to the preparatory process for the strategy by providing ali
appropriate input, including relevant documentation, using comprehensive analytical studies;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in this context, to
entrust the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation with the responsibility
for overall co-ordination of the contributions of relevant

43/184.

Reverse transfer of technology

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, 3362 (SVII) of 16 September 1975, 35/56 of5 December 1980 and
40/191 of 17 December 1985,
Conscious that the development process of the developing countries is crucially dependent on the availability of
highly trained personnel and that the acquisition of skills
and their efficient utilization are a crucial component of
the social, economic and technological transformation of
those countries,
Convinced that the continuing outflow of skilled personnel from developing countries seriously hampers their development and has implications of global concern,
Recognizing the urgent need to formulate appropriate
policies to avoid the "brain drain" and to obviate its adverse effects,
1. Takes note of the outcome of the Fourth Meeting of
Governmental Experts on the Reverse Transfer of Technology, held at Geneva from 14 to 18 March 1988; 20
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to make the
necessary arrangements so that future work on the reverse
transfer of technology can be considered by the Committee on Transfer of Technology in the context of the elabo-

20 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-third Session,
Supplement No. 15 (A/43/15), vol. 1, annex 111.
