United Nations

S/PV.9262

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9262nd meeting
Friday, 17 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05028 (E)
*2305028*

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

Its intensity was reflected by the efforts entailed in
numerous meetings and discussions, including at the
leaders’ level in the Normandy format, as well as in
the regular meetings of the working groups of the
Trilateral Contact Group covering political, security,
humanitarian and economic issues that fell under
the agreements.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Belarus, Germany and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central
Asia and the Americas, Departments of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations; and His
Excellency Mr. Martin Sajdik, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe for the Minsk negotiations from 2015 to 2019.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: We meet today exactly one week
ahead of the one-year mark of Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine. While we witnessed immense suffering and
destruction over the past year, today is also a reminder
that the armed conflict in Ukraine has been ongoing
since 2014. Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo briefed the
Security Council on this same topic exactly one year
ago (see S/PV.8968). She warned about the increasing
tensions around Ukraine and reminded all those
concerned of the urgent need to make full use of the
existing frameworks to prevent an escalation.
The members of the Security Council are aware
that the United Nations, in the previous eight years, has
not been formally part of any mechanism related to the
peace process in Ukraine, such as the Normandy format.
The United Nations was not invited to be a participant
in the various negotiations in Minsk, or of the 2014 and
2015 agreements themselves. Neither was the United
Nations involved in the implementation efforts led
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in the Trilateral Contact Group.
Those directly involved in the process and
its implementation are better placed to assess the
achievements and challenges in managing this process.
2/20

17/02/2023

Despite not having any formal role in the Minsk
framework, over the years the United Nations has
consistently and fully supported the implementation
of the Minsk agreements and related measures, in
accordance with resolution 2202 (2015) and the
presidential statement of 6 June 2018 (S/PRST/2018/12).
The United Nations has repeatedly expressed its full
political support to all those involved in the Normandy
format and other diplomatic efforts. In line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Organization has offered support, when requested and
where appropriate, to some of the working groups under
the OSCE-led Trilateral Contact Group.
Similarly, the United Nations has shared its global
practices and provided expert support to the OSCE’s
Special Monitoring Mission in eastern Ukraine,
including with regard to issues related to ceasefire
monitoring, women and peace and security, as well as
other areas. On the ground, the United Nations country
team has continuously coordinated with the Special
Monitoring Mission on security and humanitarian and
human rights access-related issues in non-Governmentcontrolled areas in order to provide assistance to all
communities in need. We remain grateful for the
OSCE’s cooperation in that regard.
At the same time, throughout that entire period and
to date, the United Nations has remained consistent
in its principled support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders, in line with the
relevant General Assembly resolutions.
The outbreak of the armed conflict in eastern
Ukraine in 2014 was, up to February of last year,
the biggest test the OSCE had faced in its existence.
Similarly, the response of the organization was
unprecedented and deserves recognition. Since its
establishment, the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, through its team of more than 1,000
monitors, provided critical information on ceasefire
violations on the ground, in accordance with its mandate
to maintain dialogue, reduce tensions and prevent
further escalation. I wish to pay tribute to the important
23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

work, often under very challenging conditions, of the
leadership and staff of the Special Monitoring Mission
before it discontinued its operations.
Despite the even bigger challenges brought about
by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine last year and worsening
tensions across the region, the OSCE remains an
essential actor in the area of European security. In that
regard, I would like to recall that in its resolution ES11/4, of 12 October 2022, the General Assembly called
upon Member States and international organizations,
including the OSCE, to support the de-escalation of
the current situation and a peaceful resolution of the
conflict, with respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. Consistent with Chapter VIII of
the Charter, the United Nations continues to work in
a complementary way with all regional organizations
and mechanisms that were created to deal with
security challenges, including the OSCE, across the
Eurasia region.
Long before the situation in Ukraine evolved
into the present tragedy, the United Nations stressed
the importance of political will by all sides and, at
the same time, cautioned all relevant actors about the
dangers of complacency regarding the implementation
of the Minsk agreements and the risks of keeping the
conflict unresolved. The United Nations has also used
all opportunities, including before the Council, to
urge all sides to avoid any unilateral steps that could
deepen the divide or depart from the spirit and letter of
the agreements.
In his remarks to the open debate on conflicts
in Europe, the Secretary-General warned against
taking European peace and prosperity for granted (see
S/PV.7886). He also stated that, until peace agreements
are signed and implemented, the risk of renewed
violence remains. That is also what we learned from
the experience of the Minsk process — peace is not
just about signing an agreement. We need sustainable
and implementable peace that addresses the root causes
of the conflict and is in line with the United Nations
Charter and international law. That is particularly
important given the complexity of the current context
in Ukraine, but also with regard to its implications for
the future of the European security architecture and,
indeed, the international order itself.
Achieving sustainable peace requires an inclusive,
transparent and meaningful process, supported by a
viable framework, which is currently missing. Any

S/PV.9262

genuine process should come with the full and equal
participation of women and take into consideration
the views of the broader population and civil society.
As the Secretary-General has reiterated, the United
Nations is ready to support all meaningful efforts to
bring peace to Ukraine, in line with the Charter and
international law.
The President: I thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sajdik.
Mr. Sajdik: Nearly four years after my previous
intervention (see S/PV.8516), I now again have the
honour to address this body and to share my experiences
of the Minsk negotiating process, as the former Special
Representative of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office in
Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group — the
position I held from 2015 to 2019.
Today’s meeting marks the eighth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), which
after, inter alia, reaffirming the full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, not only endorses the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements of
12 February 2015, but also welcomes the declaration of
the same date by the Normandy Four leaders and their
continuing commitment to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
In my previous briefing to the Security Council, I
underscored that the ultimate goal of our efforts must
be the full implementation of the Minsk agreements, to
which there is no alternative. That was my conviction
throughout all the four and a half years of my work as
Chief Coordinator of the Trilateral Contact Group. The
three sides of the Trilateral Contact Group were Ukraine,
the Russian Federation and the Special Representative.
According to established practice, during the
course of each meeting of the Group, representatives
of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
were, upon the respective decisions of the three
sides, invited to join their deliberations. When I
replaced my predecessor — Swiss diplomat Heidi
Tagliavini — in June 2015, the Ukrainian member of
the Trilateral Contact Group was the second President
of Ukraine, Leonid Kuchma. He was supported by a
range of prominent former or active politicians of his
country, such as ex-Prime Minister Yevhen Marchuk,
former Secretary of the National Security Council

23-050283/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

Volodymyr Horbulin, and Mr. Kuchma’s former head
of administration, Viktor Medvedchuk — just to name
one of the latter’s previous positions — and the Deputy
Speaker of the Rada, Irina Gerashchenko.
When Leonid Kuchma left the Trilateral Contact
Group in 2020, he was replaced by the first President
of Ukraine, Leonid Kravchuk, one of the signatories to
the Belovezha agreement and the Almaty declaration of
December 1991. In June 2015, the Russian member of
the Group was Ambassador Azamat Kulmukhametov.
In December 2015, Boris Gryzlov, former Speaker of
the Duma and former Minister of the Interior, was
appointed by President Putin to represent Russia in the
Trilateral Contact Group.
Although a comprehensive ceasefire should have
entered into force at midnight on 15 February 2015,
heavy fighting continued, especially around Debaltseve,
raising great concerns at the international level. Those
concerns were also reflected in resolution 2202 (2015),
paragraph 3 of which calls on “all parties to fully
implement the ‘Package of measures’, including a
comprehensive ceasefire as provided for therein”.
As heavy fighting persisted throughout the summer
of 2015, my personal efforts then were directed at
reducing the human toll, especially among the civilian
population, and at finally achieving a ceasefire. That
came about in September 2015 with a ceasefire at the
beginning of the regular school year, which lasted
for some two weeks — a real breakthrough, as it
demonstrated that a ceasefire was possible. The most
successful and effective ceasefire was agreed by my
successor Heidi Grau in July 2020, at the height of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.

17/02/2023

750 OSCE monitors stationed in eastern Ukraine on
both sides of the line of contact for approximately
480 kilometres — not to mention the lack of access
to specific territorial stretches, such as the bilateral
border, and especially to some parts of the certain areas
of the Donetsk region.
There were major developments in 2017 that ran
counter to the letter and spirit of the Minsk agreements.
First, in March 2017, there was the brutal
interruption of economic links across the line of contact:
the blockade and economic ban on one side and the socalled “external administration” of companies in the
Ukrainian jurisdiction on the side of the certain areas,
as well the end to railway transportation services.
In December of 2017, after prior warning, Russia
withdrew its members from the so-called Joint Centre
for Control and Coordination (JCCC), based in the city
of Soledar, in the Government-controlled part of the
Donetsk region. The JCCC had played a key role in
what I would call daily conflict management across the
line of contact.
With the sides drifting further and further apart, the
efforts of the coordinators of the security, economic and
humanitarian working groups — my colleagues whom
I already mentioned, Mr. Apakan and Mr. Çevik — as
well as my colleagues from Germany, Mr. Per Fischer
and Mr. Ulrich Brandenburg, and from Switzerland,
Mr. Toni Frisch, mostly focused on mitigating the
effects of the deepening divide on the population on
both sides of the contact line.

Thanks to the outstanding negotiating skills of
then Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission and the coordinator of the security working
group, Ertuğrul Apakan, agreements were signed
on the withdrawal of heavy weapons, demining and
disengagement in 2015 and 2016. Disengagement zones
were also agreed under the leadership of Apakan’s
successor, Halit Çevik. Both he and Apakan were, by
the way, like me, former Permanent Representatives in
New York.

In the spirit of resolution 1894 (2009), of
11 November 2009, we concentrated on the protection of
civilians. The number of civilian victims significantly
decreased over the years, with 2019 being the first year
in which no children lost their lives owing to conflictrelated activities, with mines and unexploded ordnance
being the most ubiquitous and dangerous threat near
the contact line. We also focused on improved access to
Ukrainian pension payments; more humane conditions
at the crossing points, especially for the elderly; water
management; and maintaining telephone services
across the contact line.

Unfortunately, the sides lacked the political will
to implement those agreements. And the monitoring of
the implementation by the unarmed Special Monitoring
Mission had its limits, first of all, because the mere
size of the operation — on average, there were some

In the political field, Ambassador Pierre Morel, the
eminent French diplomat, who just yesterday received
his insignia of Commander of the National Order of the
Legion of Honour from President Macron, tirelessly
tried to lay the legal ground for local elections, as well

4/20

23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

as for amnesty. He played a key role in the final adoption
of the so-called “Steinmeier formula” in October
2019, on the entry into force of the Ukrainian law on
the special status for certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions after the holding of local elections. In
December 2019, after long and difficult negotiations,
a major exchange of detainees could be agreed. The
Steinmeier formula also stands for the pivotal role of
the Normandy Four and the resolution of the situation
in the eastern regions of Ukraine through a peaceful
settlement, as enshrined in resolution 2202 (2015). The
negotiations in Minsk were one pillar of those efforts.
The second pillar was assigned to the Normandy Four.
In the light of all the previous international efforts
for a peaceful settlement in eastern Ukraine, I can, at
the end of my statement, only express my profound
shock and disappointment with the developments since
24 February of last year.
The President: I thank Mr. Sajdik for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Eight years ago, on 17 February 2015, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2202 (2015),
which approved the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. The
resolution made those agreements the only legal basis
for resolving the intra-Ukrainian conflict, and through
the Security Council, it received the support of the
entire international community. Since then, the Council
has met regularly, and primarily at our initiative, to
consider the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In 2018, presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12 was
adopted in support of that process. And yet the Minsk
process failed and became a clear Security Council
failure in the area of preventive diplomacy, which
many of us call one of the most important goals of this
organ. I do not know about other Council members, but
we are extremely disappointed by that. It undermines
the authority of the Security Council, which has
failed to carry out its primary function of maintaining
international peace and security. I propose that today
we have a serious talk about what went wrong and draw
lessons from the past.
I would like to ask our former Western partners,
who habitually recite mantras about how everything is
Russia’s fault, to lift their eyes from the papers before
them and answer one simple question. Why is it that,

S/PV.9262

while they repeat every year in this Chamber their
support for the Minsk process and sign documents
with us, they hid their true intentions, and they knew
perfectly well that the Minsk process was just a
smokescreen for them to rearm the Kyiv regime and
prepare it for war against Russia in the name of their
geopolitical interests?
The recent confessions by François Hollande,
Angela Merkel and Boris Johnson leave no doubt that the
West was only imitating a constructive process. NATO
Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg’s statement that the
alliance had been preparing for war with Russia since
2014 revealed a plan for the geopolitical containment
and weakening of my country, which is being attempted
to be implemented before our eyes. The revelations
by Petro Poroshenko and Volodymyr Zelenskyy
characterize that criminal scheme very eloquently. The
constituent elements of the crime are clear, and the
motive is clear. And the method chosen was to flood the
ears of the international community with absurd claims
that it is Russia that is not implementing the Minsk
agreements, when, as everyone knows, it is not even
mentioned in them.
We have a question for Mr. Sajdik, and I ask him
to answer it frankly, if he is able to do that. Does the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in general, and its Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine in particular, understand that they are
simply being used, knowingly or not, for the purpose of
this cheap charade? Do they understand their guilt and
responsibility in Vienna? After all, it is now quite clear
that the Special Monitoring Mission failed in its tasks.
Moreover, in recent years, the Special Monitoring
Mission has generally descended to highly politicized
and one-sided approaches. For example, contrary to
its mandate, the Special Monitoring Mission ended its
contacts locally with the leadership and the majority of
officials in the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics,
demanding that Donetsk and Luhansk publicly affirm
their loyalty to Kyiv. The OSCE officials turned a
blind eye to Ukraine’s increasing Russophobia and
aggressive Ukrainian nationalism. And facts that were
inconvenient for Kyiv and the Ukrainian armed forces,
such as the murder of civilians by Ukrainian formations
in Donbas, were often whitewashed or hidden from the
eyes of the general public in confidential reports.
As a result, the Special Monitoring Mission was
essentially turned into a partisan tool to protect the
Kyiv regime and put pressure on the Donetsk and

23-050285/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

Luhansk authorities, instead of one for engaging in
dialogue. Such approaches have jeopardized all the
OSCE efforts to facilitate a peaceful settlement of the
conflict in eastern Ukraine. Does Mr. Sajdik, with
his vast experience, not understand that? And does
he not realize that because of the mutual covering for
one another and continuous lying, in which the OSCE
structures have been assigned a very specific role, the
credibility of European multilateral institutions has
been undermined and plummeted to a critically low
level? How, when and at whose behest did they become
hostages of egregiously Russophobic Poles, the Baltic
States and other new Europeans, who have made no
secret of their plans to dismember Russia and seize its
natural resources? If Council members do not believe
me, they should listen to Polish Member of the European
Parliament Anna Fotyga, who published a manifesto on
the subject on the Euractiv website.
We would also like to draw attention to the role of
another body whose leadership we wanted to hear from
today but unfortunately could not. Since the beginning
of the Ukrainian crisis in 2014, the Secretariat has
buried its head in the sand, taking an ostrich-like
stance. We did not hear any direct criticism of Kyiv
from its representatives, even when they were waging a
real war against their citizens in the eastern regions. We
did not hear any calls for direct dialogue with Donbas,
as is required by resolution 2202 (2015). Supposedly,
the United Nations did not have the authority to do so.
But what does a unanimously adopted Security Council
resolution grant if not authority?
At the same time, since the very first day of the
special military operation, the Secretariat, in lockstep
with Western countries, has continued to spread
anti-Russia clichés and level direct accusations against
Russia while claiming to be guided by resolutions
of the General Assembly, which were — and let me
underscore this — non-consensus resolutions. And one
of them contains a reference to the Secretary-General’s
position, which runs counter to all common sense, the
United Nations tradition and even the mere rules of
decorum. That is what United Nations officials have
come to — wilfully ignoring violations of the Minsk
agreements and refraining from assessments that
could anger the collective West. And today many are
saying that the United Nations should definitely play a
mediation role between Russia and Ukraine. But given
6/20

17/02/2023

everything I have mentioned, does the Council think
we can trust such mediation? Where is the guarantee
that the Secretariat will behave differently now?
The failure to implement the Minsk agreements
has proven to be a tragedy for Ukraine, brought about
by the criminal policies of Ukraine’s leadership, which
have been encouraged by the collective West. We are
convinced that the Ukrainian people are yet to give their
assessment of those crimes. After all, the current leader
of the country, Mr. Zelenskyy, was elected in 2019 with
a notable majority precisely because he promised the
country national dialogue, the protection of the Russian
language and inter-ethnic harmony. However, once he
was elected, he continued his course of confrontation
with Russia, abandoning his election programme in
order to serve the geopolitical ambitions of the West.
I would now like to address the Western members
of the Security Council. Obviously, in the future we
will not be able to live as we did in the past. The extent
to which they have already displayed their deep-seated
Russophobia shows us that the only thing really driving
them is that Russophobia, and their desire to destroy
our country, by the hands of others if possible. They
are not interested in building a system of European and
Euro-Atlantic security together with Russia, because
in their view such systems can be aimed only against
Russia. We have no trust left in them, and we can no
longer believe any of their promises — with regard to
NATO’s non-expansion to the East, in addition to their
unwillingness to interfere in our internal affairs and
their desire to live in peace and good neighbourliness.
Western countries have demonstrated fully that it
is impossible to negotiate with them. And they have
shown how treacherous they are by creating a neo-Nazi
and nationalist hive on our borders and then stirring it
up. And we have learned the true price of their values
after they turned a blind eye to the formation of the
most brutal and Russophobic dictatorship in Ukraine,
destroying the slightest manifestation of freedom of
speech and dissenting political views. So far, we have
no reason to believe that they are capable of breaking
this vicious circle of lies and self-deception. And the
more tall tales we hear from them today, including that
Russia did not honour the Minsk agreements, which
is contrary to the obvious facts, the more people will
understand that we had no choice but to protect our
country — to protect it from the West — in addition to
our identity and future.
23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Europe, Central Asia and the Americas,
Mr. Miroslav Jenča, as well as Mr. Martin Sajdik,
Special Representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe for the Minsk negotiations
from 2015 to 2019, for their briefings.
We are holding this meeting on the Minsk
agreements exactly one year to the day after the
previous one (see S/PV.8968), in which we expressed
our fears of escalation, but also our call to avoid the
irreparable. The Minsk agreements paved the way for a
truce to cease the hostilities, the restoration of Ukraine’s
borders and an improved humanitarian response. They
also laid the foundations for a lasting peace based on
good-neighbourly relations and economic exchanges
for shared prosperity. Those agreements, which, it
should be recalled, were endorsed by the Security
Council, provide for a comprehensive peaceful solution
to the main claims of the parties on the humanitarian,
economic and security fronts; and they establish
a ceasefire, providing for the departure of foreign
combatants and the deployment of heavy weapons, all
under the supervision of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe.
The signing of those agreements gave hope for
peace and peaceful coexistence between the parties.
Eight years later, that hope has been dashed by the
deadly war in Ukraine, which is now in its twelfth
month. The hope generated by the Minsk agreements
must be rekindled, and all parties must be encouraged
to seek a cessation of hostilities. We remain convinced
that peace and peaceful coexistence are possible. We
therefore reiterate our appeal to the parties to once
again engage in good faith in the same spirit that
prevailed when the Minsk agreements were signed,
which requires a frank dialogue between all parties,
within the framework of the mechanisms provided for
in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is never too late to make peace. The Security
Council must work to that end without further delay.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča and Special
Representative of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Sajdik for their briefings.
Russia called this meeting to discuss the lessons
learned from the Minsk agreements regarding conflict
prevention. A year ago today, we met in this Chamber

S/PV.9262

to discuss the Minsk agreements (see S/PV.8968). At
that time, Russia had built up a force of more than
130,000 troops on Ukraine’s borders and in illegally
annexed Crimea, inflaming tensions and causing
widespread concern.
The message from the Security Council then was
clear. Despite the challenges, there had to be urgent
de-escalation and dialogue among all parties. UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and the representatives
of the OSCE repeated that message. The SecretaryGeneral called for respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and reiterated that there was no alternative
to diplomacy. Urgent diplomatic efforts were under
way to engage Russia through the OSCE Vienna
Document process — Russia did not turn up to the
meetings — through the Normandy format and through
the NATO-Russia Council.
What was Russia’s response? In this Chamber,
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Vershinin said that
allegations that Russia was going to attack Ukraine
were baseless. Four days later, President Putin signed a
decree recognizing Luhansk and Donetsk as independent
entities, which tore up the Minsk agreements. Three
days after that, Russia launched its full-scale invasion
of Ukraine, bringing suffering to people in all areas of
Ukraine and trampling on the United Nations Charter.
Almost one year on, that invasion continues, with
no sign that Russia intends to bring it to an end. If
Russia is committed to agreements to which it freely
signed up, why did it unilaterally attempt to annex
Ukrainian territory in violation of those commitments?
I will tell you, Madam President, what lessons
we have learned. Russia lied when we warned of its
intention to attack Ukraine. Russia was planning for
war, while we called for diplomacy and de-escalation.
Russia continues to choose death and destruction, while
the world calls for a just peace.
In short, Russia is yet again feigning an interest
in peace, while seeking to justify its ongoing military
action against Ukraine. We therefore yet again call
on Russia to end its illegal invasion, withdraw from
Ukraine and return, in good faith, to the negotiations
aimed at establishing a just and lasting peace based on
the principles of the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes to
thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General
for Europe, Central Asia and Americas, and His
Excellency Mr. Martin Sajdik, Special Representative

23-050287/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe for the Minsk negotiations from 2015 to 2019,
for their important and enlightening briefings. We
acknowledge and welcome the presence in the Council
Chamber of the representatives of Ukraine, Germany
and Belarus.
Peace agreements between States have been a vital
feature of international relations for many centuries. The
modern law of treaties provides that such agreements
are binding on the parties, and they must be observed
and respected in good faith.
In that context, we welcomed the Minsk
agreements, particularly in relation to the provisions
on an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire, the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the front lines, the
monitoring and verification of the ceasefire regime,
the launch of a dialogue between the affected parties,
ensuring pardon and amnesty and the plan for political
and constitutional reforms.
Our nation, Mozambique, was born out of a
protracted struggle for the liberation of the people and
their land. In the process, we were bound to negotiate
many agreements, which moved us from one stage of
our history to another.
That is the reason that our first Constitution, and
the successive amendments thereto, embraced the
policy of peace and solemnly declared that:
“Mozambique shall profess a policy of peace, and
shall only resort to force in the case of legitimate
self-defence.”
In the same article, it is stated that Mozambique
defends the primacy of a negotiated solution to
conflicts. We believe that those provisions, enshrined
in our Constitution since the birth of our independent
nation in 1975, are in full and perfect harmony with the
Charter of the United Nations, adopted in San Francisco
30 years before our independence.
The Charter stipulates in its Article 2, paragraph 3,
that,
“All members shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that
international peace and security, and justice, are
not endangered.”
In that connection, in this Chamber we time and
again called for a negotiated settlement of this
conflict, because the principles contained both in our
Constitution and in the Charter of the United Nations
8/20

17/02/2023

are deeply embedded in our own political culture, and
they constitute the guiding beacons in our relations
with other States, even in times of conflict.
Within that framework, today we wish to reiterate
our call, made earlier, that, as members of the
Security Council, mandated to maintain and preserve
international peace and security, we are under the
Charter´s obligation to cooperate and support efforts in
the direction of a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
Furthermore, we are duty-bound to explore all possible
avenues that can lead the parties to an understanding. We
believe that we must emulate the spirit and the goodwill
that led to the signing of the Minsk agreements between
the parties and always be guided by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank our briefers
for their contributions.
Eight years ago, the Security Council met to adopt
resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed the so-called
Minsk package. The agreements signed by the Russian
Federation and Ukraine in February 2015, with the
decisive mediation of France and Germany, allowed for
an end to the hostilities. Notwithstanding the collapse
of the Minsk accords, we believe that their spirit can
inspire a new effort towards a peaceful solution. It
is essential that we discuss how to put an end to this
conflict, which has cost so many lives, caused so much
devastation and taken a heavy toll in terms of food and
energy security around the globe. And it continues to
present a serious nuclear safety and security risk to the
region and to the whole world. Brazil condemns the
use of force to settle any diplomatic dispute. It is our
belief that the Security Council and the international
community must act to promote peace talks between
the Russian Federation and Ukraine through the
mediation of the United Nations and countries willing
to contribute.
We also reiterate our call for the protection of
the civilian population and the strict observation of
international humanitarian law by all involved in the
conflict in Ukraine.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jenča and Mr. Sajdik for their briefings.
Russia has requested this meeting today in a
retrospective attempt to justify the unjustifiable — its
invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022 in violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and resolution 2202
23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

(2015), which endorses the Minsk agreements and
which Russia signed. Nothing, however, can legitimize
its aggression. In bringing up the past, Russia is trying
to distract us from the present — the hellish fighting on
the front line, the scale of human loss, the bombing of
civilian infrastructure and the many abuses committed
by the Russian army and Wagner auxiliaries. In the
face of this new disinformation tactic, we should recall
the facts and the law.
The facts are as follows. A year ago to the day, on
17 February 2022, the representative of Russia stated
publicly in the Security Council that
“[T]here is no alternative [to the Minsk agreements,
and that they] are the only international legal basis
for resolving the civil conflict in [...] Ukraine”
(S/PV.8968, p.10).
He added that rumours of a Russian military intervention
were unfounded and the product of Western paranoia.
Four days later, on 21 February 2022, Russia recognized
the independence of the self-proclaimed so-called
people’s republics of Donetsk and Luhansk. A week
later, on 24 February 2022, it invaded Ukraine. Russia
therefore chose war despite the de-escalation efforts
that President Macron and Chancellor Scholz had made
in the days and weeks before.

S/PV.9262

or mitigating circumstances for Russia’s choice to
end the dialogue with violence. Finally, let me point
out that the international mission of the States of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
has been observing the situation on the ground for eight
years. Its daily reports and the account we heard today
indicate that every accusation made by Russia against
Ukraine today is false.
With those facts in mind, this is no longer a time
for historical analysis. We must look to the future.
Next week, Ukraine, together with 50 co-sponsoring
States, will introduce a draft resolution in the General
Assembly that will pave the way for a just and lasting
peace in line with the Charter. We must support that
effort to promote dialogue and reiterate the call to end
Russian military operations. That is the responsibility
of all who are committed to the Charter and to our most
precious asset — peace.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča and Ambassador Martin Sajdik for their informative briefings.

Those are the facts. The law is also very clear.
The Secretary-General and the General Assembly
immediately condemned the invasion as a violation of
international law and the Charter. On 16 March 2022,
the International Court of Justice ordered Russia to
suspend its military operations. In that regard, the only
lesson to be learned is that in attacking Ukraine, Russia
made the choice to end dialogue and negotiations alone.
Russia alone decided to tear up the Minsk agreements,
whose primary goal, we should remember, was the
reintegration of specific regions of Donetsk and
Luhansk under full Ukrainian sovereignty in exchange
for greater decentralization.

It is profoundly unfortunate that we are meeting
today to discuss the lessons learned from the Minsk
agreements in the shadow of the very war that we had
all hoped they would prevent. The agreements were a
worthy effort, and, while they did not ultimately hold,
they offered an alternative to conflict. Surely a difficult
but ongoing negotiation process would have been
preferable to the tragedy that has unfolded over the past
year. In searching the Minsk agreements for lessons,
however, we find that a successful agreement cannot
be reduced to a mere talking point. It must be nurtured
as a living, breathing organism in which peace grows,
drawing the parties and their partners in, and in the
process transforming them. As the prospects for peace
negotiations to end the war in Ukraine grow dimmer by
the day, we are concerned about the possibility that the
wrong lessons are being drawn from Minsk.

Russia and Ukraine signed the Minsk agreements
to end the conflict in the Donbas. Their implementation
in good faith could have enabled the violence to end.
They held out the prospect of a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. The implementation of the agreements was
not an easy task. I would like to remind the Council
that from 2015 onward, France and Germany worked
tirelessly to promote a dialogue between the signatory
parties. However, the difficulties in implementing
the agreements can never be used as justification

The first of those is that the past is preordained.
The deterioration in relations between the parties and
stakeholders of the Minsk agreements, along with the
war in Ukraine and recent public statements, may lead
some to conclude that the agreements were destined
to fail. That reaction is understandable. Yet the eight
years that elapsed between the first signature and the
final collapse suggest that there was both a desire and
an effort to preserve the agreements. A successful
resolution of this conflict that establishes the

23-050289/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

framework for a sustainable and just peace in Ukraine
will surely depend on its design, comprehensiveness
and incentives. Most of all, it will require the ongoing
commitment of all the relevant actors to implement and
evolve with it.
The second wrong lesson is that the past is prelude.
We cannot let cynicism about the possibility of a just
and lasting peace prevail, as that would legitimize
the pursuit of military victory at all costs. A point
will come when the guns must be silenced. For us,
that point is now. Today we are meeting to discuss
the latest unrealized attempt at peace amid reports of
an impending escalation. Let us be clear — a fresh
offensive will not make peace more attainable. It will
only provoke a counter-offensive, and the wretched
cycle of violence will go on. We therefore call once
again for a cessation of hostilities, and express our
support for all earnest efforts to bring peace to Ukraine.
Today more than 17.7 million Ukrainians
require assistance. But even a year ago, 3.4 million
people — the vast majority of whom were women and
children — needed humanitarian aid as a result of the
conflict. That misery cannot continue to drag on. Over
the next week we will all reflect on the developments
of the past 12 months and the costs of the war and its
implications for Ukraine, the region and the world. It
is our sincere hope that such reflection will foster a
renewed resolve for peace.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his briefing. I am also grateful to
Ambassador Sajdik for his briefing, as well as for his
efforts to bring peace to Ukraine during his time as
Special Representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe for the Minsk negotiations.
Minsk was meant to be the blueprint for a
breakthrough in the crisis in Ukraine, or, as many saw
it, the only path via which peace could be built. But
instead of an agreement in good faith to put an end to
the war at the time, it turned out to be a conundrum, as
it was never fully implemented. In truth, the agreement
ended up being used by Russia as leverage to limit the
sovereignty of Ukraine, impose foreign policy choices
and render the country dysfunctional. When it could no
longer do that, it used it as a smokescreen for what was
going to unfold later — and we know what that was.
Many at the time feared the worst, and Russia
proved them right. Russia’s military aggression against
Ukraine did not start last year; it began in 2014, with
10/20

17/02/2023

the annexation of Crimea, followed by open support of
the Russian proxies in the eastern part of the country.
That took more than 14,000 lives and brought immense
damage to the economy and infrastructure — the kind of
horrors we have seen for almost a year now throughout
Ukraine. The 13-point agreement known as the Minsk
agreements included key provisions on issues such as the
restoration of Ukraine’s control of its State borders and
the withdrawal of foreign armed formations, military
equipment and mercenaries. That never happened, and
the agreement was never respected. While Ukraine can
be credited with efforts to implement as much as of the
Minsk agreements as could reasonably be done, Russia
did not cooperate. It hid behind its role as co-facilitator,
assuming that it was not part of the agreement and not
bound by its terms, although the document was signed
by Russia’s Ambassador to Ukraine, Mikhail Zurabov.
That has been a major blockage in its implementation.
The truth is that Russia played a part in everything — the
military aggression at the time, the agreement itself
and its non-implementation. It was in full control of the
separatist groups on the ground.
In fact, the bigger problem was and is that when
Russia wants something, agreements mean nothing.
Did the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 mean anything
to Russia? Did the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation
and Partnership concluded in 1997 between the two
countries mean anything? Does Article II of the
Charter of the United Nations mean anything? Do
the resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolution 2202 (2015), mean anything? The truth is
that to Russia, they mean nothing. Why, then, would
the Minsk agreements mean or matter more? It should
therefore come as no surprise to anyone that the fullscale aggression in February last year was just another
chapter in the same playbook.
There has hardly been a week since February
last year that we have not met to discuss the terrible
situation in Ukraine. On each occasion we have
deplored the aggression, calling on Russia to put an
end to its war, stop committing crimes and terrorizing
civilians, withdraw its troops from Ukraine, respect its
sovereignty and territorial integrity and come to the
negotiating table in good faith with a genuine will, not
a hidden agenda.
Let me conclude by saying loudly and clearly that
there is not and has never been any shred of Russophobia
anywhere in our statements or positions here or
anywhere else. There is only a clear and principled
23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

position against the war, against aggression, against
crimes and against breaches of international law. As we
all know, in that position, the world is united and Russia
is alone in this Chamber and in the General Assembly
Hall next door.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China’s
position on the Ukraine issue is consistent and clear.
The sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be safeguarded, the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations upheld, the legitimate
security concerns of all countries prioritized and all
efforts conducive to the peaceful resolution of the
crisis supported.
Eight years ago to this day (see S/PV.7384), the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2202
(2015), endorsing the Minsk agreements as the basic
political document for resolving the eastern Ukraine
issue. Unfortunately, after the agreement was
reached, the fighting never stopped. There have been
constant disagreements over the interpretation and
implementation of its provisions. The situation that
should have been de-escalated by the agreement in fact
saw further escalation, eventually leading to a largerscale conflict.
While we deplore the failure of the Minsk agreements,
no one can deny that their signing represented a step
in the right direction towards resolving disputes and
differences through dialogue and negotiation and was
in line with the fundamental spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations. The diplomatic efforts made to reach
the agreement still merit our recognition today. The
lesson here is that the viability of an agreement depends
on how well it is implemented. If it cannot be translated
into concrete action proactively and in good faith, even
the best agreement will end up being just a piece of
paper. On the other hand, if all the provisions of the
Minsk agreement had been effectively implemented,
the Ukraine crisis might not have developed into what
it is today.
In essence, the Ukraine crisis is the culmination
of European security conflicts that are closely related
to NATO’s constant eastward expansion since the
Cold War. The pursuit of absolute security, political
exclusion and containment by force against a specific
party is the crux of the reason for Europe’s security
plight. If it were to continue to espouse that mindset,
Europe and perhaps even the whole world would be
caught up in greater turmoil. We once again call on

S/PV.9262

Russia and Ukraine to cease the hostilities and start
peace negotiations as soon as possible. The United
States, the European Union and NATO should also sit
down with Russia for a comprehensive and in-depth
dialogue based on the principle of the indivisibility of
security. They should discuss how to build a balanced,
effective and sustainable security architecture and
realize common security.
In that context, no effort should be spared in
preventing attempts to fan the flames and pour fuel on
the fire in order to avoid an escalation and expansion
of the conflict. In that regard, I would like to point out
that on the one hand NATO claims that it continues to
be a regional defensive alliance, while on the other it
constantly seeks to reach beyond its traditional defence
zone and scope, provoking conflict, creating tension,
fuelling threats, stoking antagonism and strengthening
military and security ties with countries in the AsiaPacific region. This is obviously self-contradictory.
We note with concern that the NATO SecretaryGeneral recently made many irresponsible and
unfounded remarks on the situation in the Asia-Pacific
region. NATO has committed enough crimes around
the world. We urge NATO to draw lessons from history,
abandon such obsolete concepts as those embodied in
the cold war mentality and block confrontation, and
stop dangerous acts of creating imaginary enemies,
destabilizing Europe and interfering with the AsiaPacific region. Instead, it should contribute positively
to world peace and stability, instead of merely being
a troublemaker.
Strict compliance with international treaties and the
implementation of legal obligations in good faith are the
basic requirements of the rule of law at the international
level. This is what practicing true multilateralism is
about. Regrettably, negotiated agreements fail to be
implemented. The Minsk agreements are not the only
example of this. The Paris Agreement on Climate
Change faced major setbacks because of the withdrawal
of one key party. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action has yet to be revived. Some major bilateral and
multilateral treaties and agreements are now being
withdrawn from, violated, hollowed out and weakened.
Should such a trend continue, great harm would be
inflicted on the world. This is something we should be
highly vigilant against. Relevant countries also should
conduct serious reviews and reflections on this reality.

23-0502811/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

Human society is facing unprecedented challenges,
but peace, development cooperation and mutual benefit
are still an unstoppable historical trend. Globalization
is making our global village smaller, but the world is
big enough to accommodate the common development
and progress of all countries. To strive for a bright
future for humankind, all countries should pursue a
just cause for common good, promote inclusiveness,
mutual learning, peaceful coexistence and cooperation.
We must respect each other’s legitimate and reasonable
security concerns rather than cling to the Cold War
mentality or engage in bloc politics, bloc rivalry or
small exclusive circles.
We must also realize win-win cooperation by
integrating towards economic globalization rather
than expecting others to lose or trying to stay ahead
by blocking the development of other countries. A
major country should behave in a way commensurate
to its status and work together with others to maintain
stable international relations rather than putting its
own interests ahead of the common interests of the
international community or seeking dominance and
dictating its vision over the whole world.
The world is once again at a historic crossroads.
We call on all peace-loving countries to unite under
the banner of the United Nations, practice true
multilateralism and promote the spirit of the rule of law,
so as to maintain common security, promote common
development and create a common future.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I listened very carefully to
the arguments on the Minsk agreements, and, yes, we
need to learn lessons from what happened and what is
happening to realize sustainable peace in accordance
with international law. However, no argument can
justify aggression nor divert our attention from the
reality of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, which
shakes the very foundation of the international order
that the world has built up over a long period of hard
work and sacrifice. Such a unilateral attempt to change
the status quo by force undermines security not only
in Europe but across the entire world. Russia must
therefore, first and foremost, stop its war of aggression
immediately and completely and unconditionally
withdraw its forces from the internationally recognized
territory of Ukraine.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča and
the former Special Representative of the Chairperson-in12/20

17/02/2023

Office in Ukraine of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and in the Trilateral Contact
Group, Mr. Martin Sajdik.
By becoming members of the United Nations, we
all agreed to adhere to the Charter of the Organization,
one of whose principles is the resolution of international
disputes by peaceful means. Another fundamental
aspect of the Charter is its Chapter VIII, in particular
the importance of the work of regional organizations
in maintaining peace and security. The Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) was
founded in 1975. The OSCE took steps to de-escalate
the crisis in Ukraine, including through the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission. It then successfully
responded to the conflict in eastern Ukraine that
began in 2014 by facilitating the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. The OSCE initiated a process to
ensure a continuation of the dialogue. By assuming the
chairpersonship of the OSCE in 2014, and thereafter,
Switzerland was involved in the efforts of the Special
Monitoring Mission and in the negotiations on and
implementation of the Minsk agreements, adopted and
signed in September 2014 and on 12 February 2015.
Despite difficulties with their implementation, the
Minsk agreements were an attempt to resolve this dispute
peacefully, as called for by the Charter. The agreements
played an important role in de-escalation. Among other
things, the Security Council unanimously approved the
“Package of measures for the Implementation of the
Minsk Agreements”. By recognizing the independence
of the “people’s republics” of Luhansk and Donetsk in
February 2022 and by launching a military aggression
against the entire territory of Ukraine a few days
later, Russia has, as its President himself has stated,
put an end to the Minsk agreements. Russia has
resorted to violence on a large scale, in violation of the
United Nations Charter and in defiance of the principles
of the OSCE.
The OSCE has useful mechanisms and expertise
in monitoring, confidence-building measures, security
and verification. The staff of its Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine has for years made an important
contribution by providing objective information on
the security, humanitarian and human rights situation
on the ground. The OSCE has also contributed to
improving the situation for the civilian population by
facilitating humanitarian access to those most affected.
Switzerland has supported the role of the Mission and
remains convinced that its expertise is relevant.
23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Let us also recall the founding principles of the
OSCE, in particular the objective of ensuring the
conditions in which peoples can live in true and lasting
peace and free from any threat or attempt to undermine
their security. We therefore encourage the continued
commitment of the OSCE, despite the great difficulties
it is facing due to the war against Ukraine. Switzerland
fully supports the efforts of the Northern Macedonia’s
chairpersonship of the organization.
Finally, we call on Russia to cease all combat
operations and withdraw its troops from Ukrainian
territory without delay. In the territories under its control,
Russia is obliged to respect its specific obligations as
an occupying Power under international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, rapid, unimpeded and sustainable
access to humanitarian aid must be guaranteed
throughout the territory of Ukraine, including in the
occupied areas. Switzerland does not recognize the
annexation of Ukrainian territories declared by Russia,
which constitutes a serious violation of international
law. We demand the respect of the full sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča and Ambassador Martin Sajdik
for their briefings to the Security Council this morning.
We recall that when the Council met on 17 February
last year to discuss the implementation of the Minsk
agreements (see S/PV.8968), we expressed concerns at
the time about the agreements’ largely unimplemented
provisions but also the hope that in furtherance of
resolution 2202 (2015), the crisis in the eastern regions
of Ukraine would be settled through peaceful means.
Today we can see that any further consideration of
the Minsk agreements has been rendered moot. We all
well recall that exactly one week after the Council’s
consideration of the matter, Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity were assailed by its neighbour, the
Russian Federation, and an attempt was subsequently
made to unilaterally annex the territories concerned
in Ukraine.
During last year’s meeting, we also bemoaned
the 14,000 human lives that had been lost since the
start of the conflict in eastern Ukraine, as well as the
displacement of 2.9 million others. As we speak today,
the situation is far worse. According to some of the best
estimates available, some 180,000 Russian soldiers may
have died as a result of the aggression against Ukraine,
in addition to approximately 120,000 Ukrainian

S/PV.9262

civilians and troops. Many Ukrainian civilians have
also been needlessly injured in Russia’s attacks. An
estimated 8 million refugees have been registered
across neighbouring countries, while some 5.4 million
people have been recorded as internally displaced.
Those figures show the horrors of war and the futility
of seeking to establish one’s interests abroad through
the use of force. There are reports of increasing civilian
casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure, about
which we are deeply concerned, as well as the worsening
security and humanitarian conditions resulting from
the renewed missile attacks launched over the past few
days against Ukraine. We emphasize once again the
international obligation of the warring parties to respect
and afford international humanitarian law in relation to
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure
in times of war. We call on all sides to adhere to the
principles of proportionality and distinction, which are
necessary to mitigate the impact of war on the lives and
livelihoods of innocent people.
The high rates of casualties and destruction that
have followed in the wake of the war in Ukraine leave us
convinced that had the concerns for the Donbas region
been genuinely shared, the approach to resolving them
would not have been through an escalation of the conflict
but rather its immediate cessation. We believe that any
hope of renewing the spirit of the Minsk agreements
would demand as a minimum condition a cessation
of hostilities to encourage the signatories and other
relevant actors to recommit to the obligations arising
from the package of measures for the implementation
of the agreements.
We therefore want to use this opportunity to reiterate
our call on the aggressor State to put an end to its actions
through the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
its troops from the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine. We continue to believe that the Security
Council was right to endorse the Minsk agreements
as a settlement of the Donbas conflict, which has now
been overtaken by the wider war on Ukraine and can
be achieved only in a context of exclusively peaceful
means. We therefore urge the continuing commitment
of the international community in marshalling every
possible effort to achieve a peaceful settlement of the
aggression against Ukraine.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm Ghana’s
unwavering commitment to upholding respect for the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, in accordance with international

23-0502813/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. We also maintain our firm position
of non-recognition of the purported annexation of any
Ukrainian territory.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jenča and Ambassador Martin Sajdik for their
informative briefings.
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the related obligations under
international law, Ecuador has not recognized nor will
it recognize the annexation of territories by force, as we
stated in 2014, at the start of Russia’s military offensive
against Ukraine, which led to the occupation of Crimea
and armed violence in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Today we are marking eight years since the
adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), in which the
Council reaffirmed its full respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine. On
that occasion, the Council demonstrated its deep concern
about the violence in eastern Ukraine and endorsed
the package of measures for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements. Furthermore, with their 2015
declaration, the Presidents of the Russian Federation,
Ukraine and France, together with the Chancellor of
Germany, endorsed the Minsk package of measures and
stated their firm belief that there was no alternative to
an exclusively peaceful solution to the situation. Some
12 months ago, in the light of the situation in Donbas
on the one hand, and the military mobilization of the
Russian Federation on the other, the international
community called on States to prioritize diplomatic and
political dialogue in the framework of the mechanisms
created for that purpose, such as the Normandy format,
established in that same presidential declaration.
Regrettably, the seventh anniversary of the Minsk
agreements was marked by the launch of missiles and
a new and widespread military aggression that buried
those agreements. The lessons drawn from those
prevention efforts have taught us nothing new, only
the obvious, which is that the use of force by one State
against another not only undermines the implementation
of agreements but hinders and undermines trust, which
is essential for peace efforts.
Those are not the only agreements that have been
ignored. The Budapest Memorandum of 1994 on
Security Assurances concerning Ukraine’s accession
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
14/20

17/02/2023

Weapons demanded that Russia respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine in return for
Ukraine’s renunciation of its nuclear weapons. As a
country that promotes non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament, Ecuador cannot help being concerned
about and condemning the violation of such assurances.
I want to reiterate my delegation’s call for the foreign
occupying troops to be withdrawn from Ukraine and
for the establishment of a ceasefire that can enable a
return to the path of diplomacy, with a view to restoring
peace, based on respect for the territorial integrity
and political independence of Ukraine, within its
internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča and Ambassador
Sajdik for their briefings today.
Given how often Russia convenes the Council to
regurgitate its false narratives of the past, we cannot
help wondering whether its aim is to persuade or to
distract — that is, distract from its bombs and missiles
that are killing Ukrainian civilians and decimating
cities in the here and now. The level of cynicism behind
today’s meeting of the Council is astounding. Attempts
to distort history do not change the fact that Russia is
responsible for its brutal and devastating aggression
against Ukraine. Despite training and leading forces
in eastern Ukraine since 2014, Russia has long sought
to disguise and deny its role in the conflict. But we
can now clearly see what Russia’s ultimate intentions
were in 2014. We see those same intentions today — to
fully and violently subjugate Ukraine and deny the
sovereignty and independence of its neighbour and a
fellow United Nations Member State.
Russia participated directly in the negotiation of
the Minsk agreements. Russia’s representative signed
the three documents constituting the agreements in
2014 and 2015. Russia reaffirmed, at the Normandy
Four summit in 2019, that all three Minsk agreements
remained the basis for the peace process. And yet in
the years between the signing of the Minsk agreements
and Russia’s full-scale invasion last year, Russia
failed to implement a single commitment it had made.
Russia consistently and repeatedly undermined the
fundamental purpose of the Minsk agreements, which
was to fully reintegrate the conflict area with the rest
of Ukraine and restore Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
Given what we know now, are we to believe that Russia
was serious about honouring that pledge, just as the
representative of the Russian Federation urged the
23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Security Council a year ago to believe that Russia had no
intention of further invading Ukraine? The other Minsk
agreement signatories — France, Germany, Ukraine
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe — sought to implement the agreements in
good faith. The United States supported the efforts of
the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group
while calling for the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements by all sides.
Last February, days before launching a full-scale
invasion of Ukraine, President Putin unilaterally
declared that Russia would recognize the Donetsk and
Luhansk oblasts as so-called independent states. That
included territory beyond the boundaries that Russia
and its proxies actually controlled at the time. President
Putin made clear his intentions and his contempt for the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as for the Minsk
agreements. Last September, President Putin claimed
to annex the same Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, as
well as the additional Ukrainian regions of Kherson
and Zaporizhzhya. Those claims included areas that
Russia’s forces had not even reached. In October 2022,
the General Assembly overwhelmingly condemned
those actions as unlawful.
Political resolutions cannot happen at the end of
the barrel of a gun. For years we called on Russia to
honour its commitments under the Minsk agreements
and to negotiate in good faith for the end of hostilities
in eastern Ukraine, as Ukraine did, for years. However,
Russia has repeatedly demonstrated its disregard for
the Minsk agreements and for international law. We
join our Ukrainian partners in considering the Minsk
agreements nullified by President Putin’s decision to
launch this unprovoked, unjustified war.

S/PV.9262

integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We continue to call for an immediate end to this war
of aggression and the full withdrawal of all Russian
forces from Ukraine’s territory. Regrettably, however,
over the past few weeks, we have instead witnessed
renewed and prolonged attacks on Kyiv and other cities.
We underline the fact that Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine is a violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, an affront to the rules-based order
and a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. Furthermore, we cannot fail to note
that the decision of the Russian Federation to recognize
the so-called referendums of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions runs counter to the Minsk agreements that the
Russian Federation wants to focus on today.
The Minsk agreements offered a chance for
dialogue and the option to pave the way for defining
mutually acceptable solutions to resolve differences.
Those agreements were doomed to fail, however, since
one of the parties opted for a selective interpretation.
Despite Russia’s insistence that its role in the Minsk
agreements was solely as a mediator, it nonetheless
chose the path of brutal aggression against Ukraine,
a sovereign United Nations Member State, leaving no
room for diplomatic efforts.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča and
Ambassador Sajdik for their briefing today.

To date, thousands of civilians have been killed and
injured as a result of the war. Yet the Russian Federation
is further escalating the aggression against its neighbour,
pushing Ukraine into a grave humanitarian crisis. Forty
per cent of Ukraine’s population is in dire need, nearly
8 million people have fled to neighbouring countries and
5.3 million are internally displaced or unable to leave
illegally annexed regions. The repercussions of the war
have also affected thousands of Ukrainian children who
have been displaced, deported and deprived of the life
they knew not so long ago. Malta strongly condemns
the deportation of Ukrainian children and deplores
the horrendous situations that have been brought upon
them by breaking their family ties and denying them
their rights, including the right to a family life. Grim
consequences are also a reality for the women and girls
who have been a target of sexual violence in conflict
by Russian forces. We cannot fail in our responsibility
to prosecute those crimes. Accountability must be our
priority, and we fully support all efforts in the fight
for justice.

One year after the start of Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine, Malta reaffirms its full support of
Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial

In conclusion, we urge the Russian Federation to
completely and unconditionally withdraw its military
forces from the entire territory of Ukraine within

In conclusion, the Council does not need yet another
revisionist history lecture from the Russian delegation.
What the world needs is for Russia to immediately stop
its relentless attacks on Ukraine and the Ukrainian
people, withdraw its forces from Ukraine’s territory
and end the war now.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.

23-0502815/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

its internationally recognized borders, to stop the
aggression and to abide by the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor back to Mr. Sajdik, who may wish
to respond to the comments and questions posed to him.
Mr. Sajdik: If I understood correctly the question
put to me by the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, he asked whether I had realized that
Germany, France and the other countries were unwilling
to implement the Minsk agreements. My reaction to the
question, if I understood it correctly, is that throughout
the years that I worked in my position, from 2015 to
the end of 2019 and the beginning of 2020, I witnessed
the profound dedication of Germany and France to
the Minsk agreements. I was not present in Minsk
in February 2015, and I imagine that the Permanent
Representative of Germany will also take the floor, but
the accounts of the course of the deliberations in Minsk
in February 2015, from all the various sources that I
have heard and whom I have talked to, referred to the
intense personal involvement of Germany’s Chancellor,
Angela Merkel, in all the negotiations in Minsk and in
the final phrasing of the Minsk agreements.
If I may refer again to my personal contacts with
French and German officials, among whom I had
the pleasure today to recognize again the Permanent
Representative of France, as I already said, I always
had the impression that there was great hope and
willingness to implement the Minsk agreements to the
letter and that all were behind that goal. I also observed
the then German Foreign Minister, Frank-Walter
Steinmeier, when he was actually introducing the idea
of the Steinmeier formula at one of the meetings of the
Normandy format. I have to say that I personally felt
that this was made in the genuine belief that it would
help the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In her remarks today, the Permanent Representative
of Switzerland referred to the efforts of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) since
2014 — as did the Assistant Secretary-General — and
I can only underscore what she said. I believe she
really put the efforts of the OSCE and its different
chairpersonships into perspective. In 2016, the Chair
was Germany; in 2017, it was my country, Austria;
in 2018, it was Italy; in 2019 it was Slovakia; and in
2020 I observed the beginning of the chairpersonship
16/20

17/02/2023

of Albania, and I can only say that I have always had
the impression that the various Chairs of the OSCE
were really behind the efforts to implement the Minsk
agreements and to help find a solution to the conflict in
eastern Ukraine.
Those have been my impressions, and I am sure
that since Russia has cooperated not only with all those
chairpersonships, but also all throughout the years,
and especially through the Normandy format, that it
may have its own perceptions or impressions of the
attitude and honesty of the officials it has worked with.
So we have Russia’s impression of this as well as my
own. I thank the Council very much for giving me the
opportunity to respond to the question.
The President: I thank Mr. Sajdik for the
clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
remaining representatives of Putin’s regime in the
permanent seat of the Soviet Union, and I regret that
their delegation is still allowed to spam the Security
Council with initiatives such as today’s meeting. It
had been their practice to call Council meetings on
the anniversaries of resolution 2202 (2015), adopted
on 17 February 2015. However, it has never been their
aim to discuss in good faith the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Instead, they opt to disseminate
their propaganda narratives — unchangeable mantras
throughout the years stating that Russia was not a party
to the agreements and that their implementation was
the responsibility of Ukraine alone.
At a meeting held on 11 February 2021 (see
S/2021/159), the representative of Russia went even
further in his attempts to create a parallel reality,
literally saying that “Ukraine occupied Ukraine”.
Yet every year, the Russian delegation assured us of
Moscow’s commitment to a peaceful resolution of the
conflict on the basis of the Minsk agreements. Let me
also refresh the Council’s memory and remind everyone
of what Russia’s Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
said about the Minsk agreements at the Council’s
meeting exactly a year ago, on 17 February 2022: “[T]
here is no alternative to that momentous document for
Ukraine” (S/PV.8968, p.10). And four days later, on
21 February 2022, Russia killed the Minsk agreements,
brutally and deliberately, when Putin recognized the
so-called independence of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions of Ukraine.
23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

I remember Mr. Sajdik very well from when I worked
in Kyiv. I was in many meetings with him, and I can
assure the members of the Security Council that he did
his best to promote the fullest possible implementation
of the Minsk agreements. And I sincerely regret that the
representative of Russia used such thuggish language
to attack him on the issue. It does not surprise me.
We are in the twelfth month of Russia’s invasion, and
ironically, it reminds me of the lines of one of Russia’s
most famous poets, Alexandr Blok, who, before he
became disillusioned with the Bolshevik putsch, wrote
a poem called, ironically, “The Twelve”, part of which
in Russian reads,
(spoke in Russian)
“To the grief of every bourgeois
We will fan a worldwide conflagration,
A conflagration drenched in blood”
(spoke in English)
The attitude and toxic language we are seeing from the
Russian Ambassador with respect to practically every
member of the Council is reminiscent of Blok’s lines.
We have always said that although it was not
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, resolution 2202 (2015) was a very important
message from the Council asking all parties, including
Russia, to implement the Minsk agreements. I even
wondered in this very Chamber three years ago (see
S/PV.8726) whether it would have made any difference
if in 2015 the Council had had legal grounds to adopt
a mandatory document under Chapter VII. If the
document had had a different legal nature, would that
have been a compelling enough reason for the Russian
Federation to implement it?
Let us not forget that the entire history of the Minsk
agreements after the signing of the first documents,
in September 2014, was a long list of violations
and disregard by Moscow of its own commitments.
Paragraph 4 of the Minsk protocol of 5 September
2014, which envisaged the “establishment of a security
area in the border regions of Ukraine and the Russian
Federation”, was never implemented by Russia.
Paragraph 9 of the Minsk memorandum, signed by
Russia on 19 September 2014, and which stated that “all
foreign military formations and military equipment,
as well as militants and mercenaries, are to exit the
territory of Ukraine under OSCE monitoring”, was
never implemented by Russia. Finally, a week after

S/PV.9262

the third Minsk document, a package of measures,
was signed on 12 February 2015, the Ukrainian city of
Debaltseve sustained a full-fledged offensive and was
occupied by regular Russian troops and their proxies.
Those are just a few examples of how Russia violated
the agreements almost immediately after signing them,
and all those violations paved the way for Putin’s final
decision to invade Ukraine.
Ambassador Nebenzia has left the meeting, but let
me share my impression of him here today. The last time
that Putin’s envoy looked as nervous and as desperate
in the Council as he looked today, Russia launched the
invasion a few days later. Those are just a few examples
of how, as I said, Russia violated the agreements.
The destructive approach by Russia was reaffirmed
just yesterday by Vladislav Surkov, Putin’s major aide
at the time of the signing of the Minsk agreements,
who acknowledged that, while working on the Minsk
agreements, he had proceeded from the understanding
that they should not be implemented. I am surprised
that Moscow does not have control over Surkov at this
moment, right on the eve of this meeting.
However, I am not surprised that, as usual, the
Russian representative is so generously manipulating
quotes from foreign officials. It is time to see the look
in his eye. It is time to acknowledge the truth. The truth
is that Putin has once and for all proved to be impossible
to negotiate with. Russia’s consistent undermining
and final killing of the Minsk agreements make that
crystal clear.
Putin’s decision to launch the full-scale invasion
has become the wooden stake that that vampire has
suicidally driven through himself. We therefore call
on healthy forces in Russia, if there are any, to come
to their senses and to force Putin to implement the
demands of the General Assembly to immediately
cease the use of force and withdraw Russian military
forces from Ukraine. The dictator should give up and
recede into the past.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Zahneisen (Germany): First of all, I am grateful
for the opportunity to address the Security Council
today on this matter. Before starting, I would like to
thank our two briefers today, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča and His Excellency Mr. Sajdik, for
their briefings.

23-0502817/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

After the Russian occupation of Crimea and parts
of eastern Ukraine in 2014, as many representatives
mentioned today, Germany and France committed
to finding a peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Normandy format, jointly with the Russian Federation
and Ukraine. Later, we managed to agree on the Minsk
agreements, and, as mentioned by many speakers, the
Security Council unanimously endorsed them through
resolution 2202 (2015). The agreements significantly
reduced the level of violence and laid out a road map
towards a political solution, but it was always a political
solution on the basis of Ukraine’s constitutional order
and territorial integrity.
The members of the Security Council, including the
Russian Federation, voiced their continued support for
the agreements. As was mentioned many times today,
the Council met exactly one year ago (see S/PV.8968).
Many speakers have quoted Deputy Foreign Minister
Vershinin, and I will also quote him. After the meeting,
he said:
“At the meeting, we [the Russian Federation]
reiterated very firmly our commitment to the
de-escalation and peaceful solution of this crisis,
once again being based on the Minsk agreements.
… I believe that now is the time for our partners
in Western capitals to stop this hysteria about the
intentions of Russia in the region.”
We know what happened afterwards. Only one week
later, Russia launched its war of aggression.
If we really want to look back today, let me stress
only one point. Over almost 10 years, Ukraine, France
and Germany left no stone unturned to find a peaceful
and diplomatic way forward in line with the Minsk
agreements. I would like to thank Mr. Sajdik for his
clarifications regarding the motivations of my country
and of France. I also thank him for all his efforts to
implement the agreements.
The agreements sought to stop the bloodshed and
reach a political solution, in full respect for international
law and to restore Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
Russia’s continuous twisting of our former Chancellor’s
words to imply that Germany did not want a peaceful
solution is therefore simply absurd.
Despite the setbacks and a lack of trust between
Moscow and Kyiv, Germany and France kept the
process going, but Russia made it impossible for
18/20

17/02/2023

diplomacy to succeed. It is Russia that launched an
unprovoked war of aggression on all Ukraine; it is
Russia that recognized the separatist entities of its own
making in eastern Ukraine; and it is, of course, Russia’s
illegal attempt to annex Ukrainian land, starting with
Crimea — an annexation that we have not recognized
and never will recognize.
Where do we stand now? My country shares the
international community’s desire for peace. In order
to end Russia’s war of aggression and the brutal
occupation of part of Ukraine as soon as possible,
Germany supports Ukraine in making full use of its
inherent right of self-defence, in line with Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations. At the same time, we
are keeping all diplomatic channels open so as to work
towards a just and lasting peace, in line with the United
Nations Charter. In that regard, we welcome President
Zelenskyy’s peace formula, which also takes into
account the wider global impacts of Russia’s aggression,
such as the impact on food and energy security. We
deeply regret that Russia is showing no willingness
at all to enter into serious peace negotiations. On the
contrary, the Russian Government portrays its illegal
land grab in Ukraine as final and the acceptance of that
land grab as a precondition for peace talks.
The Secretary-General and the overwhelming
majority of the General Assembly have been clear on
that point: Russia’s war of aggression and the illegal
annexation of Ukrainian territories are a clear and
blatant violation of the United Nations Charter, and
they must stop immediately. Russian troops must
withdraw now. Accepting such a breach of the United
Nations Charter as the starting point for negotiations
would be nothing but giving up on the United Nations
Charter and our principles. We would enter a world in
which might makes right, and each of us would live in
constant fear of our bigger neighbour.
We believe that there is truth in this story, and this
truth is simple: Russia launched a war of aggression
against one of its neighbours, a founding Member of
the United Nations. It continues to violate Ukraine’s
sovereign equality and territorial integrity.
To stop this war is equally simple. We urge Russia
to abide by the binding order of the International Court
of Justice, to cease hostilities and to withdraw its
troops. We urge Russia to live up to its responsibilities
as a member of the Security Council and abide by the
United Nations Charter. That is the only avenue for
23-05028

17/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9262

meaningful diplomatic efforts. My country stands
ready to support all such efforts to find an end to this
devastating war of Russia’s choice and making.

trained and equipped. It is the merit of the Minsk
agreements that they have given the Ukrainian
army this opportunity.”

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.

A former President who promised to bring peace to
Ukraine and whom the Ukrainian people believed at
the time said in an interview,

Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian);
Eight years ago, on 12 February 2015 in Minsk, after
lengthy negotiations an agreement was signed on
a package of measures aimed at implementing the
Minsk agreements. On 17 February 2015, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2202 (2015),
on Ukraine, calling on all parties to ensure the full
implementation of the Minsk II agreements, including
the cessation of hostilities stipulated therein.
The long-awaited outcome of negotiations in the
Belarusian capital was to become the basis of the
peace process in Ukraine. The inhabitants of longsuffering Donbas, the whole of eastern Europe and,
without exaggeration, perhaps the entire world believed
the promises of politicians and States guarantors of
the agreements.
The responsible implementation of the agreements
in practice could have put the peace process in Ukraine
on a stable, positive trajectory. That did not happen. We
all know this perfectly well, and that is long in the past
now. As a matter of fact, it has become crystal clear
today that that could not happen.
Eight years later, both the leadership of Ukraine
and former leaders of Western countries are openly
declaring not only that the Minsk agreements were
officially signed without any original intention of
implementing them, but also that the negotiation
process as a whole was being used solely for military
preparations in order to resolve the conflict by armed
means. One Head of Government said,
“The 2014 Minsk agreements were an attempt to
give Ukraine time; Ukraine also used that time to
become stronger, as you can see today. The Ukraine
of 2014 and 2015 is not the Ukraine of today. I doubt
very much that at the time the NATO countries
could have done as much as they are doing now to
help Ukraine.”
Another eminent peacemaker who happened to take
part in the negotiation process in Minsk wrote,
“Since 2014, Ukraine has strengthened its military
potential. It is completely different. It is better

“Do you know how the Minsk agreements have
succeeded? They gave Ukraine eight years to build
an army, an economy and a global pro-Ukrainian,
anti-Putin coalition.”
In a recent interview, the current President of
Ukraine added a finishing touch to the comments I
just cited by noting that the Minsk agreements could
not have been implemented at all owing to some sort
of “deliberate mistake”, thereby effectively confirming
that the death sentence of the peace process in Ukraine
had been handed down long before the full-scale
armed conflict.
Regarding the brief response by Mr. Surkov
referred to just now, while I am not about to interpret
his meaning, I read it a completely different way to the
representative of Ukraine. Unlike the representative of
Ukraine, I will not cite classic literature but something
rather more earthy. All the comments I have cited
remind me of a bumper sticker I once saw in New York
a few years ago. I believe that it perfectly captures the
attitude toward these kinds of officials. It reads,
(spoke in English)
“Some politicians are like diapers. They need to be
changed often, and for the same reason.”
(spoke in Russian)
The statements that I cited earlier confirm that
high-ranking politicians, even if they are no longer
in those positions, lied to their negotiating partners,
their own people, the Security Council and the entire
international community. And it does not matter when
they lied, whether it was eight years ago or today, or
whether it was based on their personal short-term
interests or the evolving political situation. The key
point is that they lied. So why do the current members of
the Security Council not properly assess such voluntary
admissions? They have the authority to do so. Why do
they remain silent? Did we vote for the elected members
of the Security Council so that they could remain silent
in such situations? Incidentally, why not do it at the
upcoming resumption of the emergency session of the

23-0502819/20

S/PV.9262

Threats to international peace and security

General Assembly, or at yet another Security Council
meeting, where they could perhaps invite or persuade
the officials I mentioned to hold them to account?
Sooner or later, they will have to answer for their
actions and words, if not in a real court or tribunal,
then at least to be judged by history.
Instead, another draft resolution accusing the
Russian Federation of aggression will be submitted to
the General Assembly, which does not include a single
word about the true causes of the current conflict — the
eight-year destruction of the residents of Donbas, the
revival of Nazism in Ukraine and the active efforts of
the West to turn Ukraine into an anti-Russia. Today,
a week before the emergency session, I can say that
the Republic of Belarus will not participate in that
spectacle. But we will vote against the draft resolution
unless it is amended beforehand to specifically include
a paragraph condemning in the strongest terms the
actions of the officials whom I just quoted.
One of the speakers mentioned the Budapest
Memorandum earlier. Just in case, I would like to recall
that the document pertains not only to Ukraine but also
to Belarus. It obliges its signatories to refrain from
taking any coercive economic measures against the
countries that have voluntarily given up their nuclear
weapons, including Belarus. I believe that everyone
here is well aware of the large-scale war of economic
sanctions that the West is collectively waging against
Belarus and its attempts to strangle our country
economically and politically, in contravention of the
Budapest Memorandum. We have reached a point
where this war has for some time also been being waged
on the platform of the United Nations. Let me give a
concrete example — and by the way, any country could
find itself in this situation. As is well known, in 2006,

20/20

17/02/2023

Belarus presented its candidacy as a non-permanent
elected member of the Security Council for the period
from 2024 to 2025. The elections for that will be held on
8 June. For 15 years, Belarus was the only candidate to
represent the Group of Eastern European States for that
term. On 9 December 2021, Slovenia filed its candidacy
for the same seat, although it had already presented its
candidacy in 2017 to represent the Group for the period
from 2042 to 2043. I hope that everyone is well aware
that that was not Slovenia’s sovereign decision, and we
do not hold a grudge against it. But I believe that the
political motivation of such an anti-Belarus step should
be clear to everyone.
Are we afraid of losing the election, given the scale
of the anti-Belarus campaign? No, we are not. Even if
we lose, we will do it with dignity, and we are grateful to
the countries that have already shown their support for
us. I can only assure the Council that if we are elected,
we will follow a principled, independent, responsible
and honest policy. People often accuse Belarus of
playing the role of co-aggressor. They are the same
“peace-loving countries” that have the effrontery to
blame us, while flooding Ukraine with deadly weapons
and doing everything to ensure that as many people as
possible continue to die for as long as possible.
Belarus has already made huge efforts to resolve the
conflict in Ukraine and remains sincerely interested in
ending it peacefully as soon as possible. In an interview
yesterday with members of the mass media, President
Aleksandr Lukashenko comprehensively answered their
questions on the current and most critical issues of the
day. I encourage everybody to read the interview itself,
not the articles, commentary on or interpretations of it.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

23-05028
