7th
PLENARY MEETING

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Saturday, 20 September 1986,
at 10.50 a.m.

FOURTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION

NEW YORK

Official Records

President: Mr. Humayun Rasheed
CHOUDHURY (Bangladesh).

reiterated by the Assembly and proceeds to reaffirm
the inalienable right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination, freedom and national independence
in a united Namihia, including Walvis Bay, the
Penguin Islands and all the adjacent offshore islands,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) as well as the
subsequent relevant resolutions and decisions of the
Assembly and the Security Council.

AGENDA ITEM 6
Question of Namibia (concluded)

8. The draft resolution further reaffirms that the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia is the only internationally acceptable basis for a
peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia and
demands its immediate implementation without preconditions or modifications.

l. The PRESIDENT: I hereby remind representatives that the debate on agenda item 6 was concluded
at the sixth meeting. In connection with the item, the
General Assembly has before it a draft resolution,
contained in document A/S-14/L.l. I call on the
representative of Zambia to introduce the draft
resolution.

9. The draft resolution also recognizes that the
policies of "constructive engagement" and "linkage"
have hindered the realization of Namibia's independence and appeals to the United States to abandon
them.

2. Mr. MW ANANSHIKU (Zambia): It is a great
honour and privilege for me, a representative of one
of the front-line States, to introduce the draft resolution which is before the Assembly and contained in
document A/S-14/L.l.

10. In paragraph I 5 of the draft resolution the
Security Council is urged to exercise its authority
with regard to the implementation of its resolutions
385 (1976), 435 (1978), 532 (1983), 539 (1983) and
566 ( 1985) and to act decisively against any dilatory
manoeuvres and fraudulent schemes of South Africa
against Namibia.

3. Over the years, the international community has
been frustrated in its efforts to implement the United
Nations plan for the independence of Namibia as
agreed upon by the Security Council. South Africa's
intransigence remains the only obstacle in the way of
Namibia's independence.
4. In June 1985 the Security Council considered the
question of Namibia, in particular the question of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 435
( 1978). On that occasion the Council adopted resolution 566 ( 1985), by which it once again expressed its
indignation at South Africa's refusal to comply with
resolution 435 (1978) and, in particular, at Pretoria's
insistence on the irrelevant and extraneous issue of
linkage, which had obstructed the implementation of
the resolution.

11. In paragraph 19 of the draft resolution the
Security Council is called upon to convene urgently
to take action for the immediate and unconditional
implementation of the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia.

5. In his statement a few days ago [1st meeting] the
Secretary-General informed this body that there had
been no change in the position of South Africa in
regard to the issue of linkage. This has made it
impossible for the United Nations plan for Namibia
to be implemented.

13. A fair reading of the draft resolution should
make it clear that it is purely and simply an attempt
to implement the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia embodied in Security
Council resolution 435 ( 1978).

12. Finally, in the draft resolution the SecretaryGeneral is requested to report to the General Assembly as appropriate, hut not later than 31 December
1986, on its implementation.

14. On behalf of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, I appeal to all members to adopt the draft
resolution as a whole by acclamation. I submit the
draft resolution in the firm hope that it will receive
the broadest possible support from the Assembly.

6. It is a matter of grave concern that 20 years after
the General Assembly terminated the Mandate of
South Africa over Namibia [resolution 2145 (XXI)],
Namibia not only remains illegally occupied by
South Africa, but also continues to be subjected to
increasing militarization by the aggressive forces of
occupation.

15. The draft resolution is sponsored by the following Member States: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Yemen,
Equatorial Guinea. Ethiopia, German Democratic

7. The draft resolution before the General Assembly begins by laying down the basic principles
149

A/S-14/PV. 7

General Assembly-Fourteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

150
-------------------------Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia,

Iran, Islamic Republic of, Iraq, Kenya, Lao People's
Democratic Republic. Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Mongolia, Mozarr bique, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, U sanda, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia
and Zimbabwe.
16. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to e:tplain their votes
before the voting on the draft rtsolution. I remind
the Assembly that under rule ~ 8 of the rules of
procedure, "the President shall not permit the proposer of a proposal or of an amendment to explain
his vote on his own proposal or amendment." I also
remind representatives that expla 1ations of vote are
limited to I 0 minutes and should be made by
representatives from their seats.
17. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak about the craft resolution on
behalf of the twelve States members of the European
Community. We regret that onct: again it has not
been possible to reach consensus, because of certain
elements that make unanimous approval by the
General Assembly impossible.
18. The Twelve consider that, ur: der the provisions
of the settlement plan, the Constitution of an independent Namibia must be worked out by a constituent assembly appointed as a res111t of elections in
which all political groups in the Territory are able to
participate. None of those groups should, therefore,
be designated in advance as the wle and authentic
representative of the Namibian r:eople.
19. The Twelve cannot endorse t:1e call in the draft
resolution for Member States to render increased
military assistance to the South Wt:st Africa People's
Organization [SWAPO], as a means of bringing
Namibia to independence. Simil.uly, they cannot
agree to lend their support to armed struggle as a
means to that end, in spite of th~ impatience and
frustration felt by the Namibian people owing to
South Africa's continuing and illegal occupation of
the Territory. In the view of the T .velve, the general
and primary duty of the United Nations is to
promote peaceful solutions in corJormity with the
Charter, thus avoiding any encouragement of the use
of force.
20. The Twelve also reject any arbitrary and selective attack against States Members of the United
Nations or groups of countries.
21. Our respect for the division of competence
among the main bodies of the Org<mization remains
unchanged. The Security Council alone is authorized
to take decisions binding upon Member States.
22. This special session testifies t) the importance
accorded by the international community to the
question of Namibia. It is therefore all the more
regrettable that those and other controversial elements have been introduced into th(' draft resolution.
That practice risks dividing the m1:mbership of the
United Nations at a time when there is a need more
than ever to mobilize the international community in
pursuit of the common goal of intemationally recognized independence for Namibia.

23. Earlier in the debate [Jrd meeting] I set out the
position of the Twelve on the question of Namibia.
The illegal occupation of the Territory by South
Africa must be brought to an end. The only acceptable basis for a peaceful and lasting solution to the
problem is the implementation, without pre-conditions or pretext, of Security Council resolutions 385
( 1976) and 435 ( 1978). The settlement plan endorsed
by the second of those resolutions-which has been
accepted by the Government of South Africa and by
SWAPO-embodies the only universally accepted
framework for a peaceful transition to independence
in a manner that is guaranteed by the Organization to
be fair and free. We wish to see the plan implemented
in its entirety so that the people of Namibia can
move forward to the internationally recognized independence that is their due. We cannot accept any
further delay in that process or accept that the
implementation of the settlement plan should be held
up because of extraneous considerations.
24. Mr. KOUASSI (Togo) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, in a more authorized voice
than my own, we will at the appropriate time convey
to you the warmest congratulations of the Togolese
delegation on your unanimous election to the presidency of the forty-first session of the General Assembly. In the meantime, rest assured that we shall give
you our full support and that we shall at all times cooperate with you in order to ensure the smooth
running and the success of our work.
25. My country strongly condemns, without reservation and without any nuance, the retrograde and
h~inous policies pursued by the South African
regime, and its continued defiance of the international community. It is obvious that the arrogance,
intransigence, and scorn shown by Pretoria with
regard to the relevant United Nations resolutions
have been encouraged by the collusion of certain
major Powers. Furthermore, my country believes
that the imposition of comprehensive mandatory
economic sanctions against South Africa is the only
effective way of ensuring that that regime will put an
end to its illegal occupation of the international
Territory of Namibia.
26. For this reason my delegation will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/S-14/L.I. However, my
delegation will have to abstain in the separate votes
on paragraphs 13 and 14 of the draft resolution. Our
abstention on these paragraphs is in keeping with our
position of principle, which is well-known, namely
that we object to any condemnation or reference to
specific countries in a draft resolution. In the case in
point our attitude is well founded because many
other countries also co-operate with the racist regime
of South Africa or give their support to its policies,
and even maintain many forms of co-operation with
that regime. But our abstention does not in any way
diminish our commitment to the people of Namibia
and their authentic representative, SWAPO, as has
been testified to by the position which we have
maintained at all times.
27. Mr. MANGWAZU (Malawi): I wish to explain
my vote before voting on behalf of my delegation. I
want to make it clear to the members of the Assembly
that we strongly support the idea of a free Namibia. I
think this must be made very clear. We wish to make

7th meeting-20 September 1986

it clear also that we do not support the idea of
linkage. And I wish also to make it clear that, like
Togo, Malawi does not support the condemnation or
the naming of specific countries as perpetrators or as
causing the delay of the independence of Namibia.
Our wish is to get everybody's support for the draft
resolution, and for the thrust of the resolution, which
is basically the freedom of Namibia. In addition, let
me make it clear to the members of the Assembly
that Malawi is reluctant to support paragraphs 15, 16
and 17, which mention mandatory sanctions.
28. Having said this, I want to make it clear that we
shall not vote in favour of these paragraphs, to which
we object, but we shall vote for the freedom and
independence of Namibia, which is long overdue.
29. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Peru
has asked to speak on a point of order. I call on him.
30. Mr. WAGNER TIZON (Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): Yesterday, in the course of my
statement [6th meeting], I said that this special
session of the General Assembly should lead to a
clear statement by the international community with
regard to its decision to act in the face of the
intransigent attitude of the Government of Pretoria,
which has violated all the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and which illegally occupies
the Territory of Namibia and is thus denying the
Namibian people their independence, freedom and
justice to which they have a right. In this regard this
is not a time for hesitation or doubt. We are
convinced-and this has been recognized by the
General Assembly and by the Peruvian Government
in particular-that SWAPO is the legitimate representative of the people of Namibia and there can be
no doubt in this regard. Furthermore, in our opinion,
the draft resolution before us reveals a very determined desire to act, and that is what we are looking
for at this session of the Assembly. Although any
document can always be improved upon, we believe
that the draft resolution does reflect the position of
Peru on the question of Namibia. We would like to
request, therefore, that Peru be included amongst the
sponsors, and of course we would vote in favour of
the draft resolution in its entirety.
31. The PRESIDENT: I have to inform members
that the Syrian Arab Republic and Vanuatu also wish
to become sponsors of draft resolution A/S-14/L.1.
32. The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/S-14/L.l. In this connection, I should
like to inform members that the Secretary-General is
not in a position at this time to determine the
programme budget implications of the draft resolution. Should it be determined, after consultation with
the United Nations Council for Namibia, that the
implementation of the resolution would give rise to
expenditures over and above those already approved
for the activities of the Council for the biennium
1986-1987, the Secretary-General would submit a
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first
session on the estimated additional requirements for
the implementation of the resolution.
33. The Assembly will now begin the voting process. Separate votes have been requested on portions

151

of paragraphs 13 and 14 of the draft resolution. Is
there any objection to those requests?
34. Mr. MWANANSHIKU (Zambia): I should like
to raise an objection to the motion made by some of
our colleagues to vote on parts of the draft resolution
before us. I submit that since the draft resolution
represents the broad views of most of the Member
States, it should be voted on as a whole.
35. The PRESIDENT: Objection has been made to
the request for a vote by division. In accordance with
rule 89 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, "if objection is made to the request for
division, the motion for division shall be voted upon.
Permission to speak on the motion for division shall
be given only to two speakers in favour and two
speakers against." Do any other members wish to
speak on the request for division?
36. Mr. SVOBODA (Canada): As the President has
pointed out, the rules of procedure allow for two
speakers to support and two to oppose a motion such
as the one placed before us, namely, to have separate
votes on portions of the draft resolution we are now
considering. My delegation wishes to support the
motion to have separate votes on portions of paragraphs 13 and 14 of the draft resolution. It would be
unprecedented in the recent history of the General
Assembly to deny a vote on parts of a draft resolution
to any delegation requesting such a vote. To do so
would, in our view, set an unfortunate precedent for
the conduct of this forum's business and we are of the
firm belief that our proceedings should not be
circumscribed in this way. I emphasize that this does
not bear on the substance of the matter before us. In
this instance, we simply wish to support the motion
to allow a separate vote on particular parts of the
draft resolution before us. We wish to avoid limiting
the rights of delegations to make their views known
in the Assembly.
37. Mr. LAUTENSCHLAGER (Federal Republic
of Germany): My delegation wishes to support the
request for a separate vote. Indeed, it would be
unprecedented in the recent history of the General
Assembly to deny a vote on parts of a draft resolution
to any delegation that wanted it. To do so would set a
dangerous precedent for the conduct of the Assembly's business and we cannot accept that our discussion should be curtailed in this way. This has nothing
to do with the substance of the matter that we are
discussing. We simply are opposed to limiting the
rights of delegations to make their views known in
this Assembly.
38. The PRESIDENT: Are there any other speakers
on the request for division? One representative has
spoken against and two representatives have spoken
in favour of the request for division. In accordance
with rule 89, I shall now put to the vote the motion
for division. The decision we are about to take is a
procedural one and has to be taken by a simple
majority. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Belgium, Belize, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Co-

152

General Assembly-Fourteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

lombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, C'He d'Ivoire, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican R~public, Ecuador,
Egypt, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabc,n, Germany, Federa! Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, lsrad, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Philippines, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay.

Against: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Congo, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopi1, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic F.epublic of), Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Maldives, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, Poland, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Uganda, Ukrainia;l Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, VietNam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining: Barbados, Iraq, Ken)a, Lesotho, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Nepal Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guin1:a, Peru, Senegal,
Somalia, Trinidad and Tobago, T misia, Zaire.
The motion was adopted by 62 votes to 55, with 20
abstentions. 1
39. The PRESIDENT: I shall therefore put the
portion of paragraph 13 on which a separate vote has
been requested to the vote first. A s'~parate, recorded
vote has been requested on retenti::m of the phrase
"the United States Administration and".

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Bhutan, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon,
China, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, German Democratic
Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lityan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, N1geria, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Ug<mda, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
ofTanzania, VietNam, Yemen, Yug,)slavia, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Fiji, Finlanc, France, Gambia, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grena-

da, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta,
Mauritius, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Spain,
Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Abstaining: Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Egypt, Gabon, Haiti, Lesotho, Mali, Mauritania,
Mexico, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, Swaziland, Sweden, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire.
There were 65 votes in favour, 48 against and 27
abstentions. Having failed to obtain the required twothirds majority, the phrase was not retained. 2
40. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Ghana on a point of order.
41. Mr. ASAMOAH (Ghana): I apologize for intervening at this stage of the proceedings, but my
delegation would like some guidance from the President with regard to the number of votes required on
thi~ question.
42. Special rule F of annex III to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, which I believe
governs decisions on this draft resolution, reads as
follows:
"Decisions of the General Assembly on questions relating to reports and petitions concerning
the Territory of South West Africa shall be regarded as important questions within the meaning of
Article 18, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations."
My question is, are we taking decisions relating to
reports and petitions?
43. The PRESIDENT: I call on the Legal Counsel
to provide clarification.
44. Mr. FLEISCHHAUER (Legal Counsel): With
respect to the request for clarification by the delegation of Ghana, I would like to state that the words in
special rule F have been regarded in the practice of
the General Assembly-most recently at the last two
sessions-as referrins to all decisions to be taken
with respect to Namibia, including resolutions and
portions of resolutions.
45. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Ghana on a point of order.
46. Mr. ASAMOAH (Ghana): I wish to thank the
Legal Counsel for that opinion. However, it seems to
my delegation that past practice did not involve any
special session. I remember that the interpretation
given by the Legal Counsel last year was accepted by
the Assembly. But that was in respect of a report on
the Territory of South West Africa or Namibia to the
Assembly at a regular session. This, however, is a
special session of the Assembly at which there is no
report or petition before us. Therefore my delegation
has considerable difficulty understanding the appli-

7th meeting-20 September 1986

153

cation of the Legal Counsel's opinion to the present
proceedings.

Court of Justice will be a useful arbiter on this
matter.

47. I should like to know if indeed the practice to
which the Legal Counsel referred involved a special
session of the Assembly.

57. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Ghana.

48. The PRESIDENT: The point raised by the
representative of Ghana is an important one on
which, I think, we need a legal opinion. I therefore
call on the Legal Counsel to provide clarification.
49. Mr. FLEISCHHAUER (Legal Counsel): In response to the additional question asked by the
representative of Ghana, no distinction is made
between precedents set by the General Assembly at a
regular session, a special session or an emergency
special session in matters of procedure of the the
Assembly.
50. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Ghana.
51. Mr. ASAMOAH (Ghana): I am sorry to have to
drag this matter out, but I think I made two points in
my last intervention, one relating to the fact that this
is a special session and the other to the fact that there
are no petitions or reports before us. I am quite sure
that many of us would be happy to hear what the
Legal Counsel says in respect to the second point.
52. The PRESIDENT: I call on the Legal Counsel
to provide clarification on the second point.
53. Mr. FLEISCHHAUER (Legal Counsel): In my
reply to the first question I pointed out that the
practice of the General Assembly has been to make
no distinction in the application of special rule F of
annex III in dealing with reports or petitions or
resolutions, and that it has come to interpret special
rule F as applying to all decisions on Namibia. I
cannot recall any case in which the General Assembly
had determined that the existence of a report or a
petition was a prerequisite for the application of the
two-thirds majority provided for in special rule F.
54. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Nigeria has asked to speak on a point of order. I call upon
him.
55. Mr. ONONAIYE (Nigeria): I apologize for
appearing to want to hold up the proceedings. Far be
it from an unlearned person to attempt to lock horns
with learned and honourable men when they give
opinions on matters that are very, very important to
a considerable number of delegations.
56. I confess that I myself am a little ignorant since
the area of discussion touches on law, and I do not
know whether in your own wisdom, Mr. President,
there is not a basis here for wanting to seek a neutral
interpretation as to the position of the delegation of
Ghana, with which we very much sympathize and
which we support, and the opinion given to us by the
Legal Counsel, especially since he has said that he
cannot cite a precedent. It looks as though the
Assembly would just have to be at the mercy of an
assertion by the Legal Counsel. Perhaps there is no
precedent for this, and it looks like the International

58. Mr. ASAMOAH (Ghana): My delegation has
difficulty in accepting the validity of the opinion
given by the Legal Counsel. If I am not out of order, I
would ask that, in order that we do not establish bad
precedents, a vote be taken on this issue. It is quite
clear to me that this rule relates to reports and
petitions and that the practice in the past has related
to reports that have been submitted to the Assembly
in respect of the Territory. There is no precedent that
a vote by a two-thirds majority present and voting is
required when no report is submitted to the Assembly. I think this is very important. Even if any such
precedents existed, they would be bad ones, and we
should really not clog the work of the Assembly with
precedents that could not stand up to critical examination. Therefore, if this is not too much to ask, I
would request that we all express our opinions on this
issue.
59. Mr. VRAALSEN (Norway): Let me say that I
deeply regret that we have ended up in the procedural
wrangle in which we now find ourselves. At the
outset I really did not believe that this would happen.
Thanks to past experience and the practice of past
years, the situation appears very, very clear, at least
to my delegation. We went through the same thing
last year and the year before that, and we had
opinions from Legal Counsel. I would have expected
the situation to be equally clear to other delegations.
60. The Legal Counsel has given us his opinion on
three occasions here. In my delegation's view his
opinion is consistent. My delegation does not see any
difference between regular sessions, special sessions
and emergency special sessions as far as the rules of
procedure are concerned. They are equally applicable
to all three kinds of sessions. We use the same rules,
the same procedures. I do not really think any
attempt should be made to construe a difference. So
first of all I should like to express my whole-hearted
support for the opinion that has been given.
61. The representative of Ghana has just suggested,
if I heard him correctly, that the Assembly should
vote on the opinion of the Legal Counsel. That, if I
may say so, would be very unusual indeed. I cannot
in my many years in the Assembly remember any
occasion when we have voted on the opinion of the
Legal Counsel. I would ask you, Mr. President, to
give us your guidance. That would be the normal
practice. In view of what has been said and in view of
the opinion of the Legal Counsel, you should give us
your guidance and then the Assembly would abide by
it. I would first say that to vote on the opinion of the
Legal Counsel would certainly be very unusual and
would be unacceptable to my delegation, and I would
seek your guidance in this matter, Sir.
Mr. SCHRICKE (France) (interpretation from
French): My delegation of course endorses the com-

62.

ments just made by the representative of Norway and
I would add that my delegation is rather surprised at
the request for a vote made by the representative of
Ghana. You, Sir, had already taken a decision. After

154

General .\ssembly-Fourteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

the vote you stated that the two-tt irds majority had
not been achieved and that therefore the phrase
should not be retained; and you had banged the gavel
before the representative of Ghana requested clarification. My delegation naturally did not oppose that
request for clarification, considering that your decision had already been taken. There'ore, were there to
be a vote, that would be a challeng{· of your decision.
63. The PRESIDENT: I wish the matter had been
put before the International Court of Justice, as the
representative of Nigeria has said. The practice on
previous occasions has been that on important
questions, in application of rule F <.nd in accordance
with Article 18, paragraph 2 of the Charter, decisions
of the General Assembly were taken by a two-thirds
majority of the members present a 1d voting, and in
view of the fact that the question w.1s raised after the
gavel had been struck I would rule that since no
formal proposal had been made for changing the
practice so far followed, a two-thirds majority shall
be required for a decision of this nature.
It was so decided.
64. The PRESIDENT: I shall no\v put to the vote
the portion of paragraph 14 of the draft resolution on
which a separate, recorded vote ha:; been requested,
that is, the phrase "pursued by th·! present United
States Administration".
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Bhutan, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Rept blic, Cameroon,
China, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, German Democratic
Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia, Mozamb:que, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Seychelles, Sri Lanka,
Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Ric<, Cote d'lvoire,
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Fed·!ral Republic of,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japatl, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malawi, Mauritius, Moroc~o, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Spain, Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom :lf Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Stat{S of America.
Abstaining: Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Central African Republic, Egypt, Gabon, Gambia,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Lesotho, Mali, Malta, Mexico,
Nepal, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Pana na, Papua New
Guinea, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,

Swaziland, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire.
There were 60 votes in favour. 48 against and 30
abstentions. Having failed to obtain the required twothirds majority, the phrase was not retained. 2
65. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote
the draft resolution as a whole, as amended. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
The draft resolution as a whole, as amended, was
adopted by 126 votes to none, with 24 abstentions
(resolution S-1411).3
66. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on representatives who wish to explain their votes.
67. Mr. HELGASON (Iceland): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countriesDenmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Iceland.
68. The Nordic countries view this special session
of the General Assembly as a unique opportunity to
unite the international community and demonstrate
to South Africa that there is a general consensus

7th meeting-20 September 1986

among Member States on the fundamental issues
concerning the question of Namibia.
69. We all agree that Security Council resolution
435 ( 1978) is the only internationally acceptable
basis for a peaceful and lasting solution, and unanimously support the determined efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about its speedy implementation. The Namibian people must be permitted without delay to determine its own future through free
and fair elections under the supervision and control
of the United Nations, in accordance with this
resolution. All attempts to introduce extraneous
issues or other delaying tactics have been and must
be condemned, including the establishment of the socalled interim administration in Namibia. The installation of that administration must be rejected as
illegal, null and void.
70. The Nordic countries regard South Africa's
continuing illegal occupation of Namibia as a threat
to international peace and security. The international
community should increase its pressure on South
Africa in order to speed up the implementation of the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia and the Security Council should consider without
further delay effective measures to that end, including mandatory sanctions.
71. Meanwhile, there is an urgent need for generous
and increased economic and humanitarian assistance
to the people of Namibia.
72. The Nordic countries are dismayed that despite
active efforts to reach a general consensus this has
not proved possible. The resolution just adopted
contains a number of elements that cause us difficulties of principle. I shall outline those well-known
difficulties in general terms.
73. We cannot accept formulations that imply
endorsement by the United Nations of the use of
armed struggle or call for material or military
assistance to such struggle. One of the basic principles of this Organization, enshrined in the Charter, is
to promote peaceful solutions of conflicts.
74. We deplore the inappropriate singling out of
individual countries or groups of countries and their
policies as responsible for South Africa's actions.
75. We must generally reserve our position with
regard to formulations which fail to take into account
that only the Security Council can adopt decisions
binding upon Member States.
76. Finally, the Nordic countries share the view
that all parties enjoying support in Namibia should
be allowed to take part in the political process leading
to the independence of Namibia and to the establishment of a Government through free and fair elections. SWAPO is such a party, and it is fundamental
that SWAPO be made part of any solution to the
question of Namibia. However, we have reservations
concerning formulations which could prejudice the
outcome of the political process 1 have mentioned.
77. Mr. AL-ANSI (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic): My delegation followed with interest this morning the results of the important meetings held

ISS

recently to prepare the ground for the formulation of
the draft resolution submitted to the General Assembly today on the question of Namibia. We had hoped
that the draft resolution would be submitted in the
positive form originally perused by us, which was in
keeping with the agreement reached in the United
Nations Council for Namibia.
78. However, we were surprised to find new developments, linking one country-the United States of
America-and no other, with the abhorrent policies
of the Government of South Africa, and holding that
one country responsible for all the consequences of
the delay in implementation of United Nations
resolutions, particularly Security Council resolutions
385 (1976) and 435 (1978).
79. As both those resolutions were adopted unanimously, with the positive participation of the United
States of America, and as there was a general
tendency to adopt draft resolution A/S-14/L. i by
consensus if we all agreed to delete the reference to
the United States of America from paragraphs 13 and
14, this, in our view, would have been a positive
thing to do in the real interest of Namibia and its
people.
80. As we believe that the United States of America
is not the only State that has ties with and interests in
South Africa or the only country capable of influencing the present situation in southern Africa and
Namibia, my delegation was compelled, regrettably,
to abstain from voting on the matter of mentioning
by name a country that has diplomatic and friendly
relations of co-operation with my country, namely,
the United States of America, the country singled out
in the paragraphs, particularly in paragraph 14.
81. Although we abstained in the vote on paragraphs 13 and 14 because of the naming of the
United States and because of the strong language of
paragraph 14 in particular, we have none the less
expressed our full support for Namibia by voting in
favour of the resolution as a whole. Having done this,
we wish to call upon all members of the General
Assembly to co-operate fully in making possible the
independence of Namibia and to refrain from linking
it to any bilateral interest or to any special, regional
or international relationships, whatever the justification for such linkage may be. This we can all do by
supporting the efforts of the Secretary-General
towards the early accession by Namibia to independence and freedom.
82. Mr. WOOLCOTT (Australia): Australia has
abstained on the draft resolution which has just been
submitted to the Assembly. It did so with considerable regret, because of our conviction that the States
Members of the United Nations should form a solid
front on the Namibian problem, which would send a
very clear message to South Africa. The division
evident in the membership over the contents of that
draft resolution is unfortunately likely to be a source
of consolation to South Africa.
83. As a member of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, the Australian delegation worked hard to
forge a draft resolution that would have provided a
basis for the consensus that this important question
deserves. In four meetings, the Council produced a

156

Gl'neral Assembly-Fourteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

draft resolution which might wdl have attracted
widespread support, including ar, affirmative vote
from the Australian delegation. [t is in our view
unfortunate that this draft resolution was not proceeded with and that new elements were introduced
that were known to be unaccet:table, in varying
degrees, to a number of countrie;.
84. My delegation was not a part 'I to the consensus
on that text in the Council, because of those additions and changes. For similar reasons, we felt
obliged to abstain on draft resolution A/S-14/L.l.
Our reasons for so doing are not mw, and there is no
need to go into them in detail. We had hoped to
move forward on the question of Namibia at this
special session and regret that in the end we could
not do so.
85. I shall briefly mention our reservations about
references to the legitimacy of the armed struggle.
While we can appreciate the desperation which many
Namibians and SWAPO must feel in the face of
continuing South African obstruct on, Australia has
always believed that peaceful means should be used
in the settlement of disputes, as is made clear in the
Charter of the United Nations it~.elf.
86. In addition, while we can understand the reasons that led to the concepts expressed in paragraphs
13 and 14 of the text, and while we do understand the
frustration that African States and SWAPO feel, we
had problems with the tone and l.mguage in which
those paragraphs were couched. Statements of fact
are one thing; pejorative referenc1!S to a sovereign
State are another. Australia, as i; well known, is
opposed to the concept of linking the independence
of Namibia to the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola.
87. Mr. MOYA-PALENCIA (M~xico) (interpretation/rom Spanish): The Mexican ddegation voted in
favour of draft resolution A/S-14;L.l. Our vote is
consistent with the position that we have adopted in
the past on the question of Namibia. However, we
are firmly convinced that it would tave been preferable to stick to the text that was agreed upon last
Monday, 15 September, in the United Nations
Council for Namibia-a text wt ich, for reasons
difficult to understand, was subsequently changed by
a group of delegations and then sut mitted under the
symbol A/S-14/L.l.
88. If we compare the original tex1 drawn up by the
United Nations Council for Namibi1 with the text we
have adopted today, we arrive at the conclusion that
the differences between those two kxts boil down to
changes in editing and tone which co not in any way
affect questions of substance. But those changes in
tone have compelled the Assembly 1o take a separate
decision on certain paragraphs of the draft resolution-a procedure which has eroded the virtual
unanimity that existed in this Hall in respect to the
question of Namibia. That is wh 'I my delegation
abstained on the separate votes on parts of paragraphs 13 and 14.
89. I should add that we abstained not because we
disagreed with the substance of the issues contained
therein, but because we could not agree to the form in
which draft resolution A/S-14/L.l was drawn up.

90. It is not necessary to reiterate our solidarity
with the cause of the Namibian people. Those who
have read the statement we made last Thursday in
the general debate [3rd meeting] are already aware of
our position. That is also true of the members of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, the participants in the International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia, held at Vienna, and
those who are familiar with our voting on this matter
in past years.
91. As Mexico is a member of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, my delegation took an active
part in drawing up a draft resolution to accord with
the guidelines agreed upon at the Council's meeting
at the end of July under the chairmanship of Mr.
Paul Lusaka. On Monday, 15 September, after
lengthy negotiations, the members of the Council had
the clear impression that agreement had been
reached on a broadly acceptable text. However, at the
request of some delegations, certain changes were
introduced into the text, and included in draft
resolution A/S-14/L.l, which was originally sponsored by only 13 of the Council's 31 members. As I
said, those changes did not affect the substance of the
draft resolution, but the consequence has been that a
substantial number of delegations are no longer
prepared to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
92. We have thus lost a great opportunity for the
General Assembly to reflect faithfully what is undoubtedly the position of virtually the whole international community on the question of Namibia and on
the policy Pretoria is carrying out in that Territory in
open defiance of world public opinion.
93. Lastly, the Mexican delegation would like to
place on record its disagreement with the procedure
that has been followed on this occasion, a procedure
that must inevitably adversely affect the cause of the
Namibian people.
94. Mr. FISCHER (Austria): It is with great regret
that my delegation had to abstain in the voting on
draft resolution A/S-14/L.l. My delegation, together
with others who have a proud record of supporting
the just cause of Namibia's independence, would
have preferred this year's special session of the
General Assembly to adopt a resolution that would
have put Namibia on the road to independence in
accordance with the provisions of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978).
95. My country has consistently regretted the practice of name-calling in this forum and has voiced its
reservations about the principle of armed struggle.
Austria, furthermore, cannot accept the provision
relating to military assistance, even if it is to achieve
the noble aim of freedom and independence. Calls
for armed struggle and military assistance do not
behove an Organization which is built on principles
of non-use of force and the peaceful settlements of
disputes.
96. Although my country has always supported the
just cause of the Namibian people and has had, twice
in 13 months, the privilege of being the host to
important conferences on this vital issue, and while it
understands the impatience of the Namibian people,
20 years after the termination of South Africa's

7th meeting-20 September 1986

Mandate over the Territory, to gain immediate
independence, Austria would have preferred a wording reflecting the full participation of all parties
involved in the process to bring independence to
Namibia.
97. Austria maintains that solutions should be
found solely by peaceful means, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is for that reason that my delegation had
to abstain in the voting on draft resolution A/S14/L.1 as a whole, and cast a negative vote on
paragraphs 13 and 14.
98. Mr. ARMSTRONG (New Zealand): The final
version of this draft resolution was not supported by
my delegation. We regret this, because we have had
for many years firm views on the inadmissibility of
Pretoria's illegal occupation of Namibia. We are of
the view that it is through continued and united
pressure from a resolute world community that the
final liberation of the people of Namibia will most
surely be achieved. This resolution will not make
possible such a display of unity.
99. We have several difficulties with the text. For
example, my delegation cannot agree with the endorsement of armed struggle by the General Assembly. Our negative vote on parts of paragraphs 13 and
14 reflected our objection to the singling out of one
Member country in the text. This has not proved a
productive course in the past.
100. We have rejected in the past, and do so again
today, the linkage theory in relation to the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 ( 1978), but
we were not prepared to endorse the naming of one
country in this context when another major Power
might well, for example, have been named in the
context of paragraph 18, which condemns the plunder by South Africa and other foreign economic
interests of the natural resources of Namibia. This
situation illustrates that to embark on name-calling
in such resolutions is to embark upon a slippery
slope. It was for these reasons, among others, that we
voted against paragraphs 13 and 14 of the draft
resolution and abstained in the voting on the resolution as a whole.
101. Mr. WALTERS (United States of America):
My delegation has listened carefully to the debate
these past days on Namibia. Much that has been said
conforms to United States views on this important
issue. For example, we support fully peaceful and
rapid implementation of Security Council resolution
435 (1978). We are convinced that the presence of
foreign troops in the area is an impediment to peace.
We condemn cross-border actions on the part of the
South African Defence Force.
l 02. The United States has been engaged in extended negotiations with involved parties for the purpose
of expediting implementation of resolution 435
( 1978) in a manner that takes the interests of all into
careful consideration. Unfortunately, since the suspension of diplomatic efforts, the war has intensified.
Various factions are poised for combat, both in
Namibia and in neighbouring Angola, with the
inevitable result that peace is forced to take a seat on
the sidelines.

157

103. My Government rejects, however, all accusations that hold the United States responsible for lack
of progress. The Government at Luanda failed to use
the opportunity of the proposed 1 August date
certain to commence implementation of resolution
435 (1978). The South Africans continue to violate
Angola's border. The civil war inside Angola rages
on. I have listened to a number of delegations
accusing my Government of linking the withdrawal
of Cuban troops from Angola to the implementation
of resolution 435 ( 1978), but I recall that the
Government of Angola itself, in its platform contained in a letter dated 17 November 1984 from the
President of the People's Republic of Angola to the
Secretary-Generat,4 implicitly accepted the principle
that Namibian independence could only be achieved
in the context of Cuban troop withdrawal from
Angola.
104. Furthermore, I would note in this same context that Cuban President Fidel Castro, addressing
the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, recently held at
Harare, pledged that his troops are prepared to
remain in Angola "for as long as apartheid exists in
South Africa". We do not accept that Cuba can
unilaterally determine the conditions for the removal
of its troops from Africa.
105. My Government does not believe that the
resolution voted on today will advance Namibian
independence in any way. It seems to reject by
inference a peaceful resolution of the question of
Namibia. But my Government does not believe the
peace process is over. Nor do we expect any involved
participant to act against his perceived interests. The
basic outlines for a regional agreement are known to
all parties. The conflicts cannot be resolved militarily. The United States does not have an American
solution for Angola's internal problems. We saw 1
August of this year as an opportunity, not a deadline,
and remain committed to reaching a timely agreement on the entire Namibian independence package.
To this end we stand ready to meet with all those
whose concurrence is a sine qua non to any final
agreement.
106. My Government abstained on the resolution
under consideration here today despite the numerous
flaws contained therein. We did so based on our
membership in the Western contact group and the
role our good offices have played in advancing
independence for Namibia under Security Council
resolution 435 (1978). We earnestly hope that the
coming weeks will see a recommencement of the
dialogue that is so essential for a peaceful solution to
the problem of Namibian independence.
107. Mrs. BETHEL-DALY (Bahamas): The Bahamian delegation voted in favour of retaining paragraphs 13 and 14 as they exist in the text, for two
principal reasons. First, there is an almost universal
feeling that the concepts of linkage and constructive
engagement mentioned in those paragraphs are major obstacles to the freedom and independence of
Namibia. Secondly, my delegation feels bound to
lend this form of support to a people who have been
struggling for so many years to achieve personal
dignity and to preserve the integrity of their Territory.

158

General Assembly-Fourteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

108. Having said that, my de egation wishes to
reiterate its opposition to name-calling or the selective singling out of any country. While we shall
continue to espouse that position in future, we do not
consider our position as just take 11 to be contrary to
that view, since we feel that :he paragraphs in
question pinpoint the principal controversy or conflict surrounding the question of Namibia's independence.
109. My delegation also wisht:s to reiterate its
reluctance to support concepts of .umed struggle and
military assistance, and would have wished to see a
resolutiOn unencumbered by divisiveness. But we are
also aware that if these causes were not present there
would be others to delay the implementation of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978). We seem
always to be in a no-win situation on these delicate
matters; while we fiddle, the p~ople of Namibia
continue to suffer.
110. We can only hope that Member States will
endeavour to put the United Na1ions first and not
allow our differences to blind us to our responsibilities. This in large part prompted my delegation to
take the position it just took.
111. Mr. LEGWAILA (Botswana): I wish simply to
state that, although we supported the resolution and
continue to support it totally, we wish to place on
record our inability to implement any sanctions
against South Africa as called for in paragraphs 15,
16 and 17.
112. Mr. DELPECH (Argentir. a) (interpretation
from Spanish): Argentina support{:d the retention in
their original form of paragraphs 13 and 14 of the
resolution we have just adopted. VIe did this for two
reasons.
113. My Government agrees wit:1 the substance of
those paragraphs. Moreover, we believe that it is
urgently necessary for all members of the international community-in particular thos1~ with the greatest
ability to influence Pretoria-effe,;tively to increase
their pressure speedily to bring aJout the independence of Namibia.
114. We wish, however, to reitetate our doubts as
to the advisability of making critical reference to
countries by name in resolutions on this or other
issues. The fact is that such reference militates
against attracting the full support of the Assembly for
such issues and, in the final analy;;is, could even be
harmful to the cause of the Namibian people, whose
just struggle would i:nefit at this :rucial stage from
the active, united support of the entire international
community.
115. Finally, my delegation vo1ed in favour of
taking separate votes on proposah: or amendments,
as provided for in rule 89 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly. We understand this to be the
undeniable right of Member States, the exercise of
which should not be curtailed.
116. Mr. SVOBODA (Canada): My delegation
wishes to explain its abstention on rhe resolution just
adopted and its non-participatioa in the debate
during the special session thus far. The latter should

in no way be taken as a lack of interest in the plight of
Namibia and the Namibian people. We very much
continue to be grieved that the people of Namibia are
still denied their internationally recognized independence after more than a century of colonial rule. The
community of nations must, therefore, press South
Africa to change its offensive policies towards the
Territory.
11 7. Nor does our abstention on the resolution as a
whole indicate in any way what would be the
Canadian position were we not a member of the
Western contact group established pursuant to Security Council resolution 435 (1978). We believe,
however, that the contact group may still have a role
to play during the actual implementation of that
resolution as well as in bringing about an agreement
to set a meaningful date to implement the United
Nations settlement plan.
118. Thus, our abstention on the entire resolution
was for technical and procedural reasons connected
with our membership of that group. It flows from
what I said that we strongly support the immediate
and long-overdue independence of Namibia and
appropriate measures and resources both to prepare
the Namibians for the self-management of their
country and to campaign internationally for such
independence.
119. While it shares some of the reservations
expressed, for example, by the European Community
and Australia earlier, Canada is nevertheless ready to
concede that there are many positive elements in the
resolution just adopted, and we are grateful to those
who attempted to achieve a fully satisfactory resolution.
120. As to the votes on separate phrases of paragraphs 13 and 14, we were constrained to oppose
those parts of the paragraphs as originally proposed
due to our consistent opposition to unnecessary, and
indeed unhelpful, instances of name-calling.
121. Mr. MAKEKA (Lesotho): My delegation abstained on paragraphs 13 and 14 inasmuch as we had
not received voting instructions. We voted in favour
of the resolution as a whole because we fully share
and support its purport in general. Suffice it to say
that my delegation, as I stated before, has difficulties
with paragraphs 15, 16 and 17, in that we are not in a
position to impose any form of sanctions against
South Africa.
122. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Angola, who has asked to exercise his right of
reply.
123. Mr. DE FIGUEIREDO (Angola): In reply to
the accusations launched by the representative of the
United States, first of all I wish to inform the States
Members of the United Nations that there is no civil
war in Angola. There is a war of aggression being
perpetrated by the racist regime of South Africa, with
the help, in fact, of the United States. Linkage, a
concept created and perpetrated by the United States
in 1981, is the only obstacle to implementation of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978). Bear in mind
that the Council has condemned the concept of
linkage.

7th meeting-20 September 1986

124. The presence of the Cuban forces in Angola is
a matter of bilateral agreement between two sovereign Governments. We would not permit any other
Government to dictate the policy of our own Government. South Africa continues to invade and attack
Angola, a country with which South Africa has no
borders.
125. We regret the accusations perpetrated by the
United States representative. I am certainly sorry to
have brought this to your attention at this stage.
126. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Cuba, who has asked to exercise his right of reply.

159

Angola and that Cuba will always fully respect all
decisions by Angola on the subject.
132. I reiterate that Cuba is ready to maintain its
presence in Angola in compliance with its international obligations as long as is necessary-that is to
say, as long as there is a threat to Angola's territorial
integrity, independence and sovereignty, that is. until
apartheid disappears and Namibia is independent.
133. The PRESIDENT: The observer of SWAPO
has requested to make a statement. I call on him in
accordance with General Assembly resolution
311152.

127. Mr. MALMIERCA PEOLI (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): The United States has repeatedly
proclaimed its alliance with the racist apartheid
regime of Pretoria, which it has described as a policy
of "constructive engagement". This alliance is a
decisive element in South Africa's unwillingness to
accept Security Council and other United Nations
decisions calling for the independence of Namibia.

134. Mr. GURIRAB (South West Africa People's
Organization): That the special session on the question of Namibia has been held and has seen the
participation of a large number of Foreign Ministers
in the debate is a victory for us. We thank those
States which, out of genuine concern for Namibia's
independence, have, over the years, without fear or
favour, supported our struggle and r~:o1ai~:cd unswerving in their solidarity with our C<• .~sr.

128. Moreover, on the pretext of linking the start of
the independence process with withdrawal of Cuban
internationalist forces from Angola, the United
States has by its delaying tactics been obstructin~ the
Namibian independence process. Interestmgly
enough, the Pretoria racist regime has adopted the
same tactics.

135. We are victims of occupation--victims of
aggression, humiliation and degradation. We are a
struggling people. We therefore need the support and
assistance of the whole world.

129. Nevertheless, at this special session of the
General Assembly on the question of Namibia, the
United States has objected to having the draft
resolution make mention of the United States in
connection with those two particular questions. If
that opposition is a sign of shame, it is a positive
factor.
130. The representative of the United States has
referred to the statement made by President Fidel
Castro at the recently held Eighth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries. We believe it useful for us to repeat the
words of President Fidel Castro on that occasion
when he said:
"Both the Yankee imperialists and the South
African racists are doing everything in their power
to see the Cuban internationalist troops withdrawn
from Angola on the pretext that this is a precondition for the independence of Namibia. By
common agreement the Governments of Cuba and
Angola have responded: 'First implement Security
Council resolution 435 ( 1978); let there be no more
threats of aggression against Angola; call a halt to
the dirty war; stop supporting the mercenary
bands. Only then can a gradual, phased withdrawal
of the 20,000 Cuban troops which are defending
strategic lines in southern Angola commence. The
remaining Cuban military personnel will be withdrawn only when the sovereign Governments of
Cuba and Angola deem it appropriate-and without any pre-conditions."'
131. On that occasion President Fidel Castro also
reiterated Cuba's well-known position that the presence of internationalist Cuban troops in Angola is
based on a decision of the Government and people of

136. But we are also realists. The struggle has
taught us to be so. We are therefore not impressed by
the fallacious preoccupation with consensus in our
situation. If consensus means that we should not
point a finger at, or name, those countries that are
directly responsible for our suffering and the reprehensible delaying of our independence, then we do
not need consensus: we need the honest and sincere
votes of our true friends-and we have got their
votes.
137. We know our friends; and we also know
Pretoria's friends, who for selfish reasons and by
their own actions have made themselves enemies of
our people. I promise here that SWAPO will continue
to mention the United States of America by name as
long as the United States of America continues to
insist on linking our independence to the extraneous
issue of the presence of the Cuban internationalist
forces in the People's Republic of Angola. That is the
pre-condition which is today primarily responsible
for the delaying of Namibia's independence.
138. Before I conclude, may I say this: All of us are
against violence. We are a small population. We
would have liked to achieve our freedom and independence by peaceful means. So we say to those who
profess abhorrence of violence and the intensification of the armed struggle that they should show the
courage of their convictions by removing the South
African occupation army-more than 100,000
strong-from Namibian soil. So long as that occupation army remains in our country, so long as the
illegal occupation of our country continues, so long
as military aggression persists in our country, we
have no qualms about calling for support to intensify
the armed struggle for the liberation of our country.
139. If that 100,000-strong occupation army is
removed from our country, by people who profess to

160

General ,\ssembly-Fourteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

be against violence and armed struggle, there will be
no need for debates of the General Assembly on
Namibia's independence; there will be no need for
special sessions. Instead, as I hope, we will be
discussing the question of Namibia, as a sovereign,
independent country, in the conteJ:t of international
co-operation. Until that happens, we appeal to our
friends to render all assistance and support to
SWAPO to continue the heroic and patriotic struggle.
140. The PRESIDENT: We hav~ thus concluded
our consideration of agenda item 6 and have come to
the end of the fourteenth speciHl session of the
General Assembly. I extend my hea ·tfelt appreciation
to all delegations for their co-o{>eration with me
throughout this very important special session.
AGENDA ITEM 2

Minute of silent prayer or meditation
141. The PRESIDENT: I invite representatives to
stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or
meditation.

The members of the Assembly objerved a minute of
silence.

Closure of the session
142. The PRESIDENT: I declare closed the fourteenth special session of the General Assembly.

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

NOTES

'The delegation of Solomon Islands subsequently informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour of the motion; the
delegations of Antigua and Barbuda, Bolivia and Saudi Arabia
subsequently informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
abstain.
2The delegations of Antigua and Barbuda and Solomon Islands
subsequently informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
abstain in the voting on the paragraph.
3The delegations of Antigua and Barbuda, Saint Christopher and
Nevis and Solomon Islands subsequently informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
40.f]icial Records of the Security Council. Thirty-ninth Year.
Supplement for October, November and December 1984, document
S/16838.
