198

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

and to ensure, by both administrative and legislative measures, that the territory of those States and other territories under their control, as well as their nationals, are not
used for the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and
transit of mercenaries, or the planning of such activities
designed to destabilize or overthrow the Government of
any State and to fight the national liberation movements
struggling against racism, apartheid, colonial domination
and foreign intervention and occupation for their independence, territorial integrity and national unity;
5. Urges all States to take the necessary measures under their respective domestic laws to prohibit the recruitment, financing, training and transit of mercenaries on
their territory;
6. Calls upon all States to extend humanitarian assistance to victims of situations resulting from the use of
mercenaries, as well as from colonial or alíen domination
or foreign occupation;
7. Considers it inadmissible to use channels of
humanitarian and other assistance to finance, train and
arm mercenaries;
8. Welcomes with satisfaction the appointment by the
Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1987/16
of 9 March 1987, 26 of a special rapporteur to study the
matter with a view to preparing a report for consideration
by the Commission at its forty-fourth session and requests
that the report be transmitted to the General Assembly at
its forty-third session;
9. Decides to pay due attention to the matter at its
forty-third session under the item entitled "lmportance of
the universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and ofthe speedy granting ofindependence
to colonial countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/97.

Elimination of ali forms of religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the need to promote universal respect for,
and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without distinction as to race, sex, language
or religion,
Reaffirming its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981,
by which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination
Based on Religion or Belief,
Recal/ing its resolution 41/112 of 4 December 1986, in
which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
continue its consideration of measures to implement the
Declaration,
Encouraged by the efforts being made by the Commission on Human Rights and by the Sub-Commission on
Prevention ofDiscrimination and Protection ofMinorities
to study relevant developments affecting the implementation of the Declaration,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1987/ 15 of 4 March 1987 26 and Economic and Social
Council decision 1987/143 of 29 May 1987, whereby the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur appointed to examine
incidents and governmental actions in ali parts of the
world that are incompatible with the provisions of the
Declaration and to recommend remedia! measures as appropriate, was extended for one year,

Noting with satisfaction that the Sub-Commission on
Prevention ofDiscrimination and Protection ofMinorities
examined at its thirty-ninth session the study concluded
by the Special Rapporteur, 77 in accordance with SubCommission resolution 1983/31 of 6 September 1983, 78
on the current dimensions of the problems of intolerance
and of discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief
and laid the foundation in its resolution 1987/33 of 4 September 1987 79 for future in-depth study of aspects of the
issues raised in the study,
Emphasizing that non-governmental organizations and
religious bodies and groups at every leve! have an important role to play in the promotion oftolerance and the protection of freedom of religion or belief,
Seriously concerned that intolerance and discrimination
on the grounds of religion or belief continue to exist in
many parts of the world,
Believing that further efforts are therefore required to
promote and protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion and belief and to eliminate ali forms of intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief,
1. Reaffirms that freedom of thought, conscience, religion and belief is a right guaranteed to ali without discrimination;
2. Urges States, therefore, in accordance with their respective constitutional systems and with such internationally accepted instruments as the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 2 the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights 13 and the Declaration on the Elimination
of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based
on Religion or Belief to provide, where they have not already done so, adequate constitutional and legal guarantees offreedom ofthought, conscience, religion and belief,
including the provision of effective remedies where there is
intolerance or discrimination based on religion or belief;
3. Stresses, in this connection, the value of the work in
progress in the Commission on Human Rights on the
preparation of a compendium of national legislation and
regulations on the question of freedom of religion or belief
and invites States to provide the necessary information to
the Secretary-General, with particular regard to the measures taken to combat intolerance or discrimination in this
field;
4. Urges ali States to take ali appropriate measures to
combat intolerance and to encourage understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief and, in this context, to examine where necessary the supervision and training of their civil servants,
educators and other public officials to ensure that, in the
course of their official duties, they respect different religions and beliefs and do not discriminate against persons
professing other religions or beliefs;
5. Invites the United Nations University and other
academic and research institutions to undertake programmes and studies on the encouragement of understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief;
6. Considers it desirable to enhance the promotional
and public information activities ofthe United Nations in
matters relating to freedom of religion or belief;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to give
high priority to the dissemination of the text of the Decla77 E/CN.4/Sub.2/1987/26.
78 See E/CN.4/!984/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/43

and Corr. l and 2,
cha¡- XXI, sect. A.
7 See E/CN.4/1988/37-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1987/42 and Corr.l, chap. 1,
sect. B.

VI.

ration on the Elimination of Ali Forros of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in all the
official languages ofthe United Nations, and to take all appropriate measures to make the text available for use by
United Nations information centres, as well as by other interested bodies;
8. Requests the Secretary-General in this context to invite interested non-governmental organizations to consider what further role they could envisage playing in the
implementation of the Declaration and in its dissemination in national and local languages;
9. Urges ali States to consider disseminating the text of
the Declaration in their respective national languages and
to facilitate its dissemination in national and local languages;
10. Welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur appointed to examine incidents and governmental actions in all parts of the world that are incompatible with the provisions of the Declaration and to
recommend remedia! measures as appropriate;
l l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-fourth session to consider the study of the current dimensions of the problems of intolerance and discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief in the light of the
observations transmitted to it by the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities;
12. Notes that the Commission on Human Rights intends to consider also at its forty-fourth session the question of a binding international instrument in this field and
emphasizes, in this connection, the relevance of General
Assembly resolution 41/120 of 4 December 1986 entitled
"Setting international standards in the field of human
rights";
13. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue its consideration of measures to implement the
Declaration and to report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its forty-third
session;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the itero entitled "Elimination of all
forros of religious intolerance" and to consider the report
of the Commission on Human Rights under that itero.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/98.

lmplications of scientific and technological developments for human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December 1978, in
which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
urge the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection ofMinorities to undertake, as a matter
of priority, a study of the question of the protection of
those detained on the grounds of mental ill-health, with a
view to formulating guidelines,
Mindful of the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant to
the role ofhealth personnel, particularly physicians, in the
protection of prisoners and detainees against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, 80

80 Resolution 37 /194, annex.

199

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also its resolution 41/114 of 4 December 1986,
in which it again urged the Commission on Human Rights
and the Sub-Commission to expedite their consideration
of this question, so that the Commission could submit its
views and recommendations, including a draft body of
guidelines, principies and guarantees, to the General A~sembly at its forty-third session, through the Econom1c
and Social Council,
Reaffirming Commission on Human Rights resolution
1986/12 of 10 March 1986,61
Taking note of resolution 1987/22 of 3 September 1987
of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities, 81
Expressing deep concern at the repeated evidence of the
misuse of psychiatry to detain persons on non-medica!
grounds, as reflected in the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission, 112
Reaffirming its conviction that detention of persons in
mental institutions on account of their political views or
on other non-medica! grounds is a violation of their human rights,
Noting that, because the Working Group of the SubCommission has made only limited progress so far, the
Sub-Commission is still far from concluding its consideration of the draft body of guidelines, principies and guarantees,
1. Again urges the Commission on Human Rights and,
through it, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to expedite their
consideration of the draft body of guidelines, principies
and guarantees, so that the Commission can submit its
views and recommendations, including a draft body of
guidelines, principies and guarantees, to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the Economic
and Social Council;
2. Invites the Commissión on Human Rights at its
forty-fourth session to consider the question ofthe emphasis to be attached to the Working Group, in the light of the
Sub-Commission's discussion at its thirty-ninth session.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/99.

Human rights and use of scientific and technological developments

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth
of the human person, to maintain international peace and
security and to develop friendly relations among peoples
and international co-operation in promoting and encouraging universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recallingthe relevant provisions ofthe Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 the Intemational Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 13 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 13
Recalling further the Declaration on the Strengthening
oflntemational Security, 83 the Declaration on the Use of
Scientific and Technological Progress in the Interests of
81
See E/CN.4/1988/37-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1987/42
chap. II, sect. A.
82
E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/17.
83
Resolution 2734 (XXV).

and

Corr.1,
