United Nations

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6341st meeting
Wednesday, 16 June 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr Heller/Mr. Puente . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Nguyen
Ms. Marinčić
Mr. Figueirôa
Ms. He Fen
Mr. Gonnet
Ms. Onanga
Mr. Nishiumi
Ms. Tawk
Mr. Edokpa
Mr. Lukiyantsev
Mr. Ay
Mr. Nkayivu
Mr. Barlow
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181)
Letter dated 15 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/314)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-40838 (E)

*1040838*

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Armenia, Bangladesh and the
Philippines, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
I wish to remind all speakers, as did my Secretary
of Foreign Affairs this morning, to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Switzerland.
Ms. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this open debate and
welcome the presence this morning of your Secretary
of Foreign Affairs. We also welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/181) and thank the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her invaluable work.
Switzerland appreciates the fact that the
Secretary-General’s report has broadened the criteria
for including parties to armed conflict in its annexes,
which now include not only those parties responsible
for killing or maiming children, but also those
responsible for rape or other forms of sexual violence
against children. This is an important step. At the same
time, more efforts are necessary to make these new
provisions effective and to implement resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1882 (2009).
I would like to comment on some of the report’s
recommendations. First, the 16 persistent violators
must be the subject of the Security Council’s strongest
and most urgent action. The Council should also
consider including provisions relating to the
recruitment and illicit use of children in the mandates

2

of all its sanctions committees. In this context, we
welcome the precedent set by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, the capacities of the mechanism for
monitoring and reporting information on the two
additional violations must be strengthened. The
relatively low reported incidence of sexual violence
against children does not reflect the extent of that
practice; rather, it demonstrates the challenge of
collecting relevant information. Consequently, the
documentation of incidents and trends should be
improved and cooperation must be strengthened among
entities working to implement the relevant mandates.
In particular, gender advisers should have greater
involvement with the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms at the field level.
Thirdly, the Security Council should encourage
concerned Member States to authorize contact between
the United Nations and non-State actors to ensure the
effective protection of children. Such contact would
have no impact on the legal status of non-State actors.
Fourthly, since June 2009, peacekeeping mission
policy has been to systematically include the protection
of children affected by armed conflict in all stages of
mission planning, design and implementation. In this
context, Switzerland also supports the deployment of
child protection advisers to relevant peacebuilding and
political missions, as provided for under resolution
1882 (2009).
I wish to add the following comments to my
remarks on the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report. Attacks on schools and
hospitals are an unfortunate and persistent reality.
There is a need to improve the monitoring and
reporting of information in that respect. The SecretaryGeneral should provide additional information on
effective prevention and accountability strategies. The
triggers of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
could be expanded to include attacks on schools and
hospitals. Furthermore, the Security Council should
consider the issue of children and armed conflict more
systematically, especially in its gender dimensions
pursuant to resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009) on women, peace and security.
Finally, Switzerland encourages the Security
Council to open to non-member States the factual

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

briefings of the Special Representative of
Secretary-General on country-specific situations.

the

protection, recovery and reintegration of children
separated from those groups.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.

The Commission has conducted its work in 114
municipalities nationwide and six locations in the
capital that are considered to be of high social and
economic vulnerability. Through the Commission,
safety nets are defined and reinforced in order to
reduce the risk of use of children by illegal armed
groups at the local, provincial and national levels.
Among the strategies put in place, the Commission has
encouraged the prevention of violence and established
procedures to identify cases or risks of threat. It has
also created participatory mechanisms for children to
make their voice heard directly in local Governments
so that their points of view may be included in public
policy.

Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first to congratulate you, Sir, and Mexico on your
work in the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I also wish to recognize the work of your
delegation in chairing the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Colombia, a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols, appreciates your initiative in convening this
debate. We also recognize the efforts undertaken by the
Security Council to strengthen the capacity of States in
the protection of children from violence generated by
illegal armed groups.
My country has solidly structured institutions and
pursues significant efforts to move forward decisively
in the realization of the rights of all citizens. The
policies implemented by the Government of President
Alvaro Uribe Vélez have significantly improved
security conditions in Colombia and enhanced the
protection of all persons, including children. These
policies, firmly anchored in strengthening the rule of
law and democratic institutions, enjoy the solid
backing of Colombian society.
In this context, we seek to apply the full weight
of the law against violations of the rights of children
committed by groups identified in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/181), as organizations that
have been included on the annexed lists for at least five
years. We regard this designation as part of the
international community’s required denunciation and
censure of acts of deliberate and criminal violence
against children.
By voluntarily accepting the implementation of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, as provided
for in resolution 1612 (2005), the Government of
Colombia also expects to receive the support of the
United Nations in consolidating institutional capacities
for the protection of children. The recognition granted
by the Secretary-General in his latest report to the
work undertaken by the Government of my country
through the Intersectoral Commission for the
prevention of recruitment and use of children by illegal
armed groups highlights the relevance of this strategy.
This is a comprehensive policy that includes

10-40838

In that respect, I would like to highlight the
awareness project developed by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Reintegration. Through its
implementation, demobilized persons have contributed
to the training of 6,200 students in recruitment
prevention. With the same objective, the Office of the
Ombudsman has promoted the “No more children and
adolescents recruited” campaign, with the support of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Norwegian Refugee Council and the
Mayor and Township People’s Spokesperson of
Soacha, a town near the capital.
Together with the Department of National
Planning and strategic partners, the Commission is
preparing a document aimed at strengthening the
policy to prevent the recruitment and use of children,
to be submitted for consideration by the national
Government for implementation by all entities
involved. Furthermore, the Colombian Family Welfare
Institute continues to provide children separated from
illegal armed groups comprehensive physical and
psychological care to facilitate their full reintegration
into society. The Institute also carries out many
activities in support of prevention programmes. In the
case of Colombia, the Secretary-General’s initiative to
ensure that adequate resources for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of children separated from illegal
armed groups are provided to national Governments
has had an additional positive effect. We urge Council
members to lend their support to this initiative.
For its part, the Attorney General’s Office
continues to conduct investigations in pursuit of those

3

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

responsible for recruiting children. As of May 15 2010,
the Unit for Human Rights and International
Humanitarian Law of the Attorney’s Office had
advanced
239
investigations
concerning
the
recruitment of 775 children. Twelve sentences have
been issued affecting 30 perpetrators.
The Colombian Government, in implementing its
policy of zero tolerance for human rights violations
regardless of who commits them, has not hesitated to
punish those associated with the State who may have
committed individual acts affecting those rights.
Specific measures have been taken to prevention,
investigate, prosecute and punish such practices.
My delegation wishes to emphasize the
distinction made by the Secretary-General in his
reports to the Security Council on the issue of children
and armed conflict between situations that are on the
agenda of the Council and those that are not. The
existence of annexes I and II to the Secretary-General’s
report adequately reflects this distinction. It is of vital
importance that, in applying the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, it be borne in mind that each
situation is unique and that there is therefore no single
formula that can be applied to all of the situations that
exist in various countries and regions. Likewise, these
decisions must be made in strict compliance with
existing legal provisions. In particular, any targeted
measures must conform to Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Colombia
reiterates
its
willingness
and
commitment to guarantee the effective protection of
children and the promotion of their rights. We do so in
the understanding that this task requires a
comprehensive approach and coordinated institutional
management. My country recognizes the positive
contribution that the United Nations can make towards
that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Her Excellency the
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico for having
honoured us with her participation in the meeting this
morning. I should also like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are confident that you will
demonstrate outstanding and wise leadership as you
guide the work of the Council.

4

I also take this opportunity to convey my
gratitude to the delegation of Lebanon for its
outstanding presidency of the Council last month.
I should also like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this open debate on children and armed
conflict, which, quite clearly, is an issue of great
importance to all of us. I pay tribute to the role played
by Mexico in this area as Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. Our thanks go also to
the Secretary-General, and we thank his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF for their
introductory statements and for all their efforts in this
field.
I cannot fail to pay tribute to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her outstanding role on the protection of children in
armed conflict, including through her work which
benefits Yemen.
Based on our deep-rooted conviction that children
are our future, the Republic of Yemen was among the
first States to accede to the international Convention on
the Rights of the Child, in May 1991. It has also
acceded to that Convention’s two Optional Protocols.
In addition to submitting periodic reports on the
implementation of these instruments, Yemen has
ratified a number of international conventions in this
field, including the Convention concerning Minimum
Age for Admission to Employment and the Convention
concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for
the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour.
Furthermore, the Republic of Yemen has passed
legislation on children, including Law 45 of 2002, on
the rights of the child, and Law 24 of 1992, on
assistance to minors. We have also incorporated
provisions on the protection of the rights of the child
elsewhere in our legislation.
In addition to this legislative framework, the
Republic of Yemen has set up institutional mechanisms
to ensure that the legislation is implemented in
practice, including the High Council for Motherhood
and Children, the Ministry of Human Rights, which
also attaches great importance to the rights of the child,
and departments and offices responsible for children’s
issues within the framework of other ministries and
institutions. Children’s issues have had an extremely

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

important place in all national development strategies,
programmes and plans adopted since the 1990s.

importance of consulting with the State concerned
when reports are being prepared.

My delegation has familiarized itself with the
ninth report of the Secretary-General on this topic
(S/2010/181), which we have before us, and we should
like to share with the Council the following
clarifications. First, we should like to reaffirm the
complete commitment of Yemen to protecting children
and promoting their rights. Secondly, during its violent
clashes and military confrontations with rebels in
Sa’dah province, the Government of Yemen paid due
attention to the safety and security of all citizens and in
its military actions acted prudently so as to ensure that
there were no victims among the civilian population,
especially children. We did so by ensuring the security
of various public institutions, especially schools and
hospitals.

In conclusion, we must note that despite the
efforts and achievements made in protecting the rights
of children in armed conflict, a great deal remains to be
done to put an end to their suffering. Here I should like
to refer in particular to continued violations against
Arab children in the occupied Palestinian territories.
The international community is urged to meet its
responsibilities by putting an end to the ongoing
occupation and thus to enable Palestinian children to
live in peace.

Thirdly, on 21 May, the political leadership of our
country decided to release all detainees who had been
arrested within the framework of the insurgency
launched by rebels in Sa’dah. Fourthly, Yemen has
discharged its responsibilities to its citizens affected by
the war, despite the very limited resources available to
it. Our country cooperates with humanitarian agencies
providing assistance to internally displaced persons
and people affected by these events by ensuring and
facilitating humanitarian access to refugee camps to
enable these agencies to see the situation in the camps.
The most recent visit to these camps was that of the
Secretary-General’s Representative for the Human
Rights of Internally Displaced Persons.
Fifthly, the Government of Yemen is currently
striving to strengthen peace and security, launch
reconstruction efforts and ensure the return of
displaced persons by guaranteeing decent living
conditions to all citizens, including children. The
Government of Yemen is determined to include
children’s issue in future development programmes and
in the reconstruction plans for Sa’dah province. In this
respect, we call on the international community to
support the efforts of the Government of Yemen in this
field.
Sixthly and finally, my country reaffirms the
primary responsibility of the State to protect children
and promote their rights. We also reaffirm the
importance of ensuring the relevance and accuracy of
the information and data collected, as well as the

10-40838

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the opportunity to contribute today. We
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2010/181), Radhika Coomaraswamy for the
outstanding role she continues to play as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mexico
for its long and commendable history of promoting the
issue of children in armed conflict, including by having
convened today’s debate.
As we sit in the comfort of this Chamber, it is
nearing 9 p.m. in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, 11 p.m. in the Sudan and 3 a.m. in Myanmar.
And as we speak, in such places and elsewhere,
children are being handed guns and told to fight,
suffering the vilest forms of sexual assault, abuse and
rape, or are being disfigured, maimed or even
murdered.
Member States, the various organs of the United
Nations and the Security Council all have a vital role to
play in protecting such children, and there has been
some progress on that. For example, New Zealand
welcomes the efforts of those countries that have been
de-listed from the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
report and of others that have committed to action
plans. We also welcome the fact that child protection
enjoys a high profile on the Council’s agenda.
However, while there has been progress, much
remains to be done. In the interests of time, I will
highlight just four recommendations that New Zealand
considers important.
First, while we welcome their highlighted listing
in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2010/181), it
is distressing that there are still 16 parties that, in that

5

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

context, have recruited, maimed, killed, raped or
sexually violated children for at least five years. Those
parties are ignoring international law, as well as
Council resolutions, presidential statements and
conclusions, and more needs to be done to hold them
accountable. In line with the Secretary-General’s
recommendations, we encourage the Council to include
the recruitment and use of children in the mandates of
its sanctions committees; to ensure that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is asked to
brief those committees more regularly; and to prioritize
persistent violators on its agenda. We encourage the
Council to refer persistent violators to existing
sanctions committees and to consider other targeted
measures where no sanctions committee exists.
Secondly, we urge those countries concerned to
allow United Nations contact teams to meet with
non-State armed groups to enable them to prepare
action plans and carry out other protection measures.
And we ask the Council to take a more active role to
ensure that contact. We note, for example, that
Government restrictions prevent the United Nations
country team in Myanmar from contacting non-State
armed groups. That greatly hinders its monitoring and
verification activities and means that action plans
cannot be concluded.
Thirdly, New Zealand advocates the Security
Council’s taking a more active role to ensure that
parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
reports develop and execute action plans with clear
timelines. The Council should ensure that any
non-compliance with those plans is promptly dealt
with, using the full range of tools at the disposal of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Fourthly, there has been a disturbing increase in
the number of politically and ideologically motivated
attacks on and threats to teachers, students and
educational facilities. We call on the Security Council,
in line with international law and its presidential
statement of 29 April last year (S/PRST/2009/9), to
take a more active role in bringing those violations to
an end. One possible step could be for country task
forces of the monitoring and reporting mechanism to
improve the level of information in their reports on the
motivations for and extent of attacks on schools. In his
annual and country-specific reports, the SecretaryGeneral could also detail effective strategies for the
prevention of such attacks and to improve response and
accountability.

6

Another step could be the more concrete
inclusion of child protection, including access to and
the quality and political neutrality of education, in
future Council outcomes on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Eventually, the monitoring and
reporting mechanism triggers could be expanded to
include attacks on schools.
Those are just four steps that could be taken to
protect children. There are others, and the ongoing and
systematic commitment of the Security Council,
Member States, the United Nations and its organs is
required to ensure overall action and compliance. In
addressing this matter, we should also keep in mind
that one of the most effective ways of ensuring the
well-being of children is to protect their parents, and
that requires the ongoing action of States to protect
civilians in armed conflicts, especially women.
In that respect, New Zealand ensures a conflictsensitive approach in its development assistance to the
education and health sectors of fragile States, including
human rights education; provides support for the
elimination of gender-based violence; and works to
foster
sustainable
and
equitable
economic
development. All of this contributes to building a safe
environment where parents and children see options for
their future beyond the perpetuation of conflict.
I note that, because of insufficient age
determination procedures, the Afghan National Police
(ANP) is listed in annex I of the Secretary-General’s
report. New Zealand welcomes the fact that the ANP
already has measures in place to verify the minimum
age of recruits, and we encourage its ongoing
commitment, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report, to additional measures to verify the age of
recruits, as the Afghan National Army has already
done. We hope that the implementation of such
measures will lead to the de-listing of the ANP, and we
encourage the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, UNICEF and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to work
closely with the ANP to implement those measures.
Those children in the deserts, jungles and forests
of whom I spoke and who, as we speak, are being
forced to fight, are being raped, maimed or even
murdered are the children that we must think of during
this debate. It is our collective duty to protect them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me first
congratulate Mexico as the President of the Security
Council for the month of June and commend its
initiative in organizing today’s debate. Thailand shares
the concerns of the international community regarding
children and armed conflict and wishes to share the
following views.
First, we wish to note the progress made by the
Council on the issue and welcome the mainstreaming
of a child-conscious approach in political,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. With the
recent inclusion of two new triggers — namely, the
killing and maiming of children and sexual violence
against children — we hope that children around the
world will be better protected.
Still, to effectively address the issue, States have
the primary responsibility for protecting and promoting
the rights of the child in their respective jurisdictions.
The international community and the United Nations
have an important supportive role to play in ensuring
that States meet their basic human rights obligations
and in empowering them to build an environment
where violence against children is unthinkable. The
international community needs to invest more in areas
that can make a real difference, such as education,
basic health care, poverty alleviation, the rule of law
and good governance.
Secondly, better coordination among all parties
concerned is crucial. Cooperation between United
Nations agencies and the Governments concerned
needs to be based on mutual respect and sincere
dialogue. Closer coordination and greater coherence
among the relevant United Nations forums and
agencies are also needed. Each forum and agency has
its own unique strengths and constraints. With better
coordination and coherence among those diverse
instruments and an integrated and holistic approach,
the United Nations system as a whole should be able to
better respond to the challenges.
Thirdly, on the part of Thailand, we wish to
reaffirm our strong commitment to protecting the rights
of the child. Thailand has long been a State party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols. Indeed, we have been at the
forefront of efforts to make the Convention more
effective and responsive. We have worked hard to
ensure universal access to 15 years of quality education
and a safe learning environment for our children. We

10-40838

have also invested heavily in measures to promote and
protect the rights of children and their development.
Fourthly and finally, utmost care should be
exercised in the preparation of the Secretary-General’s
reports on children and armed conflict. The SecretaryGeneral needs to ensure that information collected and
communicated in the production of the reports under
his name is accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable
by the United Nations system. The scope of the reports
should be confined to situations of armed conflict, as
defined by international law. Also, there should be
more accountability and transparency in the listing and
de-listing of parties to conflicts in the annexes of the
reports of the Secretary-General. Reference to
countries where there is no situation of armed conflict,
in accordance with applicable international law, and
sweeping generalizations about their situations are
unwarranted, misleading and counterproductive.
Information provided by United Nations agencies
on the ground and by the Governments concerned
should be fully taken into account. A consultative and
cooperative approach will ensure that our efforts are
well coordinated and based on reliable information.
Lack of such a cooperative spirit may have unattended
consequences on the ground, which may harm the very
children we wish to protect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany fully aligns itself
with the statement made by representative of the
European Union. As a member of the Group of Friends
for Children and Armed Conflict, we are pleased to
also align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends.
Let me start by extending my gratitude to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for
their dedicated engagement and leadership in taking
this important issue forward.
Germany attaches great importance to the
protection of the rights of children in situations of
armed conflict and is one of the main donors in this
field, both bilaterally and multilaterally. We welcome
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict (S/2010/181) and fully
endorse all the recommendations contained therein.

7

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

However, in our view the Security Council could
strengthen the United Nations protection framework
for children affected by armed conflict. The report of the
Secretary-General contains valuable recommendations
in this regard. Let me concentrate on three.

directive by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support on
mainstreaming the protection, rights and well-being of
children affected by armed conflict within United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

First, with regard to strengthening accountability
for persistent perpetrators, the most recent report of the
Secretary-General names 16 parties to conflicts that
have been repeatedly listed for grave violations and
non-compliance with the United Nations for at least
five years. However, the credible threat of forceful
action by the Security Council against persistent
perpetrators is key if we want parties to conflict to
engage in time-bound action plans with the Special
Representative to stop the violations and abuses for
which they are cited. Like other speakers before us, we
therefore call upon the Security Council to consider
stronger measures, including targeted sanctions,
against those parties to conflict listed in the annexes of
the reports of the Secretary-General that persistently
ignore calls by the Security Council to cease their
illegal practices with regard to children in armed
conflict.

As a last point, I would like to join other
members of the Group of Friends in calling for the
provision of administrative support for the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, as requested in
resolution 1882 (2009) and as is currently provided to
other subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

The second recommendation concerns an
increased collaboration of the Working Group with
relevant sanctions committees. In our view, the regular
sharing of information between the Working Group and
the sanction committees of the Security Council could
considerably strengthen the United Nations child
protection framework. One way to achieve this might
be to invite the Special Representative for Children in
Armed Conflict to brief the relevant sanctions
committees on a regular basis. In this context, we
welcome her recent briefing of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
an important first step. The Security Council should
also start considering means by which targeted
measures may be applied against perpetrators in
country situations not covered by existing sanction
committees.
Thirdly, with regard to mainstreaming in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the Security Council
should remain fully engaged in mainstreaming the
issue of children in armed conflict into all United
Nations peacekeeping and political operations. In this
regard, we welcome the deployment of an increasing
number of child protection advisers in peacekeeping
operations and the adoption of a child protection policy

8

Let me conclude by reiterating our firm support
for
the
Secretary-General
and
his
Special
Representative. Germany stands ready to join hands
with all those striving to improve the situation of
children affected by armed conflict worldwide.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking you, Sir, for organizing this
important and timely debate. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Canada earlier today on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, but we also
wish to make a few points of our own.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/181), which again makes for rather disturbing
reading, and we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and her Office for their highly dedicated work
on this topic.
We are very alarmed by a new UNESCO study
that reveals an escalating number of systematic and
deliberate attacks on students, teachers and school
buildings in conflict settings. State and non-State
actors alike are perpetrating such attacks. At the same
time, the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict has addressed the issue only in a small number
of conclusions issued between April 2009 and May
2010.
In our view, attacks on schools deserve a more
prominent position on the Working Group’s agenda,
based on enhanced and verifiable information collected
through the monitoring and reporting mechanism. The
mechanism in turn needs appropriate resources to fulfil
its mandate. It is also worthwhile recalling that attacks
on schools violate the Hague Conventions and the

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Geneva Conventions, including their Protocols, and are
also criminalized by the Rome Statute. We therefore
urge all States to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law in the prevention of
such crimes and to prosecute attacks on schools and
educational facilities as war crimes.
In accordance with resolution 1612 (2005), the
monitoring and reporting mechanism provides reliable
information on situations listed in annexes I and II of
the relevant reports of the Secretary-General. We
commend the Council for adopting resolution 1882
(2009), which expanded the trigger for the monitoring
and reporting mechanism to include, in addition to
parties that recruit and use children in armed conflicts,
parties that commit rape and other forms of grave
sexual violence, and/or parties responsible for the
killing and maiming of children. However, to ensure
the best possible protection of children, we still believe
that equal weight must be given to all six grave
violations as triggers for the mechanism.
The differential treatment of grave violations of
children’s rights in various conflicts is difficult to
square with the universality and interdependence of
human rights and the principles of international
humanitarian law. We therefore encourage the Council
to continue to develop this mechanism and to consider,
as a next step, the expansion of the monitoring and
reporting trigger mechanism to attacks on schools.
Sixteen parties have been listed in the annexes of
the reports of the Secretary-General for more than five
years. We are of the view that these persistent violators
must be subject to the Council’s strongest and most
urgent action. Measures taken by the Working Group in
response
to
persistent
violators
should
be
complemented by effective enforcement measures such
as sanctions, including arms embargoes, bans on
military assistance, and the imposition of travel
restrictions. We call on the Council to include the
recruitment and use of child soldiers in the mandates of
relevant sanctions committees.
The first briefing of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is an important step in the right direction. In
this context, we support an approach that allows direct
contact between the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and relevant

10-40838

non-State actors with a view to preparing an action
plan that could ultimately lead to the de-listing of some
conflict parties from the annex.
Finally, in addressing the issue of persistent
violators, the Security Council should also be mindful
of its competence to refer to the International Criminal
Court, for investigation and prosecution, situations
involving violations of the rights of children.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head
of the delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Serrano (spoke in Spanish): I would like at
the outset to express my gratitude for the invitation
extended to the European Union (EU) to participate in
this debate.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.
In the interests of the smooth conduct of this
debate, I shall read out a condensed version of the
European Union’s statement.
As other speakers have done, I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
The participation of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of
Mexico was a reflection of her personal engagement in
this important issue. It also illustrated the intensive
work done by the delegation of Mexico under the
leadership of amba Heller as Chair of the Security
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy for her
tireless efforts on behalf of children affected by armed
conflict. I wish in particular to send a special greeting
to Ms. Manju Gurung, whose powerful and moving
words shed light on the reality we face.
(spoke in English)
As the Council is aware, the fight against the
adverse impact of conflicts on children is high on the
EU’s foreign policy, development and humanitarian
agenda. The European Union is a firm supporter of and

9

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

partner to the United Nations in this context, both with
regard to policy development and to implementing
actions. I am happy to announce that the European
Union plans to review and further enhance its
engagement so that we can improve our response to
current challenges and our contributions to the work of
the United Nations in this area.
Important progress has been made over the past
year. Like many others, we welcomed resolution 1882
(2009) and the expansion of the triggers for listing to
the killing and maiming of children, as well to rape and
other sexual violence. We look forward to the further
implementation of the resolution, in particular steps
aimed at strengthening the United Nations ability to
gather and analyse information. In that context, we
look forward to closer cooperation with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
The European Union is grateful for the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2010/181) and its
recommendations, and welcomes the attention that is
drawn therein to persistent violators. We also commend
the work of the Security Council Working Group and
its country-specific conclusions and recommendations.
The European Union, through its programmes and
projects,
lends
concrete
support
to
their
implementation.
Moreover, we welcome the first steps taken
recently towards increasing the exchange of
information with Sanctions Committees. We would like
to encourage much more interaction with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Sanctions
Committees and their expert groups, and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Furthermore,
the European Union encourages the Security Council to
include in the mandates of Sanctions Committees,
where appropriate, provisions pertaining to violations
of applicable international law committed against
children and of resolutions on children and armed
conflict.
In line with the European Union’s strong
commitment to international law, we also firmly and
actively support the Special Representative’s campaign
for the universal ratification of the Optional Protocols
to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
The European Union systematically brings up
children’s rights issues in political dialogues and when

10

discussing country strategies with partner countries.
We also cooperate with civil society on these matters.
We particularly seek to help to prevent the recruitment
of children and to ensure their unconditional release
and reintegration. We also pay special attention to the
situation of girls.
Furthermore, the European Union uses its early
warning mechanisms and conflict-sensitive approaches,
flexible financial tools and procedures to provide quick
responses to children in need. We have also increased
the awareness of our staff of these issues, both at
headquarters and at the country level. European Union
personnel are engaged in gathering and sharing
information on situations and countries of concern. Our
priority countries for action are in line with those
identified by the United Nations.
Like the Special Representative, we support the
mainstreaming of children’s rights into crisis
management. Within the European Union Common
Security and Defence Policy, we use a checklist to
integrate the protection of children affected by armed
conflict into the planning and conduct of European
Union crisis management missions. As an example, I
would like to refer to our security sector reform
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which promotes the enrolment of children in school.
The
European
Union
funds
numerous
programmes and projects to contribute to the protection
of children in armed conflict. These address prevention
issues, respond to the needs of girls, foster the social
inclusion of children affected by armed conflict, and
attempt to make justice and other services accessible to
victims. In that context, the European Union would
like to express its grave concern about the increased
number of attacks on educational facilities and to
encourage the Security Council to address this problem
in its future deliberations.
The European Union also believes in the
importance of investigating, prosecuting and punishing
all those who commit grave violations against children.
We have repeated on numerous occasions that every
effort must be made to end the culture of impunity. We
would like to recall here that children are specially
protected by the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. As the Council is aware, the European
Union strongly supports the effective functioning of
the International Criminal Court and other international
criminal tribunals.

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

As has been mentioned, during the second half of
2010 the European Union will review its
implementation strategy for children and armed
conflict-related actions so as to align them even better
with current needs and with international developments
in this field. To that end, we look forward to working
closely with the Office of Special Representative
Coomaraswamy and with other relevant United Nations
actors, such as UNICEF.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Rulumeni (South Africa): South Africa
wishes to express its appreciation for the opportunity to
participate in this open debate on children and armed
conflict, to which we attach great importance. We also
wish to extend our thanks for the briefings presented
by Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Assistant Secretary-General Khare; Ms. Johnson,
Deputy Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund; and Ms. Gurung.
My delegation appreciates the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children in Armed Conflict to enhance the protection
of children in situations of armed conflict and to
promote a more concrete protection response. We also
wish to recognize the important work and progress
made as a result of the implementation of the
recommendations of the members of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, which your delegation leads, Mr. President.
We would like to reiterate the importance and
relevance of the first report on children affected by
armed conflict, contained in document A/51/306. In
that context, we note with satisfaction that, since the
release of that report, significant progress has been
made in the development of international legal and
policy frameworks for the protection of children in
armed conflict.
The adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict in 2005 was a significant
demonstration of the actions taken by the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council and the international
community, which have produced tangible progress
that includes greater protection and awareness of the
plight of children in conflict situations. My delegation
has also noted the inclusion of, and the provision of
separate sections on, the protection of children in

10-40838

Council resolutions, such as those on peacekeeping
missions. We have also noted the prominence of the
latest resolution on this issue — resolution 1882
(2009), which was adopted last year — as follow-up to
the relevant Security Council resolutions to monitor
and report on progress.
In his report of 13 April (S/2010/181), the
Secretary-General indicates that, in accordance with
the newly implemented child protection policy
directive of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Security Council is also being urged to
ensure that specific provisions for the protection of
children continue to be included in all relevant United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as in political
and peacebuilding missions. It also goes on to urge that
child protection concerns be reflected in all these
missions.
Of note is the progress achieved in a number of
countries emerging from conflict. In Burundi, for
example, the progress in discussions on the release of
children associated with the Forces nationales de
libération, which culminated in the formal release of a
group of children on 2 April in response to the
declaration of the Special Envoys for the Great Lakes
Region and continued advocacy by the United Nations
and the Political Directorate, as well as the regional
initiative, warrants commendation.
Notwithstanding these achievements, there is still
much to be done to protect children from grave
violations. My delegation is disheartened by the fact
that the recruitment of children continues globally. We
must also highlight the lack of progress in the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1612
(2005) on monitoring and reporting mechanisms.
Children remain vulnerable and adversely affected by
armed conflict despite positive developments.
South Africa therefore encourages the Security
Council to redouble its efforts and pay more attention
to addressing the plight of these affected children. We
call upon all the armed groups involved in the
recruitment of children and those groups that are party
to conflict to enter into dialogue and to agree to and
implement concrete, time-bound action plans to cease
and prevent grave violations committed against
children, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s report.
Ensuring the well-being of children is not an
event but a complex and long process. Beyond
domestic political circumstances, and given that many

11

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

conflicts have cross-border dimensions, neighbouring
States as well as regional and subregional
organizations play a critical role and have
commensurate responsibilities in finding solutions for
children affected by conflict. While the demobilization
of children from armed groups remains a concern, the
Secretary-General’s report informs us that some
children who have been demobilized often voluntarily
rejoin in order to receive salaries to support their
families.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Children’s Fund in undertaking to assist and
prepare time-bound action plans that would include
measures to screen the armed groups and armed forces,
as well as the establishment of prevention mechanisms
against the further recruitment of children. The
priority, however, is to ensure the release of children
from armed groups through utilizing mechanisms such
as these action plans and focusing special attention on
the needs of all children affected by armed conflict.
Sustained investment in health and social
infrastructures, as well as education and skills training,
will ensure the successful integration of children in
their communities and prevent re-recruitment. Special
attention should be given to girls who have been
exploited by armed groups. The rehabilitation and
reintegration of all children who have been associated
with armed forces require immediate attention.
Adequate funding and resources should be made
available by the international community to assist
national efforts to develop relevant and effective
programmes that will ensure the long-term
sustainability and success of such interventions.
South Africa supports dialogue and enhanced
international cooperation to encourage recalcitrant
parties to adhere to the letter and the sprit of those
international instruments that provide the most basic
and appropriate protection of the rights of the child in
situations of armed conflict. The recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict is not only an affront to
human values but also a fundamental impediment to
long-term socioeconomic development, nation-building
and social cohesion.
Lastly, my delegation supports the adoption of
the draft presidential statement at the end of this
meeting.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.

12

Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I wish to
congratulate Mexico on its assumption of the Security
Council presidency for the month of June. I thank the
Mexican presidency for convening this open debate on
an important topic dear to our hearts. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his report contained in
document S/2010/181, and Special Representative
Coomaraswamy for her briefing before the Council.
We appreciate the efforts of United Nations
entities during the reporting period in protecting
children from violations in armed conflict, and
particularly in monitoring and reporting on grave
violations of children’s rights, incorporating child
protection policy into peacekeeping operations, and
promoting the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. At the
national level, we are pleased to note that 131 countries
have ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, that significant successes
have been recorded in integrating child rights and child
protection goals into national development plans and
strategies, that many States have enacted new pieces of
legislation to prevent and prohibit grave violations
against children, and that more parties to armed
conflict are now engaged in establishing action plans to
release children from their ranks and to end the
recruitment and use of child solders.
My delegation, however, remains deeply
concerned about persistent violations committed
against children by many parties to armed conflict, and
equally concerned about the high numbers of civilian
casualties, including children, during military
operations in several parts of the world. We are
dismayed by the increasing hostility against
humanitarian aid work in more than one war-torn
country, driving civilian populations — children in the
first place — into extremely difficult living conditions.
We condemn all these acts and call on all parties
concerned to comply with international human rights
and humanitarian laws. We join the call for the
Security Council to ensure that specific provisions for
the protection of children continue to be included in all
relevant peacekeeping operations, and that child
protection concerns be integrated into mission planning
instruments and processes, as appropriate. It is our
view that child protection concerns should be
consistently reflected in peace processes and peace

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

agreements, and that children’s particular needs
included in post-conflict peace planning and financing.
We recognize the work of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, which is essential to keeping us
all abreast of developments on the ground. At the same
time, we believe that greater caution is needed in
selecting specific situations to be mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report, bearing in mind the scope
of the report as mandated by resolutions 1612
(2005)and 1882 (2009). It is necessary that this
mechanism operate with the participation of and in
cooperation with national Governments, and that all
actions undertaken by United Nations entities within
the framework of this mechanism be designed to
support and supplement, as appropriate, the role of
national Governments. Consultations with Member
States should also be further enhanced during
preparation of reports to ensure that the information
contained therein is updated, non-biased, reliable and
verifiable.
Let me reiterate Viet Nam’s view that the State
bears the primary role and responsibility in protecting
its civilians, including children, in armed conflict. The
contact between the United Nations and non-State
actors should therefore be conducted in cooperation
with concerned Governments in order to avoid possible
prejudgment in giving political and legal status to those
non-State actors, including in particular terrorist
groups.
Furthermore, child protection in situations of
armed conflict should always be part and parcel of a
broader strategy of conflict prevention and response
that deals with hunger and poverty as well as
socio-economic development. I also wish to emphasize
the indispensable cooperation of United Nations bodies
in the successful implementation of such a strategy. In
this connection, it is vital to ensure closer and more
effective coordination among the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as among peacekeeping and political
missions, UNICEF, the United Nations Development
Programme and other agencies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate the delegation of Mexico on its
stewardship of the Council this month and to thank it
for convening this very important debate. I also wish to

10-40838

thank Her Excellency Secretary of Foreign Affairs
Patricia Espinosa Cantellano for her presence here
earlier today. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy;
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Atul Khare; and the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Hilde Johnson, for their
informative statements and their commitment to this
important issue.
I also wish to commend the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for its important work
and the Permanent Representative of Mexico for his
able guidance as Chair of the Working Group. Finally, I
also wish to offer my personal thanks to Ms. Manju
Gurung for appearing before this Council and sharing
her experience with us. Her testimony awakens us all
to the necessity to act decisively on the issue of
children in armed conflict.
Since this Council last debated this issue,
significant advances have been made in the protection
of children in situations of armed conflict, including
the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), expanding the
scope of the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
reports. Additionally, for the first time, a Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict is
coordinating the activities of the United Nations on this
issue.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/181) highlights progress in other areas, as
well. In nearly every region affected by conflict,
scores, hundreds, and even thousands of children
conscripted into armed groups have been released. In
many other situations, action plans have been
developed and should be implemented without delay.
Unfortunately, for the hundreds of thousands who
remain trapped in armed groups, valuable time is being
lost. All those who exploit minors in armed conflict
must cease this practice and immediately release the
children in their ranks. We further urge sustained
international support for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration efforts so that children can hope for a
future outside of combat. In addition, the increased
deployment of child protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions could serve as an additional
tool for monitoring and defending the interests of
children.
Ms.

Israel follows with interest the important work of
Radhika
Coomaraswamy,
the
Special

13

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. The attention she has paid to
children in specific situations of conflict, as well as
that paid by the Security Council Working Group
through its reports and communications, has the
potential to rein in the most egregious practices of
armed groups.
We note the reference in the Secretary-General’s
report to Israel’s concern that more information should
be provided in order to enable the appropriate
authorities to investigate and respond substantively,
where appropriate. However, the continued reliance on
allegations lacking supporting detail continues to
undermine the credibility of the report. We therefore
urge the Office of the Special Representative to give
greater attention to the invaluable process of carefully
documenting and vetting the various sources of the
information it receives and uses in its reports,
especially those aspects that rely heavily on
uncorroborated allegations.
While we hope for and work towards peace, our
region remains filled with dangerous threats against
children from terrorists and extremists. We welcome
the mention of Israeli children who have been victims
of armed conflict — a sad reality that Israeli children
have had to live with. We also take note of the
instances of the exploitation of children and their use
as human shields by the Hamas terrorist rulers in Gaza.
Given the abundance of accounts and documentation of
such incidents, we strongly encourage future reports of
the Special Representative to further elaborate on this
aspect, rather than mentioning it in passing.
One such well-documented incident took place
just weeks ago when approximately 30 gunmen
attacked and set fire to United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) recreational facilities dedicated to use by
children. The attack not only undermined the work of
UNRWA and was condemned by the SecretaryGeneral, but according to the UNRWA Director of
Operations in Gaza it was also “an attack on the
happiness of children”. In addition, one abhorrent
practice of Hamas is to gather civilians — notably
children — to the location of a pending strike by the
Israel Defense Forces on terrorists or weapons
facilities, in the knowledge that Israel will refrain from
intentionally attacking civilians.

While the incidents I have just described require
the attention of this Council, the broader context in
which children are used in armed conflict by terrorists
must also be addressed. In this respect, the incitement
of children is no less dangerous than terrorism, as
hateful education fans the flames of conflict. Let me be
clear — inciting children today provides them with the
foundation for becoming the terrorists of tomorrow.
Accordingly, the international community has a
duty to prevent such incitement in schools, camps,
houses of worship, the media and elsewhere. Many
children across the region, and in particular generation
after generation of Palestinian children, have been
taught to deny Israel’s legitimacy and to hate and kill
Jews. Such incitement is only one element in a
determined effort by many in the region to indoctrinate
children to take up arms.
Although examples abound, I wish to share only
one with this Council. A Hamas magazine for children
reads
“Oh, our Aqsa [Mosque], we shall return; we are
soldiers of God’s religion … We will rejoice at
the victory and kill the Jews by the sword”.
We tend to focus our energies primarily on the
conscription and use of children in hostilities. It is no
less important that we effectively and more
comprehensively deal with the brainwashing of
children who are taught to glorify terrorism,
martyrdom and anti-Semitism. Unfortunately, hatred
and violence are taught to children. Yet we can — we
must — undo the teaching of such destructive ways so
that all children will become contributing members of
a global, tolerant society.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank the
Mexican presidency for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict, a subject in which Italy is
very involved. I would also like to commend
Ambassador Heller for his valuable leadership of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Finally, I express my deep
appreciation to Special Representative Coomaraswamy
for her commitment to defending and promoting the
rights of children who are victims of armed conflicts.
In taking the floor, Italy endorses the statement
made by the representative of the European Union. We

14

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

also support the comments made by the representative
of Canada on behalf the Group of Friends for Children
and Armed Conflict, of which Italy is a member.
The protection of children’s rights during armed
conflicts is one of Italy’s foreign policy priorities.
During our 2007-2008 term on the Security Council,
we proposed the insertion of child protection
provisions into United Nations mission mandates. We
are glad that this has become standard practice and we
encourage the Council to continue to ensure that such
provisions are included in all relevant United Nations
mission mandates.
Moreover, just one year ago, we organized in
Rome an international conference, in cooperation with
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and the non-governmental organization Save
the Children. The participants included several former
child soldiers and youth advocates of the Network of
Young People Affected by War. I cannot but stress the
importance of listening carefully to the voices of those
who have lived through such a terrible experience —
as we have today.
Finally, Italy is financing numerous projects in
various countries, targeting conflict and post-conflict
situations, with a special focus on children. We also
support rehabilitation and education programmes
through UNICEF and other United Nations agencies.
Italy welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/181)
and
strongly
endorses
its
recommendations. We join other delegations in calling
on the Security Council to adopt more vigorous
measures against persistent violators. Impunity is
indeed a critical problem. In that regard, we believe
that the International Criminal Court (ICC) has a key
role to play. In our view, the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
should examine ways to develop practical cooperation
with the ICC in fighting impunity.
We also attach great importance to the action
plans and welcome the signing and implementation of
plans that lead to the release and reintegration of child
soldiers.
Child Protection Advisers on United Nations
missions perform essential duties, including training.
Adequate training in child protection is one of the core
priorities set out in the relevant Security Council

10-40838

resolutions. In that regard, Italy is considering
supporting a new initiative by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and
Save the Children, to develop a comprehensive and
systematic training programme, for all peacekeeping
personnel, on child protection and child rights. We
hope that other donors will be interested in supporting
this strategic project.
I conclude by expressing our strong support for
the United Nations campaign for the universal
ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Universal ratification is an
ambitious but realistic goal. It would reflect our
determination to put an end to the worst violations of
the rights of the child, which are also a major threat to
the stability and welfare of our societies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Rodríguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the initiative to convene this open debate on a
matter of great importance for my country: the
participation of children in armed conflicts. I am
grateful to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Mr. Atul
Khare and Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson for their
briefings. It is only appropriate that I make special
mention of the courageous testimony provided by
Ms. Manju Gurung.
My country supported the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1882 (2009), which unquestionably
marked significant progress in the protection of
children in armed conflict. It enabled the SecretaryGeneral to name in the annexes of his reports parties
that have committed acts of sexual violence, killing or
maiming against children in armed conflict. But more
work is needed to ensure proper implementation of the
resolution. In that regard, it is necessary to build the
capacity of United Nations agencies, programmes,
funds and missions to carry out new tasks and
mandates.
It must be recalled that, as the Secretary-General
indicates in his report, the low incidence of sexual
violence against children reported does not reflect the
true depth and extent of that practice; rather, it reflects
the challenges encountered in collecting and verifying
information on that issue. To that end, it is necessary to
consider mechanisms that will make it possible for

15

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

United Nations agencies and, above all, the various
Security Council sanctions committees and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, to
exchange reliable information on acts of sexual
violence with a view to taking steps to reduce and
combat that scourge. The political will of the parties is
essential for proper implementation of resolution 1882
(2009). The parties must therefore commit themselves
to develop zero-tolerance policies against sexual
violence, and to fight against the killing and maiming
of children.
At the same time, implementation of resolution
1612 (2005) must continue, in particular as regards the
preparation of specific action plans with timelines for
putting an end to the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflicts. The report of the Secretary-General
indicates progress in that regard, and it is vital that
donations to ensure the sustainability of such
programmes continue to flow, making it possible to
maintain the rehabilitation of former child soldiers and
their reintegration into their communities.
It is cause for concern to read in the report of the
Secretary-General about impunity for perpetrators of
these heinous crimes against children. This is due in
part to a lack of political will, but also to the fragility
of legal and judicial systems and to a lack of resources
and experience for carrying out investigations. Hence,
the Peruvian delegation considers that United Nations
field missions should play a key role by focusing their
efforts on strengthening the legal and judicial systems
of countries emerging from conflict and on supporting
legislative reform and training for those involved in
law enforcement.
My country also believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission must incorporate the issue of children
affected by armed conflict into plans and programmes
for recovery and reconstruction. The Commission’s
working group on lessons learned should take account
of successful experiences in reintegrating former child
soldiers into various areas of economic and social life
following conflict.
The establishment of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict — and here I hail
Mexico’s excellent work as its Chair — reflects the
Security Council’s commitment to protecting children
in situations of armed conflict. Hence, pursuant to
resolution 1882 (2009), the Group should be given

16

appropriate administrative and substantive support to
enable it to carry out its tasks.
I wish also to acknowledge the dedicated work of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and the important work of UNICEF, the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and other
relevant entities. We call on States and on all parties to
conflict to cooperate with them.
We possess a broad legal framework to combat
the use of children in armed conflict, to protect them
and to ensure their safety in times of violence. The
well-being of children depends on the sense of
responsibility and political will of States in complying
with our obligations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Hernández-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): In its national capacity, Costa Rica aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of children
and armed conflict.
It is an honour for Costa Rica to speak today in
its capacity as Chair of the Human Security Network
(HSN) and on behalf of the following members of the
Network: Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland
and Thailand, and South Africa as an observer.
We would like to thank Mexico for convening
this important open debate on children and armed
conflict, which has been one of the priority issues for
the HSN since its inception. The presence this morning
of Ms. Patricia Espinosa Cantellano, Mexico’s
Secretary of Foreign Affairs, was a particular reflection
of its importance. We also would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for her introduction of
the annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/181). Our thanks to also to the representatives
of UNICEF and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, as well as to the Council’s special guest,
Ms. Manju Gurung, for their valuable contributions to
the debate.
We believe that the information provided on the
criteria and procedures used for listing and de-listing
parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the reports
is an important step for greater clarity, objectivity,

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

transparency and accountability in the Security
Council’s work for the protection of children affected
by armed conflicts.
We welcome the efforts and the important
progress made in different parts of the world to address
the six grave violations committed against children in
armed conflicts. The Security Council’s strengthening
of its protection framework in all its relevant
resolutions — in particular its most recent one on this
issue, resolution 1882 (2009) — as well as ongoing
efforts in the General Assembly and other bodies of the
United Nations system, are a clear sign of commitment.
We also acknowledge the positive trend towards
mainstreaming the protection, rights and well-being of
children affected by armed conflict within some United
Nations missions on the ground. We encourage the
relevant departments of the Secretariat responsible for
providing support to the field, in particular the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding
Support Office, to work closely together to ensure a
more systematic and consistent approach in all field
missions. The appointment of more child protection
advisers could also contribute to this end.
We still face major challenges in responding to
the issues that affect children in armed conflicts. The
effectiveness of United Nations work on this issue has
been limited by the low number of situations where
action plans have been effectively implemented after
signature; the absence of systematic follow-up to the
recommendations of the Working Group; the lack of
decisive action against persistent violators, as well as
accountability measures to fight impunity; and
insufficient funding for sustainable disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes,
including for the social protection of children who
have been associated with armed forces and groups.
In order to address these challenges, the Human
Security Network believes that action plans are among
the most important mechanisms to achieve tangible
results and a fundamental tool in halting the
recruitment of children. As part of the de-listing
process, the main elements of these action plans should
be tailored to the new requirements set forth in
resolution 1882 (2009) in order to respond more
effectively to other violations against children, such as
killing, maiming and sexual violence.

10-40838

It is important to complement these action plans
with a strong programmatic response to support
Governments in implementing national strategies that
include prevention within a multisectoral approach to
assist and protect children who have been associated
with armed forces and groups, and in particular to
ensure their access to medical care, psychological and
psychosocial support, legal assistance, education and
sustainable socio-economic reintegration. Assistance
measures
must
focus
on
preventing
their
marginalization and stigmatization and on facilitating
their social reintegration. Furthermore, a more stable
and long-term funding structure to fulfil all elements of
the action plans and to implement sustained
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes is critical to preventing re-recruitment and
the reoccurrence of other violations.
All parties to conflicts must in all circumstances
refrain from committing and condoning grave
violations against children in armed conflict. The real
commitment of civilian and military leaders and the
principle of command responsibility are fundamental to
enforcing the accountability of all perpetrators of grave
violations under internationally agreed standards. The
complementary
role
of
international
justice
mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court
and others, can also play a relevant role in supporting
national efforts to fight impunity, as appropriate.
Targeted and effective means to ensure compliance
should be considered, in particular against persistent
perpetrators of grave violations. In addition, the
Security Council should improve the communication
and exchange of information among its subsidiary
bodies in order to ensure a more coherent approach.
Lastly, the Human Security Network considers it
important to give systematic follow-up to the
recommendations of the Working Group, including in
the reports of the Special Representative. The agreed
conclusions should serve as indicators of progress in
successive evaluations of every situation involving
children affected by armed conflict. In this regard, we
also believe that administrative support for the
Working Group is necessary. This could help to
systematize information, strengthen historical memory,
facilitate assessment, and identify trends and patterns
to promote a more strategic vision and find remedies
for every situation involving children affected by
armed conflict. Last but not least, a more efficient use

17

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

of the toolkit, in particular the conduct of field visits,
would also enhance follow-up by the Working Group.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Mikec (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Mexico’s presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate and for its dedicated work
on the issue of children and armed conflict. Croatia
would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm its
support for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
Croatia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of the European Union and by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends for Children and Armed Conflict.
As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council in 2008 and 2009, Croatia contributed to the
adoption of resolution 1882 (2009). Croatia is pleased
to see that, in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2010/181), the parties to armed conflict that
engage in patterns of killing and maiming and or rape
and other sexual violence against children, have been
listed. In future reports of the Secretary-General,
Croatia would like to see strengthened monitoring and
reporting mechanism capacities with a view to the
implementation of resolution 1882 (2009).
Croatia welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral and its recommendations, the rigorous
implementation of which could greatly alter the lives
of these children. Croatia further welcomes the
progress achieved by several parties to armed conflict
in releasing children, addressing impunity for
perpetrators of grave violations, and undertaking
measures to prevent rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children, as indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. However, we remain deeply
concerned about the lack of compliance by many
parties to armed conflict with signed action plans as
well as with the conclusions and recommendations of
the Council’s Working Group.
The implementation of concrete time-bound
action plans and the adoption of measures against any
party that fails to thus comply are crucial for halting
child recruitment, killing and maiming, rape and other

18

sexual violence committed against children. It is
important for the Security Council to develop a plan
for tracking the progress and implementation of the
action plans. It is also important that the concerned
Member States allow contact between the United
Nations and non-State actors.
Croatia encourages the Council to include child
recruitment and use, rape and other sexual violence
against children in the mandates of the relevant
sanctions committees. We would also like to encourage
the Council to ensure that the Special Representative is
regularly invited to brief the sanctions committees. In
the countries where a national justice system is not
willing or able to do so, the Security Council should
consider referring cases of identified perpetrators to the
International Criminal Court. These measures can be
used efficiently to compel persistent violators listed in
the Secretary General’s annual reports to finally cease
their abhorrent practices.
Croatia attaches great importance to paragraph 11
of resolution 1882 (2009) on the inclusion of specific
provisions for the protection of children in all relevant
United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
political mandates. In order for violations committed
against children to be addressed more efficiently,
Croatia encourages the Council to call upon parties
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report to engage
with the United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Croatia welcomes the newly implemented child
protection policy directive of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Croatia strongly believes
that child protection concerns should be included in all
mission planning processes, as well as in reports to the
Council.
Building on everything I have mentioned, Croatia
urges concerned Member States and non-State actors to
address child concerns in peace processes and peace
agreements. This will give child-related issues priority
within the post-conflict peace consolidation and
peacebuilding.
As a member of the Security Council, Croatia
contributed to previous debates on the same issue with
a clear focus on the eradication of these human rights
violations. The Security Council needs to find a way to
agree on targeted or other vigorous measures against
persistent perpetrators of grave violations against
children; otherwise, the United Nations and its Member
States will be faced with the same issues year after

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

year. For almost a decade, we have seen the same
names on the lists annexed to the Secretary General’s
reports, and we find the situation unacceptable.
Croatia believes that the Security Council can act
more systematically and more urgently as a part of its
mandate on peace and security, using all of its powers
to ensure that there are no more violations against
children in armed conflict. Let me assure the Council
that the Republic of Croatia remains committed to this
important issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to begin by expressing our appreciation for
the initiative of the Mexican presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this debate, and to congratulate
it on its work on and commitment to this issue as Chair
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Argentina recently presented its report to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, specifically
including its implementation of the pertinent Optional
Protocol ratified by our country in 2002. We join in the
call for the prompt ratification of the Protocol with a
view to its universalization.
We wish to underline that there are no children
under 18 years of age among the members of the armed
forces of the Argentine Republic. Since 1994, military
service has been voluntary. The law establishes a
minimum age of 18 years of age and stipulates that the
rights safeguarding human dignity, recognized, adhered
to and practiced by our country, constitute the
foundation of the drafting and enacting of specific
norms of procedure, which must be complied with and
demanded by all citizens if omitted. Laws, military
rules and regulations and international conventions that
govern human activities and behaviours within the
armed forces must include and guarantee the necessary
safeguards to citizens working for the national defence
system, as well as its goals and ends, which must be in
accordance with the paramount interests of the nation.
Armed forces educational institutions are
dependent from the Ministry of Defence and impart
education at the starting, primary and secondary levels.
Their curriculums are analogous to those of other
centres for public education in the country and
governed by national laws and the resolutions of the
Federal Council for Education. A review has been

10-40838

initiated of all the disciplinary regimes and rules and
regulations of conduct currently in force at military
secondary education institutions in order to align them
with the full protection of rights.
Regarding the recruitment of underage girls and
boys, until 2009 graduates from military secondary
schools who had received military training became part
of the country’s military reserves. Since the decision to
receive such an education and become part of the
reserves falls to parents, the Ministry of Defence will
implement, starting this year, an instance for the
ratification or revocation of such a decision by the
young persons involved, which will be enforced upon
their turning 18 years old.
Reports from the field indicate important
progress in the implementation of resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1882 (2009), such as the conclusion of
action plans by States and parties to conflicts, and
other concrete measures, such as the liberation of
children and programmes for psychosocial treatment,
reintegration and the re-establishment of rights. On the
other hand, the global situation remains devastating,
and cases of child recruitment and extreme forms of
violence against children, including mutilation and
sexual violence, persist. These call for the maintenance
and strengthening of mechanisms to work actively on
this issue. The parties must pursue their dialogue with
the mechanisms of the United Nations and progress in
the adoption and full implementation of action plans to
that end.
No argument can be validly made to justify
abhorrent attacks against the most vulnerable boys and
girls, who are not safe even inside their schools.
Governments and the various instances of the United
Nations system must fully cooperate with the Special
Representative in her work to implement the mandates
of the 2005 and 2008 resolutions through the provision
of necessary information, cooperation and access. On
the other hand, we believe that the Security Council
must continue to include a specific mandate on this
issue in all peacekeeping, peacebuilding or political
missions, and to incorporate specific advisers.
We would like to express our appreciation for the
efforts made to date by the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, the Special Representative,
UNICEF, the monitoring and reporting mechanism, and
the child protection advisers. The international
community cannot stand idle in the face of practices

19

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

and abuses as grave as those identified in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/181), and we must work
on the important recommendations put forward in that
document to strengthen the system and to bring
perpetrators to justice.
We recognize that the protection of children in all
its aspects is an issue falling primarily to the General
Assembly, and in this regard we support efforts to
strengthen the mandates of existing mechanisms and
the coordination of efforts. Argentina reiterates its
ongoing commitment to the protection of children from
all forms of violence and its readiness to continue
cooperating with the Working Group and all
mechanisms that strive to promote and protect the
rights of children and to allow them to be just what
they are — boys and girls.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the lofty position of
President of the Security Council for this month. We
are totally confident that, under your leadership, the
Security Council will be able to accomplish all the
objectives on its agenda for this month.
I also want to express our gratitude for the
outstanding leadership of the Ambassador of Lebanon
and his team last month.
The situation of children in armed conflicts,
including foreign occupation, from which the children
of Palestine continue to suffer, remains a matter of
grave concern. We grieve for the millions of innocent
children around the world whose lives have been taken
violently and prematurely by armed conflict and for the
millions of other children who continue to suffer the
traumas of armed conflict.
The fact that the Secretary-General has had to
appoint a Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and that the Security Council must
continue, along with the General Assembly, Human
Rights Council and other United Nations organs and
agencies, to address this very serious matter year after
year is a sad testament to the failure of the
international community to live up to its commitments
and legal obligations to protect children from the
scourge of armed conflicts.
Children in situations of armed conflict continue
to be the victims of appalling human rights violations,

20

exploitation and grave crimes. Millions of children are
forced to live in fear, hunger, poverty, isolation and
despair among their devastated families and
communities. Their rights to life, to health, to
education, to food, to family, to development and to be
nurtured and protected are grossly violated. Failure to
provide them with the protection they are entitled to
under international humanitarian and human rights law
has deepened their suffering, with immense
socio-economic, humanitarian, political and security
consequences for their societies and nations.
Urgent action is required to uphold our
commitment to protecting children from the horrors of
armed conflict, among them children living under
foreign occupation. We must ensure respect for their
rights in accordance with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and all other relevant legal instruments,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention.
What is missing is not intention, as evidenced in
the international declarations and positions reaffirmed
time and again. What is missing is the political will to
directly address the crises being faced by children in
situations of armed conflict and to thus render the
debating of this global dilemma unnecessary. This
would require, among other steps, real measures to
ensure the accountability of those found to be
persistently committing grave violations against
children in armed conflict. There must be zero
tolerance for the perpetration of crimes against
children in all cases, without exception. Excuses
should not be made or accepted for violations of the
rights, safety and innocence of children.
The lack of accountability for systematic human
rights violations and war crimes against civilians in
armed conflict has fostered a vicious culture of
impunity that has only prolonged conflicts and
compounded the vulnerability and suffering of
innocent civilians. I can say without doubt that this has
been the case in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, where
Israel, the occupying Power, has been permitted to act
with impunity, in total disrespect of all norms of
international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, resulting in a heavy price being paid by
Palestinian children.
Generations of Palestinian children have been
traumatized by decades of human rights violations by
Israel, the occupying Power. In this regard, we recall a

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

telling reflection by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, to whom we express our
appreciation for her tireless efforts to call attention to
the plight of children in armed conflicts and to
advocate for their protection and well-being. In a 2007
report after her visit to the occupied Palestinian
territory, she noted that this ongoing conflict has
created “a palpable sense of loss and a feeling of
hopelessness that places the children of the West Bank
and Gaza apart from all other situations”.
Tragically, the plight of Palestinian children has
not improved since her last report on the situation
there. Their situation has deteriorated in all respects, in
particular in the Gaza Strip, where children — who
constitute over half of the population, the majority of
them refugees — continue to be tormented by the
occupation policies, particularly Israel’s illegal and
shameful blockade imposed in collective punishment
of the entire population.
The critical situation of children in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
reflected in the Secretary-General’s recent report on
children and armed conflict (S/2010/181). While that
important report provides a brief, sterile glimpse into
the pervasive and intense suffering of Palestinian
children during the reporting period, particularly in the
aftermath of the Israeli military aggression against the
Gaza Strip in December 2008, it nevertheless conveys
a grim picture of what Palestinian children continue to
endure under Israeli occupation. This includes death
and injury, as at least 374 children were killed and over
2,000 injured, the majority during the Israeli military
aggression against Gaza. Children were also repeatedly
used as human shields by the occupying forces.
Children face homelessness and displacement as a
result of the military aggression, the wanton
destruction of homes in Gaza, the demolition of homes
and eviction of Palestinian residents in East Jerusalem,
as well as the continued confiscation of Palestinian
land and property by Israel for its illegal colonization
campaign.
Children also endure forcible and violent
interrogation, detention, arrest and physical and mental
ill-treatment and torture by the occupying forces,
including threats of rape and sexual assault against
children between the ages of 12 and 15. At least 305
children remain in Israeli jails, 42 of them under the
age of 15.

10-40838

There are grave violations of children’s rights to
health and to education as a result of Israel’s
destruction of schools and health centres, the
blockade’s obstruction of necessary medical and school
supplies, and blatant discrimination against Palestinian
schools in East Jerusalem. At least nine children died
in Gaza wile waiting for Israeli permits to travel
outside the territory to receive life-saving medical
treatment.
Children also continued to be victims of settler
attacks, being shot, beaten and threatened while
walking to school, tending livestock or playing outside
their homes. Their right to food has been grossly
violated in blockaded Gaza, where thousands have
been afflicted by hunger, malnutrition, anaemia,
stunted growth and other diseases as a result. The
socio-economic conditions and overall well-being of
children also continued to decline as a result of Israel’s
intentional
obstruction
of
livelihoods
and
impoverishment of the majority of the population.
As for the alleged Palestinian deficiencies
referred to in the Secretary-General’s report, we
continue to strive through our ministries and national,
judicial and social institutions to redress all problems
and abnormalities arising from the oppressive,
dysfunctional foreign occupation we are forced to
endure. We shall continue to exert the necessary efforts
in this regard, with the assistance of relevant United
Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations on
the ground, as we strive to end the Israeli occupation
and to prepare for the independence of our State, where
our children will be able to enjoy their human rights in
freedom, peace, dignity and security, free from fear and
want.
Until that goal is attained, we reiterate that the
rights and needs of children living in armed conflict
cannot be withheld until more amenable circumstances
somehow materialize and must be safeguarded and
addressed without delay. Based on our legal, moral and
global obligations, collective efforts must be exerted to
protect these children, provide them with assistance
and rehabilitation, give them hope and ensure their
well-being and ultimate survival.
We reaffirm the central role of the United Nations
in protecting children, particularly through UNICEF
and, in the case of Palestinian children, through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as well as through

21

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

peacekeeping missions and the programmes of other
United Nations agencies working with humanitarian
and human rights organizations to protect and help
children around the world.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
an open debate on this important issue. I would also
like to commend the work of the Security Council and
its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to
end violations against children and protect their rights.
My delegation takes special note of the adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009) and would also like to
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Special
Representative Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for their
dedication to alleviating the plight of children in armed
conflict around the world.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict, established
by the Council in its resolution 1612 (2005), as
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/181). In 2009, specific achievements were
made with the action plans to end the recruitment of
child soldiers and to secure their release from armed
forces and groups signed between the United Nations
and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army, and the Government of
Nepal and the Unified Communist Party of NepalMaoist.
We are particularly pleased to note some
significant developments in other areas, such as the
release of children through the formal process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
During the reporting period, DDR efforts saw
particular success in Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan. Such programmes should
be expanded wherever possible.
However, despite that progress, we remain
concerned about the continued plight of children
affected by armed conflict. There is still nearly
unhindered impunity for grave crimes perpetrated
against children in many countries covered in the
report. While we note some of the steps in the right
direction, including the investigations, arrests, trials
and prosecutions that Governments have committed to,
the issue of impunity continues to prevail. Thus, the
total number of prosecutions of parties listed in the

22

annexes of the Secretary-General’s reports remains
much too small at this juncture.
The Council must stand resolute and apply
robust, targeted measures to confront those persistent
perpetrators. In that connection, my delegation
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
consider including child recruitment and use in the
mandate of all the Council’s sanctions committees,
including those that deal with counter-terrorism.
Incorporating more expertise on child protection in the
Council’s sanctions committee expert groups and
scaling up reporting on violations against children
would be steps in the right direction.
In addition to child recruitment, many persistent
violators have been responsible for committing other
grave violations against children, such as rape and
sexual violence. In that connection, we welcome the
listing of parties that commit rape and sexual violence
against children in annex II of the Secretary-General’s
report, pursuant to resolution 1882 (2009). However,
the limited time allowed for country task forces to
prepare the relevant information resulted in a more
conservative list than necessary, as reflected by the low
number of reported incidents of sexual violence. We
look forward to future lists reflecting the depth and
extent of practices on the ground in a more
comprehensive way through the elaboration of
effective measures to collect and verify information on
sexual violence.
My delegation welcomes the progress made in the
mainstreaming of child protection in United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions. The work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Political Affairs in developing
policy directives and guidance is notable. The full
coordination of all relevant bodies, including the
Security Council, the Office of the Secretary-General,
DPKO, political missions and humanitarian agencies,
such as UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and various
non-governmental organizations, is needed. We
encourage the further integration of children’s concerns
into all mission planning instruments and processes,
including through the deployment of child protection
advisers to all relevant missions.
The Republic of Korea would also like to
encourage all Member States to implement the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Protocols and to continue to abide by applicable
international law, while striving to protect children’s
rights. Moreover, my delegation would like to reaffirm
our full support for the continued work of the
International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity.
We hope that today’s open debate on children and
armed conflict will pave the way for more meaningful
deliberations in the Security Council. Ensuring the
security and the rights of the next generation is
tantamount to fulfilling the mandate of the Council and
the wider Organization. The Council can count on my
delegation’s commitment to that end. We look forward
to a strong presidential statement on this consequential
issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by congratulating Mexico on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June 2010.
The use of children in situations of armed conflict
is an abhorrent practice that militates against the
fundamental principles of humanity. There can be no
excuse for subjecting children to the depravity and
ravages of armed conflict.
I am participating in this debate today because
the Secretary-General’s latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2010/181) mentions instances of the
recruitment and use of children and systematic attacks
on schools by Maoist armed groups in some parts of
central and eastern India. At the outset, I should make
clear that the violence being perpetrated by those
groups,
although
completely
abhorrent
and
condemnable, certainly does not make it a zone of
armed conflict, as defined by international law. We
therefore cannot accept the reporting of those incidents
as falling within the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict.
Having made that specific point, I would like to
state that the Government of India is seized of such
abhorrent acts targeting innocent children by those
armed groups. We strongly condemn the despicable
acts of Naxal violence and are fully committed to
controlling such diabolical activities.

10-40838

The Government of India, along with the
concerned state Governments, has developed a holistic
strategy to address Naxal issues by focusing on
security, development, administration and public
perception. We have initiated awareness-raising
programmes through media and mass contact,
including by the police through their community
policing programmes. The entire Government
machinery has been dutifully implementing the
existing laws, including laws that prohibit child labour.
India is a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols. We are,
of course, fully committed to meeting our obligations
under those instruments.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bairagi (Nepal): Let me first congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of June. We wish to express our sincere
appreciation to you for organizing this open debate on
the important issue of children and armed conflict.
We have taken note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2010/181),
and we appreciate the presentation this morning by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, on the subject. We
welcome the fact that the Security Council has adopted
various resolutions, including the resolution 1612
(2005), with regard to the protection and promotion of
the rights of children affected by armed conflict.
Children are the most vulnerable sector of society
during conflict. At times, armed outfits recruit children
into their armed groups and misuse them, including
through sexual abuse. The maiming and killing of
children become routine features for armed groups that
are bent on spreading terror in society.
National Governments should be responsible for
enacting the necessary laws and enforcing them
through effective mechanisms to ensure the promotion
and protection of the rights of children and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. The international community
should come forward with the needed mandate and
resources to protect this vulnerable section of society
during the time of conflict. Effective national measures
and international cooperation are essential to curbing
the persistent violations of the rights of the child and to
provide remedial measures to the affected children.

23

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

What is true is that there is no short cut to address
this grave problem. It has to be dealt with in a
comprehensive and collaborative manner with the
involvement of national Governments, the international
community, civil society and all other relevant
stakeholders by devising immediate actions for
preventing the violators from recruiting, abusing and
misusing children in conflict. In the meantime,
planning for longer-term policies addressing, among
others, universal access to education and health,
development, care and support of every child in
society, is essential to ensuring the rights of children.
After the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement on 21 November 2006, Nepal’s peace
process has reached several milestones of historic
importance. Carrying the peace process forward, the
Government of Nepal and the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist signed the action plan on
16 December 2009 for releasing minor combatants.
The process of releasing began on 7 January and ended
on 8 February 2010. We appreciate the role of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations
Mission in Nepal and the United Nations country team
for their involvement in this process. The Government
of Nepal expresses its commitment to operationalizing
the national plan of action for the reintegration and
rehabilitation of children affected by the armed
conflict.
As a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocols, Nepal has adopted
the necessary legal instruments and established a legal
and administrative framework for the promotion and
protection of the rights of the child. The Ministry of
Women, Children and Social Welfare, along with its
subsidiary body the Central Child Welfare Board, and
its well-established network of district child welfare
boards and women’s development offices in all
75 districts of the country, have been implementing
various programmes for the promotion of the rights of
the child. Children affected in conflict and girl children
have been given high priority.
Clause 7.6 of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement contains the commitment of the
Government of Nepal and the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist that both sides fully agree to
provide special protection to the rights of children,
prohibit sexual exploitation and not to recruit or use
children in the armed forces. Above all, Article 22 of

24

the 2007 Interim Constitution of Nepal guarantees that
no minor shall be employed in factories, mines or any
other such hazardous work or shall be used in the army,
police or in conflicts.
In concluding my statement, I wish to assure the
Council that the Government of Nepal is fully
committed to discharging its responsibilities in a
sustained manner to protect and promote the rights of
children affected by armed conflict. We also believe
that the de-listing process should begin sooner rather
than later, as the report of the Secretary-General
explicitly notes that there were no cases of recruitment
or use, killing and maiming of children or sexual
violence against children by the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist during the reporting period.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I am
sure that, under your leadership, we will have a very
fruitful and successful month. I would also like to
thank the delegation of Lebanon for its successful
presidency of the Security Council last month.
Allow me to present my delegation’s appreciation
for the section regarding Iraq in the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2010/181). We also appreciate the important role
played by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, in her direct and indirect monitoring,
drawing attention to and overseeing the issue of
children and armed conflict.
My delegation is pleased to make the following
observations about the section on Iraq in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/181). The report covers the
period of 2009, and we would like to note that the
security situation in Iraq continues to improve despite
the security challenges faced during the final months of
last year. The security situation has witnessed many
positive developments in 2010, including the
following.
The lowest rate of terrorist attacks and casualties
since 2003 was recorded during the first five months of
2010. This is a result of the security offensive launched
by Iraqi security forces in the past three months to hunt
down Al-Qaida, with a focus on the capture or killing

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

of most of the leaders of Al-Qaida in Iraq. The most
prominent leader of Al-Qaida in Iraq, the Egyptian Abu
Ayyub al-Masri, and the head of the terrorist group
Islamic State of Iraq, Abu Omar al-Baghdadi, were
killed in mid-April this year. These strikes have
dispersed Al-Qaida’s strength, disrupted its strategies
and revealed Al-Qaida’s plans to Iraqi security
agencies, thus weakening its ability to finance and
recruit terrorists in Iraq.
The success of the general elections, held on
March 7 2010, with no major security incidents
recorded, is clear evidence of the great improvement in
Iraq’s security situation and of the growing capabilities
of Iraqi security forces to maintain order throughout
the country. The Secretary-General mentions this fact
in his latest report to the Security Council on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), in which he notes that
“the overall environment in which the poll was
conducted was relatively free of violence and
without any major security incidents that affected
the polling itself” (S/2010/240, para. 6)
and that
“the Iraqi security forces have demonstrated their
increased capacity to assume greater security
responsibilities, evidenced by their successful
maintenance of security during the March
elections” (ibid., para. 16).
The report does not mention the efforts made in
various fields by the Iraqi Government’s in cooperation
with UNAMI, or the cooperation between UNAMI’s
Office of Human Rights and the Iraqi Government.
Regarding what the report now before the Council calls
in paragraph 81 the “continuing recruitment of children
by armed groups”, that was based on information from
police and military sources, community members, the
media and United Nations partners — sources with
vastly different levels of credibility. Although the
report states in paragraph 81 that information was
provided by the “Multi-National Force-Iraq” in Kirkuk
in 2009, I would like to note that this force no longer
exists and that its mandate expired under resolution
1859 (2008), adopted on 22 December 2008.
Paragraph 82 of the report indicates that, since
the implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, 142 cases of violence were recorded, but
states that only 10 of these cases were actually

10-40838

confirmed. Additionally, reports of the SecretaryGeneral in 2009 did not refer to any serious cases of
violence recorded by the mechanism, which was
implemented in Iraq in April 2009, suggesting that
inaccurate information has been included in a report of
such importance.
The cases of abuse indicated in paragraph 83 of
the report lack source attribution, particularly the
information submitted regarding a bus transporting
children to a child care centre adjacent to the Ministry
of Justice, in which the driver and 24 children were
killed and six children injured in the bombings that
took place on 25 October 2009, in which the Ministry
of Justice and the offices of Baghdad province were
targeted.
Paragraph 83 of the report describes the
25 October 2009 attacks on Baghdad as carried out by
insurgents. The report does not clearly mention that
these were terrorist attacks, despite the fact that the
Secretary-General strongly condemned the attacks in
his report contained in document S/2009/585 as
“senseless and indiscriminate” and that Security
Council press release SC/9775 condemned these
attacks in the strongest terms and described them as a
series of terrorist attacks.
In paragraph 84, the report notes a number of
children who have been arrested and convicted. There
is a big difference between arrest and conviction.
Every country of the world condemns the
imprisonment of children who have been convicted,
and Iraq is no exception. That paragraph also refers to
people between 15 and 18 years of age as children.
However, according to international standards, people
aged 18 are considered adults and should not be
included in the report.
Paragraph 84 of the report mentions the arrest of
62 male adolescents. However, the term “adolescent”
encompasses a broad category, including young adults.
Also, the paragraph includes the word “allegations”
and the phrase “significant numbers”, which we find to
be inaccurate and lacking in credibility when the
sources of information are considered. We therefore
believe that they should not be included in this
important report.
As I have said, my Government views the section
on Iraq contained in this report to be inaccurate in its
monitoring the situation of children in Iraq. The
information it contains contradicts some information

25

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

contained in reports of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
that indicate an improvement in the security situation
in Iraq. In the future, especially after the clear and
significant improvements made in the security
situation, we hope to enable the Office of the Special
Representative, in cooperation with UNAMI, to
provide more accurate information in order to give a
clear picture to the States members of the Security
Council.
With regard to the promotion and protection of
children’s rights in Iraq, the Iraqi Government has
made a number of efforts, of which I would like to
inform the members of the Security Council.
Constitutional guarantees and Iraq’s compliance
with the Convention on the Rights of the Child form
the basic framework for the protection and promotion
of the rights of the child in my country. Children were
the group most affected by changes in human rights
conditions as a result of the terrorist attacks that struck
the country in recent years.
Our child welfare body comprises the
institutional structure for the protection of the rights of
the child in Iraq. That body is made up of several
parties from various ministries linked to the welfare of
Iraqi children. It has taken on the responsibility for
implementing policies to improve the status of children
by carrying out inspection visits to all childcare centres
in Iraq. Iraq is prepared to submit its national report
with regard to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, as well as its reports concerning the Additional
Protocols to the Convention.
The final draft of the Iraqi Parliament’s child
project has been finalized and is currently before the
Council of Ministers. Iraq is implementing a joint
project, in cooperation with UNICEF, UNAMI and the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), to
strengthen protection and justice for children and
young people in Iraq. In cooperation with the United
Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and
Cultural
Organization, UNFPA and the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia, Iraq is proceeding with
a project to promote civic values and life skills for
young people through education.
Government institutions that deal with children in
Iraq are continuously working to reduce child labour
through
inspections,
control
units
and
the
establishment of specialized centres throughout Iraq.

26

The Government is working to reduce the number of
homeless children through field follow-ups and
placement in Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
foster care programmes. That effort to provide them
with basic needs aims to prevent their exploitation by
terrorist groups.
Social welfare homes for children with special
needs have been established in all governorates of Iraq.
All placements are followed up by regular visits by an
inspector from the child welfare body.
The Government of Iraq aims to promote a
culture of children’s rights, in particular through school
programmes and the adoption of measures to prevent
violence against children, in accordance with the Iraqi
Constitution.
In her speech this morning, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy said, “In
some wars, we find children being used as suicide
bombers; there were seven such cases in Afghanistan
and several in Iraq in 2009”. I would like to make the
following points with regard to that statement.
Iraq, like any country, works continuously to
maintain and improve security and stability and
safeguard them from the threat posed by certain
terrorist groups. Iraq is not a country at war. We have
found no evidence of even a single case in 2009 in
which a child was used in a suicide attack. We would
appreciate it if Ms. Coomaraswamy could provide
evidence of the several cases she mentioned in her
briefing. Her citing of several cases to the Council is
inaccurate, vague and misleading.
Similarly in her statement, Ms. Hilde Johnson,
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director, made several
points about Iraq that need to be addressed. After citing
Iraq, Ms. Johnson spoke about her colleagues in the
field in situations where there is no rule of law.
Ms. Johnson made that statement despite the fact that
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary democracy where
freedom, human rights and the rule of law are
paramount. As Ms. Coomaraswamy did in her
statement, Ms. Johnson classified Iraq with countries in
situations of armed conflict. Iraq is neither a country at
war nor in a situation of armed conflict. Unlike in other
countries where the number of United States forces is
being increased, the agreement between the
Government of Iraq and the United States of America
to fully withdraw combat forces by the end of August
2010 is proof that Iraq is neither a country at war nor

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

one in armed conflict, as mentioned in the statements
by Ms. Coomaraswamy and Ms. Johnson.
I would like to conclude by expressing our thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, her Office and her
team for their efforts. We will continue to cooperate
with United Nations bodies to ensure human rights in
general and the rights of the child in particular as
priorities of the Iraqi Government.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
The Nordic countries are heartened that, during
the past few years, the number of conflicts in which
child soldiers have been used has decreased.
International attention and efforts to eliminate the use
of child soldiers and alleviate the suffering of children
in situations of armed conflict have intensified. This is
largely due to the excellent work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. We
would like to reiterate our deep appreciation for her
tireless efforts to call perpetrators to account and to
further develop the international mechanisms to bring
an end to this scourge. We would also like to take this
opportunity to commend UNICEF for its worldwide
efforts to ensure the protection of all children,
including through its leadership of the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms.
At the same time, we have to note that the
positive developments have less to do with the efforts
of the international community than with the fact that
certain armed conflicts in which the use of child
soldiers had persisted have come to an end. It is
particularly disheartening that human rights violations
against children are repeated when new crises and
armed conflicts flare up. We need to address the root
causes of such violations and put an end to human
rights abuses.
I wish to focus my remarks today on three issues
that the Secretary-General has emphasized in his
recommendations to the Council. The first is
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to gather information to ensure that the Council
gets timely, accurate and verified information from

10-40838

complex situations on the ground. The second is
allowing the United Nations to work with non-State
actors in addressing grave violations against children
to ensure that action is taken when violations have
been reported. The third is how to take decisive action
in cases where violations persist despite repeated
condemnations.
The Nordic countries appreciate the fact that, for
the first time, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/181) lists parties that have committed either
sexual violence or killed or maimed children. The
capacity needed for gathering, verifying and analysing
the information on these crimes is recognized in the
report. The Nordic countries support what the
Secretary-General in his report calls a conservative
approach taken this year in determining the parties to
be listed for these violations and the self-critical
approach in acknowledging the difficulties in
information collection. For us, this demonstrates that
the Office of the Special Representative, the country
task forces and all relevant United Nations and
non-United Nations partners are guided by very high
standards of accuracy and verification, despite the
often complex situations on the ground.
Nordic countries — both Governments and civil
society — have been committed supporters of UNICEF
since its establishment. UNICEF leads the work of the
existing 14 monitoring and reporting mechanisms on
the ground. We are encouraged by the good
cooperation between UNICEF and the Office of the
Special Representative. We would like to see a similar
close relationship develop with actors working on
women and peace and security, in particular the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also support the
involvement of child protection specialists in the
preparation and planning of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping missions, as well as systematic inclusion
of Child Protection Advisers in all peacekeeping
operations and political and peacebuilding missions.
Information on grave violations is not collected
and verified for the sake of having the information but
for action to be taken in response, in order to make a
difference to children’s lives. We welcome the fact that
in the course of last year the development of and
agreement to action plans by three non-State armed
groups has led to the demobilization of several
thousand child soldiers. These action plans are a strong
example of why allowing contacts between the United

27

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Nations and non-State actors for the purposes of
addressing grave violations of children’s rights is so
crucial. We join the call of the Secretary-General on all
Governments concerned to allow the United Nations to
work with non-State actors for effective protection of
children.
The presence of the Afghan National Police on
the list in annex I of the report of the SecretaryGeneral represents a special case for the Nordic
countries. Several Nordic countries actively support the
Afghan National Police as part of the effort to enhance
the human rights and security situation in the country.
We are encouraged by the steps taken so far by the
Afghan Government to address the issue of recruitment
of children, and we stand ready to support the Afghan
National Police to that end.
Unfortunately, there are also cases where the
Security Council does not lack information but where
the violations continue nonetheless. The Nordic
countries express great concern that parties continue to
commit grave violations, and we appreciate that for the
first time the Secretary-General’s report has a separate
list of persistent violators: those parties to a conflict
who have been listed for grave violations against
children for five or more consecutive years. The
Nordic countries believe it is time for the Security
Council to step up its response against these persistent
violators. It should also consider more effective
measures in response to grave violations in general. We
support the proposals of the Secretary-General to
include child recruitment and its use in the mandate of
all sanctions committees, to improve the flow of
information between the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the sanctions committees and
to invite the Special Representative on Children and
Armed Conflict to regularly brief the sanctions
committees.
In this regard we have been encouraged to hear
that the Special Representative was recently invited to
brief the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we hope that
the Security Council will decide to make this a regular
practice.
Lastly, the fight against impunity, including
through our continuing support for the International
Criminal Court, is of course both a preventive and a

28

responsive measure to combat grave violations against
children.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, please
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month and to
thank you for having convened this meeting. Your
Foreign Minister’s presence here today reflects
Mexico’s enduring commitment to advancing the
international agenda on this issue. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/181)
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict for her
briefing this morning.
More than half of Afghanistan’s 30 million
people are under the age of 18. This is a half of the
country whose earliest memories are of violence and
war and who have grown up amidst a decimated
economy, shattered institutions and a broken society.
But these children are also the best and only hope for
the future of Afghanistan, and my Government is fully
committed to protecting them and to developing their
potential.
A country of youth poses unique challenges.
Thirty years of warfare have left thousands orphaned or
disabled. Mines and unexploded remnants of war kill
or injure hundreds more every year. Many children are
the primary breadwinners for their families. Poverty,
unemployment and weak national institutions create
unrest and particularly disadvantage children, putting
them at risk of disease and malnutrition and making
them easy victims for crimes and extremist ideologies.
But more than this, children in Afghanistan suffer from
the terrorism and violence of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
their allies. These groups are responsible for heinous
acts against civilians, including the recent
heartbreaking murder of a 7-year-old boy, hanged as a
Government spy. Their complete disregard for human
life is well documented, and they continue to bear
overwhelming responsibility for the danger to children
across the country.
The Government of Afghanistan has taken many
legal, institutional and practical steps to promote
security, development and good governance and to
fulfil its national and international obligations to
protect children. In addition, as part of an ongoing
dialogue with the Office of the Special Representative,

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

and in line with the recommendations of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, the Government of Afghanistan has taken
further steps to address the particular needs of children
in armed conflict. Many of these are not fully reflected
in the current report, so I will give a number of
examples.
First, my Government welcomed the recent
creation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism in
the country and established an international and
inter-ministerial steering committee to develop a
governmental action plan on children and armed
conflict.
Second, the Government has established a
commission to oversee the needs of children and
juveniles, and another to ensure the observance of
human rights during detention and interrogation, as
required by law.
Third, the Government is working with civil
society and religious leaders to address sexual
violence, which is contrary to both Islamic teachings
and national law.
Fourth, because of the threat from the Taliban,
the Ministry of Education has instructed that schools
will no longer be used as polling stations in elections.
Fifth, the Government is engaged with
international forces to improve protection of civilians
and has welcomed recent tactical directives in that
regard.
Sixth, focal points for child recruitment have
been identified in the Ministries of the Interior and
Defence, and the Ministry of the Interior has tasked its
unit on human rights, gender and children to address
any allegations of children serving in the police, as
well as allegations of sexual violence.
Seventh, the recruitment process for both the
army and the police is being increasingly centralized
and standardized, including through the introduction of
biometric verification procedures. Records are kept of
underage applicants who are turned away.
Eighth, the Interior Ministry recently released an
executive directive reinforcing the existing legislation
by banning recruitment by the police of anyone under
18, requiring that any children found be reintegrated
into society within 30 days and mandating disciplinary
measures for those responsible.

10-40838

Given those steps and others that we have taken,
my Government is disturbed by the decision to list the
Afghan National Police force in annex I of the report
of the Secretary-General. As the Special Representative
herself has recognized, our recruitment policy is
clearly designed to prevent children from being
involved with the security forces. This decision creates
an unacceptable equivalence between the police and
the intentionally abusive practices of the Taliban and
their allies and undermines the efforts of the Afghan
Government and the international community to build
strong, effective and responsible security forces in very
challenging circumstances.
I have outlined my Government’s concerns more
fully in a letter to the Secretary-General on this
subject, which will be published as an official
document of the Security Council. In particular, my
Government was not provided with any evidence to
support the report’s allegations of child recruitment in
the police or of mistreatment or torture in Government
facilities in violation of international law. We are not
satisfied with the partial and anecdotal nature of the
report itself.
However,
despite
our
reservations,
my
Government remains ready as always to engage fully
with the Office of the Special Representative and with
the monitoring and reporting mechanism to ensure the
full implementation of resolutions 1612 (2005) and
1882 (2009), among others, and to continue to improve
our capacity and procedures for the protection of
children.
Earlier this week we became aware of vast
mineral resources in Afghanistan that have the power
to transform the country’s economy. Likewise, the
millions of children in Afghanistan are an untapped
wealth of human potential who will grow into an
economic, political and social force that will remake
the future of the country. My Government is fully
committed to educating those children, protecting
them, providing them with a bright and promising
future and building a country that they can be proud to
inherit. That is not just a moral and legal duty; it is also
the only way for Afghanistan to fully and finally
emerge from conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in extending our appreciation to you,

29

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on a very
important issue.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/181). We also would
like to express our thanks to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Assistant Secretary-General Atul Khare and Ms. Hilde
Frafjord Johnson of UNICEF for their respective
briefings, as well as to Ms. Manju Gurung for her
moving testimony.
There is no doubt that progress has been made in
better protecting children in armed conflict. This
progress is indeed an encouraging sign. However,
despite the advances, children remain victims and
targets in many instances. That is truly regrettable.
Civilians must be protected at all times: in times of
peace and in times of war. This must be emphasized to
all parties. It must be made clear to warring parties.
Governments, even in the most complex of
situations, have and will always have the main
responsibility for providing protection and relief for
children. The first and most important step in
protecting children is in the prevention of conflict
itself. It is essential to build the capacities that can
assist
Governments
in
resolving
challenges
non-violently in order to prevent the outbreak of war.
The task of protecting children during armed
conflict becomes more complex every day. The ease
with which small arms and sophisticated weapons can
be delivered makes our efforts more difficult. It is even
more daunting to protect the rights of children in such
complex circumstances. Before their rights can be truly
protected and promoted, children must first be
extracted from armed conflict. It is unrealistic to
discuss protecting their rights when parties are at war
and children are in the midst of it. Children must never
be involved in armed conflicts.
Efforts to protect former child soldiers and child
victims should be conducted beyond the framework of
security or rights-based issues. Any strategy to resolve
armed conflict needs to take into account the
reintegration of these children into society through
programmatic responses at the community level, in
order to increase opportunities for children to
participate in society. For that reason, Indonesia has
been steadfast in its position that this issue should also
be discussed within the social, economic and

30

developmental framework. The Security Council, in
cooperation with other United Nations entities and
regional organizations, can play a role in guaranteeing
the achievement of this objective.
With regard to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we would wish to see more systematic and
focused reporting on the resolutions. Reporting beyond
the scope of the annexes should take into account the
quality, reliability and objectivity of the information
provided, based on the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, as stipulated in resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009).
Protection of children is the ultimate objective. It
is therefore imperative that any consideration of
imposing targeted and incremental measures on
persistent perpetrators as a last resort should take into
account the vulnerabilities of children and avoid
unintended consequences to children.
We also wish to underline that extensive
consultation with the countries concerned should be
further strengthened so as to ensure that the
recommendations are implementable and their goals
realistic. Furthermore, we call upon the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
develop and refine a clear exit strategy for countries or
parties to be de-listed from the annexes. Such an exit
strategy would not only further clarify the steps that
the parties need to take, but would also provide
transparency and quell doubts about the work of the
Office of the Special Representative and the Working
Group; that is important if the process is to be seen as
legitimate and fair.
To conclude, we recognize the call to address the
challenges children face in armed conflicts on an equal
footing with gender issues. It is indeed advisable that
the work of gender experts be integrated with that of
Child Protection Advisers, particularly in the future
efforts of peacekeeping missions. War does not make
distinctions based on gender. Boys and girls are equally
traumatized and victimized by war. Thus, they need the
same protection. Efforts by the Security Council should
be to save lives without regard to gender, ensure that
warring parties lay down their arms, and establish
peace and security, as mandated by the United Nations
Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate Ambassador Heller on his
work in the presidency of the Security Council and on
the excellent work that the delegation of Mexico has
done at the helm of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, established pursuant to resolution
1612 (2005). We also thank him for convening today’s
discussion on the important topic of children and
armed conflict.
Chile aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the Human
Security Network and the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Canada in his capacity as
chair of the Group of Friends for children in armed
conflict.
The international community recognizes that
children have rights, yet their rights are ignored every
day in situations of armed conflict. We therefore
reiterate our firm support for the work of the Working
Group and for efforts to implement, among other
measures, Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009), co-sponsored by Chile. We also
reiterate our support for UNICEF and the various
non-governmental organizations and civil society
bodies that work together to contribute to the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism.
Similarly, we acknowledge the significant and
selfless work carried out by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
and her team. We are following with particular interest
their activities in the field, which have made Member
States aware of the serious situations facing child
victims of armed conflicts.
As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols and to
Convention 182 of the International Labour
Organization
concerning the Prohibition
and
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst
Forms of Child Labour, Chile reiterates its
commitment to initiatives to eliminate all forms of
violence against children and to the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups, known as the Paris Principles.
Accordingly, we support multilateral actions to
reduce and eradicate this scourge by focusing on
greater programmatic coherence, ensuring reintegration
is sustainable, punishing those responsible and

10-40838

promoting prevention activities designed to protect
childhood and the special needs of girl children in
armed conflicts. Ten years after the adoption of the
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, we therefore call on those States that have
not yet acceded to these instruments to consider
ratifying them promptly.
We have read with interest the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2010/181), in particular
that encouraging the Security Council to streamline the
sharing of information between its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and its sanctions
committees and to invite the Special Representative to
brief those bodies on a more regular basis on specific
information that comes under her remit. In this
connection, in accordance with paragraph 194 of that
report, we urge the continued inclusion of specific
child protection provisions in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and relevant political
missions, the permanent deployment of child
protection advisers and the training of contingents in
child protection.
The prevention and eradication of violence
against children in armed conflicts will be possible
only if the Council uses the full weight of its authority
to identify and punish those responsible for the worst
violations of human rights — those who violate the
rights of the most fragile and defenceless. We therefore
call on the Security Council to consider more forceful
action against those who commit serious and persistent
violations against children and to consider measures
that could be applied in cases where there are no
sanctions committees.
Finally, in the framework of resolution 1882
(2009), we underscore the importance of ensuring that
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict has the administrative support
necessary to carrying out its work effectively, given
that it is the only subsidiary body of the Council that
does not receive such assistance. We also urge the
Group to use the tools at its disposal, particularly
on-site visits and emergency meetings.
Almost 14 years after the publication of the
historic report of Graça Machel on children and armed
conflict, and 10 years after the adoption of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Chile renews its commitment to contributing actively

31

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

to the elimination of all forms of violence affecting the
children of the world, ranging from armed conflicts to
urban violence. Inspired by the phrase penned by the
Chilean Nobel Laureate Gabriela Mistral, “the future of
children is always today; tomorrow will be too late”,
we will steadfastly support all initiatives seeking to
implement the international commitments in this area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mrs. Horváth Fekszi (Hungary): The Republic
of Hungary welcomes this open debate and the
Secretary-General’s annual report on children and
armed conflict (S/2010/181). I should like to express
my gratitude to Mexico for its work as chair of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. I should also like to convey our
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for their
comprehensive contribution to the protection of
children in armed conflict and for bringing this issue to
the forefront of the international agenda.
The Republic of Hungary fully aligns itself with
the statement made by the European delegation on
behalf of the European Union.
The Government of the Republic of Hungary
strongly supports resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882
(2009) and the implementation of an effective
monitoring and reporting mechanism on violations
committed against children in situations of armed
conflict. We attach special importance to the expansion
of the triggers for listing, in particular sexual violence,
killing and maiming. We share concerns regarding the
alarming issue of systematic sexual violence being
used as a tactic of war in order to deliberately target
civilians, including women and children. Such
infamous assaults significantly aggravate armed
conflict and post-conflict situations, and their lasting
negative impact may seriously impede the recovery
process. In this regard, we should spare no effort to
take effective steps to respond, and ultimately to put an
end, to such acts and any kind of violence against
children, both girls and boys, and women, with a
special emphasis on sexual violence in armed conflicts
and post-conflict situations.
Furthermore, we believe that the work of the
sanctions committees constitutes a significant step
towards implementing the relevant resolutions and
other international documents.

32

It is my pleasure to announce that the Republic of
Hungary deposited the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict with the
United Nations on 24 February 2010, and I should like
to reaffirm that my Government is fully committed to
the principles and norms of the relevant international
instruments. We welcome and firmly support the
campaign for the universal ratification of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which was launched on 25 May.
The Republic of Hungary strongly encourages the
Council to continue its work to fight against the
recruitment of child soldiers, while taking into
consideration the recommendations proposed by the
Secretary-General in the current report. I should like to
assure the Council once again of the Republic of
Hungary’s commitment to and engagement on
enhancing the protection of children in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank Ms. Patricia Espinosa
Cantellano, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, for
having organized this debate. It demonstrates the
special interest that Mexico attaches to the issue of
children in armed conflict. For more than a year now,
Mr. President, your country has been chairing the
Security Council Working Group on this issue, and the
international community can only welcome the manner
in which your delegation in New York has assumed its
responsibilities. A single delegation cannot sustainably
chair such a Working Group without long-term support.
I thus take this opportunity to request the SecretaryGeneral to provide the Working Group as soon as
possible with the administrative support the Security
Council has called for.
I also would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/181). My thanks go also to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson,
Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Atul
Khare of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I
also stress the courage of Ms. Manju Gurung, who
kindly spoke to the Council this morning about her
experiences.
Belgium aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the European

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Union and by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends, which includes Belgium. On
behalf of my country, I will stress a number of points
related to today’s debate.
Last year, two new triggers were activated —
sexual violence; and killing and maiming — that have
strengthened the protection of children throughout the
world. This also created a new challenge, which the
Special Representative and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict have been determined to
address vigorously.
While thus far it has been relatively easy to
define the issue of mobilized and demobilized children,
it is clearly more difficult to catalogue and document
the cases of killing, maiming and sexual violence
systematically perpetrated by parties to conflict.
Without reliable collection of data on these new
categories of violence, the monitoring and reporting
mechanism will not function properly and it will not be
possible to put credible sanctions in place. The
international community, working closely with civil
society — and we greatly appreciate its contribution —
must roll up its sleeves. A first step has just been taken:
the criteria set out in the Secretary-General’s report.
These will lead to greater clarity and transparency in
the work of Ms. Coomaraswamy and the Working
Group. The second stage is capacity-building for data
collection on the ground. This should be done by
streamlining and coordinating existing United Nations
networks. But we must also be generous in providing
greater resources to the United Nations lest our desire
to act remain unrealized. In this regard, Belgium
decided this year, through UNICEF, to fund capacitybuilding for monitoring and reporting on the ground,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Afghanistan and the Sudan.
The third stage is for stringent sanctions to be
adopted. As we read in the Secretary-General’s report,
in many countries there is almost total impunity with
regard to grave crimes against children. Today we call
upon the Security Council to take measures, without
delay, to punish violators who have been listed for
more than five years but have shown no intention to
cooperate with the Special Representative. As the
Secretary-General describes in his report, the Council’s
Working Group and sanctions committees must work
together on this issue. I welcome the fact that in May
the Special Representative spoke to the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution

10-40838

1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
And the final, critical, stage is that when children
are snatched from the jaws of war they need to be
reintegrated. For that, reliable financing is essential.
Belgium has supported a number of projects in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, addressing issues
including sexual violence. My delegation has thus
followed with interest the efforts of France and
UNICEF to mobilize donors in the area of
reintegration, in line with the Paris Principles on
children associated with armed forces or armed groups.
Preventing recruitment and ensuring reintegration must
be viewed over the long term through multi-year
programmes.
This leads me to say that the problem of children
in conflict goes beyond the scope of action of the
Security Council. As Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s country-specific configuration on the
Central African Public, I stress the very important role
that the Commission too can play in mobilizing the
international
community
and
in
facilitating
coordination of its efforts regarding disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
raising awareness in the countries on its agenda.
As Chair of the country-specific configuration on
the Central African Republic, I have established
ongoing contact with Ms. Coomaraswamy and,
whenever possible, I raise this issue with the
authorities of the Central African Republic. In this
context, our country-specific configuration had
planned a December 2009 visit to a demobilization
centre for child soldiers in the Central African
Republic, but an armed opposition group prevented us
from conducting that visit.
I close by expressing Belgium’s hope that this
year, the Working Group will carry out a first visit to a
country of its choice, so that the Security Council may
demonstrate once again that it wants to and can make a
difference in defending children confronted by war.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important debate on one of the most
crucial issues: children and armed conflict. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/181). I am

33

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

grateful too for the efforts of the Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict and of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
I pay tribute on behalf of the State of Qatar to the
progress made through the signing of action plans with
various parties to armed conflict in order to put an end
to the recruitment and use of child soldiers and to
ensure their release by armed forces and groups.
However, despite the progress, which demonstrates the
determination of the international community to deal
with grave violations of the rights of children in armed
conflict, we note the fragility of the international
community’s determination to protect children in
situations of foreign occupation.
The report of the Secretary-General notes
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory and
indicates that 374 Palestinian children were killed and
over 2,086 injured during the period covered by the
report, including at least 350 killed and 1,815 injured
in the Gaza Strip during the military operation
launched by Israeli forces.
In Qatar, under the wise auspices of its Emir, His
Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, we are
convinced that education is the best means to control
violence and ensure peace and security. We reaffirm
the importance of taking measures to implement the
recommendations of the Secretary-General calling
upon all parties to armed conflict to respect
international standards guaranteeing the protection of
students, teachers and schools against attack. We also
note that, despite international appeals that the
educational needs of children be met during conflict, a
large number of children in many regions are still
deprived of education because of armed conflict.
Schools, including United Nations schools, continue to
be targeted by some parties to armed conflict.
Today’s debate on this theme offers an
opportunity to pose questions about the report of the
Secretary-General’s board of inquiry into the direct
attacks against schools in the Gaza Strip belonging to
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Those
attacks were carried out by the Israeli army. The
Security Council should determine responsibility for
those crimes so that the perpetrators can be brought to
justice.
At a number of international forums, Her
Highness Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser al Missned, the

34

wife of the Emir of Qatar, who is UNESCO Special
Envoy for basic and higher education, has expressed
her concern about the harmful impact of armed conflict
and violence on education. She has supported the
Al Fakhoora Campaign, a broad international
movement that seeks to promote and ensure freedom
and access to education for Palestinian students in the
Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Among its far-reaching
activities, Al Fakhoora has recently announced
60 grants to Palestinian students in Gaza out of the
100 grants that the organization provides, to the
amount of $100 million.
In addition, Reach Out to Asia, an international
non-governmental organization under the auspices of
the Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and
Community Development, is working hard to increase
educational opportunities for young people and
children in many countries affected by crises and
natural disasters. Before the Israeli war in Gaza,
together with Save the Children, the Foundation
implemented a welfare programme to promote areas
safe for education in the Gaza Strip. Following the war,
the Foundation opened 11 schools in Gaza out of the
22 that are being equipped and renovated jointly with
the International Islamic Aid Agency. The project seeks
to make a real change in the lives of 21,000 students
and 126,000 families living in very difficult conditions
in order to restore normalcy in the Gaza Strip.
On the basis of that commitment and convinced
of the importance of education in areas of conflict, the
State of Qatar, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa
Rica, Nicaragua and Norway are preparing a draft
resolution on the right to education in crisis situations
that will be submitted to the General Assembly for
adoption at its current session.
Finally, we reaffirm that we in Qatar are working
on this issue because we believe that children are the
most important resource in creating peaceful societies.
We are working with international partners to
guarantee the right to education in areas of armed
conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Jayasekara (Sri Lanka): My delegation
wishes to convey its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate and for your delegation’s
leadership of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We take note of the Secretary-

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

General’s report on children and armed conflict
(S/2010/181), which provides useful insights on how
we must move forward on this important issue.
Following the end of the armed conflict in
Sri Lanka last year, the recruitment of children by
armed groups has ended. This year, one persistent
violator, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
terrorist group, has been de-listed from annex II of the
Secretary-General’s report following its defeat and the
consequent end to its abominable practice of child
recruitment. The other former armed group, the Tamil
Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal, which entered into an
action plan with UNICEF and our Government, has
released children in its custody and entered the
democratic process.
At the end of last year, at the invitation of our
Government, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, General Patrick Cammaert, visited
Sri Lanka and witnessed at first hand the progress
following the end of the conflict.
It may be recalled that over a decade ago the
Government of Sri Lanka voluntarily submitted the
case of the LTTE for the consideration of the Working
Group. We did so because our Government has a
zero-tolerance policy on child recruitment and we fully
condemned the recruitment of children by the LTTE.
My delegation is pleased to inform the Council
that by bringing an end to the armed conflict, our
Government was able to take into its care more than
570 children, some as young as 14 years of age, who
had been recruited by the LTTE. As detailed in the
Secretary-General’s report, those children have now
been put through a comprehensive rehabilitation
programme by the Government, with the assistance of
UNICEF, and have been returned to their communities,
where they will resume normal life with their families
and
continue
to
receive
community-based
rehabilitation.
Throughout the military operation conducted by
our armed forces to liberate civilians held as human
shields by the LTTE terrorist group, our armed forces
took care to ensure the safety and security of innocent
civilians, including children. For that reason, nearly
300,000 civilians fled from the clutches of the LTTE
and sought the protection of the armed forces.
Since the end of the conflict, our Government has
provided food, shelter and medical care to those

10-40838

internally displaced persons (IDPs), including children,
with assistance from the United Nations and other
donor agencies. Special educational facilities are
provided to the displaced children. Nutritional food
supplements have also been provided to infants.
Displaced children have been reunited with their
families. Children who have lost their parents have
been entrusted to Government-registered child care
facilities. Protection teams of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF
officials are given access to ensure the safety and
security of children in IDP villages. As of today, 90 per
cent of the IDPs have been resettled and only a few
children remain in IDP villages, along with their
families. Those who remain have freedom of
movement. De-mining and the completion of
reconstruction work will enable those families to return
to their places of origin very soon.
My Government has demonstrated its serious
commitment to a process of accountability to look into
whether any violations of international norms might
have taken place during the conflict and to work
towards reconciliation through a process of restorative
justice. Last month, we announced the appointment of
a commission of inquiry, comprising eminent persons,
who will look into all aspects of the conflict. The
commission has since moved swiftly to get on with its
task.
Our Government considers its responsibility for
the protection of children and the promotion of their
welfare a high priority. It is imperative for the State to
ensure that children are not in danger and to prevent
them from being used as accessories to violence. As a
State party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocols, Sri Lanka provides
for the well-being of children, with free education and
free health care. We have established the National
Child Protection Authority, with wide-ranging powers
to deal with all issues that affect the well-being of our
children. We also have a separate ministry that focuses
on providing the resources to implement programmes
aimed at securing the rights of children.
The Secretary-General’s report pursuant to
resolution 1882 (2009) has rather vaguely and
incoherently outlined the criteria for de-listing groups
in its annexes. While the practice of recruiting children
is abominable and is unreservedly condemned, it is
important to give confidence and build trust in
post-conflict societies by de-listing groups that have

35

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

released children in their custody, rather than dawdling
over technical aspects of the criteria.
Therefore, we suggest that the criteria for
de-listing be clarified so that the groups that have
already complied with the resolutions or have ceased
recruitment can be quickly de-listed. We recognize the
need for continued engagement by the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in post-conflict societies
to ensure long-term peace and stability and with a view
to ensuring that there is no re-recruitment or
resurgence of violence.
We condemn, in the strongest possible terms, rape
and other grave sexual violence against children in
armed conflict. There should be no place for such
grave violations. We must find effective means to
ensure that all actors abide by such principles.
Throughout the conflict in Sri Lanka, our disciplined
security forces ensured that there were no incidents of
that nature.
It is pertinent to recall that the primary obligation
for complying with the resolutions lies with Member
States themselves. We need to set higher standards for
ourselves, inasmuch as we expect non-State actors to
do so. We urge all Member States to sign the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and to comply
with the relevant United Nations resolutions.
We urge the Security Council to consider targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators of grave
violations. The Secretary-General’s report highlights
the fact that persistent violators need to be dealt with in
order to enforce our commitment to protecting
children. Initiatives of the Security Council to address
the issue of children and armed conflict and efforts by
the Council Working Group on the subject must be
made to focus more on the real issues underlying the
recruitment of children. Tangible international action,
as opposed to mere expressions of concern, is needed.
My delegation appreciates the contribution of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and her Office. We remain
committed to continuing our close cooperation with the
Special Representative and with United Nations
agencies including UNICEF.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.

36

Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the initiative of Mexico to convene
this important open debate and for the personal
dedication and leadership of Ambassador Heller in
chairing the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the acting head of the delegation of
the European Union, by the representative of Costa
Rica on behalf of the Human Security Network and by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of children and armed conflict.
We would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the other
distinguished guests for their presentations today. My
delegation was particularly touched by the testimony,
this morning, of a former child soldier, Manju Gurung.
We sincerely commend her for her courage and
strength, and we wish her all the best.
A great deal of progress has been made since the
issue of children and armed conflict was put on the
United Nations agenda. However, as we have heard
today, the situation of children in some parts of the
world is still alarming, and the international
community is faced with new challenges in addressing
the issue of children and armed conflict. We have noted
with regret that new parties engaged in the recruitment
of children have been added to the annexes of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181).
Slovenia welcomes the latest report and the
recommendations contained in it. Stronger steps should
be taken to address accountability and end impunity for
perpetrators of violations, especially with respect to
those groups and individuals who persistently commit
grave violations against children and have been listed
in the report for more than five years. Slovenia is
convinced that the work of the International Criminal
Court and other international tribunals will help break
the culture of impunity for such crimes.
In this respect, we particularly support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to include
child recruitment and use in the mandate of all its
sanctions committees, to streamline the sharing of
information between the Council’s Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and its sanctions
committees, and to ensure briefings by the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict to the
sanctions committees.

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

We also believe that specific provisions for the
protection of children should continue to be included in
the mandates of all relevant United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as political and
peacebuilding missions, including by means of the
deployment of Child Protection Advisers. We welcome
the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in mainstreaming child protection into
peacekeeping missions.
Following the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009), it is
important to improve collection and verification of data
on sexual violence against children and to develop the
capacity to document incidents and trends on killing,
maiming and sexual violence against children. We have
also noted the recommendation in the report that in
order to ensure the broad and effective protection of
children, including for the purposes of preparing action
plans, contacts between the United Nations and
non-State actors should be allowed.
The issue of children and armed conflict, as a
cross-cutting issue, needs a comprehensive approach,
where human rights, security and development go hand
in hand. It is important to efficiently and sustainably
address the short-, medium- and long-term impacts of
armed conflicts on children in an effective and
comprehensive manner. It is therefore not only
essential that children be released by armed forces and
groups and returned to their families and communities,
but it is essential also to address their psychosocial
well-being and to ensure their development and their
future without fear or threats of recruitment or the
commission of other grave violations against them.
This year the Security Council celebrates the fifth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
which established the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Moreover, we are commemorating the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We fully support the campaign for universal
ratification of the Optional Protocols to the
Convention. We welcome and encourage further
cooperation among the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children,
UNICEF, other relevant bodies and civil society.

10-40838

Finally, let me take this opportunity to encourage
the Security Council to continue to address the issue of
children and armed conflict and to seek the most
effective means to improve the situation of children.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Mexico on its assumption of the Security Council
presidency. I would also like to directly thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico for her personal
dedication to the issue of children and armed conflict
and for arranging this open debate. Additionally, I
would like to thank and commend the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Task
Force on Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF
for working to submit an inclusive and well-grounded
report (S/2010/181) on the actual situation facing and
involving children in areas of concern. The fact that the
information contained in the report is disaggregated by
country and type of violation gives us a clear picture of
the magnitude of this horrific and all too common
phenomenon.
Kazakhstan, as a State party to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, fully
supports the strengthening of multilateral commitments
through the campaign launched by the SecretaryGeneral to promote its universal ratification by 2012. It
is crucial that all nations fully and legally embrace the
Optional Protocol if we are to protect and uphold the
right of all children to be children and to grow up in
safer,
healthier
and
friendlier
environments.
Regrettably, a number of countries covered in the
present report have not ratified the Optional Protocol,
including some where a legal framework for child
protection is most needed. Kazakhstan feels that this
makes full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1882 (2009), regarding the incorporation of
tracking and the eradication of sexual violence into
existing national action plans, of immediate and vital
importance.
The report indicates undeniable progress in
monitoring and preventing many violations and abuses
against children in armed conflict, as well as some
progress in holding those committing these hideous
crimes against children accountable for their actions.

37

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

However, the conclusion that impunity for violators
continues to prevail is indeed, as stated in the report,
disturbing.

and international legislation should be strengthened in
order to fill legal gaps and loopholes exploited by
those violating these rights.

Based on the data presented, we can conclude
that direct bilateral dialogue with armed groups and the
implementation of concrete time-bound action plans by
all parties to a conflict constitute an efficient and
effective framework for significantly reducing the
number of grave violations against children. Our
delegation appreciates the political will of countries
affected by conflict that have nominated local citizens
to be responsible for facilitating the separation and
demobilization of children, and those instances where
child protection units have been established in armed
groups. Such precedents have added value in the light
of the lack of trained and qualified personnel
responsible for child survival, demobilization and
reintegration. It is evident that these precedents should
become best practices for the United Nations and all
parties to conflicts to follow.

The increase of forced school closures and of
schools being damaged or destroyed in attacks,
fighting or explosions is of deep concern to our
delegation. While targeting schools clearly puts
children at direct risk of death and injury, it also results
in their being deprived of education and, potentially,
the loss of an entire generation. Such an outcome
would be fertile ground for fanaticism and terrorism,
and therefore represent a threat to international peace
and security.

Kazakhstan is deeply concerned that some
countries have shown resistance to providing access for
United Nations country teams to monitor and report on
conditions in areas of conflict. This includes contact
with non-State actors for the purpose of preparing
action plans to stop the recruitment of children and
other grave violations, including killing, maiming and
rape. We call on all countries to grant unrestricted
access to the United Nations to gather objective and
reliable information, and to prepare critical action
plans to protect children.
The report mentions the innovative domestic law
in the United States, the Child Soldier Prevention Act,
which restricts the provision of financing and any
defence-related assistance to countries identified as
recruiting or using child soldiers in violation of
international humanitarian law. This national approach
should be applauded and, where appropriate,
replicated. The loss of military support and aid could
serve as strong motivating factors for some to stop
these disgraceful practices against children.
As a member of the UNICEF Executive Board,
Kazakhstan fully supports the Fund’s new mandate as
co-lead in the struggle to end violence against children
in situations of armed conflict. In these efforts, it is
critical to focus on educating all sides in a conflict, as
well members of peacekeeping units, on the rights of
civilians, particularly children and women. National

38

Kazakhstan suggests further prioritizing the
protection of educational facilities from attack by any
party and the provision of uninterrupted education for
all children in post-conflict zones, where appropriate.
My delegation also proposes the drafting of large-scale
learning policies for countries affected by long-term
armed conflicts. The goal of these proposals is to help
today’s children grow into a generation free from
hatred and loathing based on race, culture or religion.
By promoting dignity, tolerance and a merit-based
approach, education is a cornerstone of efforts to
eradicate deep-rooted stereotypes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): I thank you, Sir, for
having convened this open debate on the important
topic of children and armed conflict.
At the outset, I should like to commend the
Secretary-General for his ninth report on this issue
(S/2010/181). I should also like to express our
gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her comprehensive presentation.
My delegation supports the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
Since 1999, the issue of children and armed
conflict has been a permanent fixture on the agenda of
the Security Council. Over the past decade, the Council
has adopted seven resolutions on this matter, but we all
know that these measures are not enough. As we have
learned from the report of the Secretary-General’s
before us, the haunting reality remains that children are
being brutally affected by military conflicts around the
world. Any conflict in which children suffer directly
from violence and brutality, or secondarily from their

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

consequences, requires much closer attention from the
international community.
Over the past several months, Member States
have had an opportunity to address the protection of
civilians at various open debates here in this Chamber.
As many present know, this is an issue of great concern
to Georgia. The Council heard an update on the two
occupied regions of my country, Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region, also known as South Ossetia.
Georgian children have suffered in both these regions,
but the Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict does not cover that part of the world
this year, and so I felt it important to remind the
Council of the humanitarian aspects of this situation.
While the active conflict is considered to be over,
the problems that we discussed last year remain and, in
certain respects, have even worsened. The demolition
of school buildings, the denial of the right to receive
education in the native language, the forcible
conscription of young men and sometimes teenagers,
and hindered access to education and opportunity are
but a few of the problems facing the young people of
these regions while under foreign occupation.
Our children have been given new textbooks
printed in another country and approved by the
education ministry of that country — textbooks their
parents and community leaders have no ability to
review. Children are no longer allowed to attend
schools on the other side of the artificially imposed
administrative boundary lines, creating divisions and
isolation where before there was community and
shared learning and experiences. Georgian citizens are
being forced to learn the Russian language and given
no choice about their preference or their future. They
are told that their identity, their language and their
culture are lesser than those of the occupying force.
There are many documented cases to which we
could refer to illustrate these charges and flesh out a
picture of how civilian life is being supplanted by the
military occupation. Many know the details of these
cases already. Every time I come here to address the
Council, I am amazed that I can list such examples in
the twenty-first century.
In Tskhinvali in December 2009, six children
between 12 and 16 years of age were detained and
charged with “terrorist activities”. Only after active
intervention by the international community were these
children released. This incident is not an exception to

10-40838

the rule, but rather the reality that is faced every day.
There might not be what we qualify here as an active
conflict, but our citizens battle every day for their basic
rights and freedoms.
A first step towards addressing this problem
would be to allow unhindered humanitarian access,
which could protect and assist those affected by armed
conflicts — children, first and foremost. In reference to
another situation, the report of the Secretary-General
emphasizes “humanitarian access in general has vastly
deteriorated during the year”. One could not better
describe the practice of blocking access for
humanitarian aid and international humanitarian actors
to the occupied Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, which
has been in effect since August 2008. This is a clear
violation of the principles of international law; of
paragraph 3 of the six-point ceasefire agreement of
12 August 2008 brokered by the European Union; and
of paragraph 4 of the General Assembly resolution
63/307 on the status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia, of 9 September 2009.
I would ask everyone here to help us defend the
rights of our children, including their right to a
peaceful and prosperous future. I should also like to
take this opportunity to commend the tireless efforts
undertaken by UNICEF in my country, including its
activities in Abkhazia.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that my Government stands ready to continue to
cooperate with the entire United Nations family to
defend the interests of all children affected by the
August war and the ongoing foreign military
occupation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for Mexico’s continuing leadership
on this critical matter.
Australia appreciates this opportunity to reaffirm
its commitment to what must be a robust international
framework to address the situation of children in armed
conflict. As a member of the Group of Friends for
children and armed conflict, we are pleased to
associate ourselves with statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group.

39

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

Australia welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/181). For the first time, as we know,
the report lists parties to conflict on the basis of sexual
violence and killing and maiming. In the four months
of the reporting period in which those triggers for
listing were activated, 10 parties were listed on those
grounds. That figure, and the fact that the numbers for
listing on those bases could be higher in future
reporting periods, is obviously of very serious concern.
All parties to conflict must take urgent action to
address those and other grave violations against
children. For that reason, the names of persistent
violators should continue to be published. The Council
should utilize the full range of tools available to it and
take vigilant measures in response to these grave and
ongoing violations. Those who abuse children in times
of conflict simply must not go unpunished. We support
the Secretary-General’s call for improved synergies
between the Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and its sanctions committees. The
Secretary-General’s recommendation to include the
issue of children in armed conflict in the mandates of
all relevant sanctions committees is also welcome, as is
his proposal to include child protection advisers in the
expert groups that inform them. Ms. Coomaraswamy’s
briefing on 21 May to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo set a very positive
precedent in that regard.
Positive signs of progress in the SecretaryGeneral’s report are a testament to the real change that
the Council mechanism can effect, in particular the
recent release of children in Nepal and the signing by
parties in Nepal and the Philippines of time-bound
action plans. We express our hope that those and other
such action plans will be translated into genuine action
on the ground. We reaffirm our own readiness to
support national efforts to do so.
Australia is pleased to assist the United Nations
and other partners to address the situation of children
in armed conflict in very practical ways — particularly
in Asia, where a significant portion of the work of the
Council mechanism is focused. The value of
identifying best practices and developing field manuals
and training toolkits must be recognized, particularly to
help identify tangible ways United Nations country
teams can address children’s welfare. UNICEF’s June
2009 all-African workshop was an excellent initiative
in that regard, and we were pleased to support it.

40

We value our continued partnership with
UNICEF in this area, including in Sri Lanka,
Afghanistan and the Philippines. The news of the
recent release of the last Sri Lankan former child
soldiers from rehabilitation centres demonstrates the
capabilities of the Council mechanism. That those
former child soldiers will be provided with the skills
and opportunities that they will need to forge a
sustainable future is particularly pleasing. With Sri
Lanka now looking towards a more hopeful future, we
trust that those children represent a new beginning for
their country.
In the Philippines, Australia supports UNICEF in
providing education for children in areas affected by
armed conflict. We are encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s finding that the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front has taken measures to operationalize its action
plan within its ranks, thereby translating words into
action.
Measures taken by Thailand to protect the safety
and enhance the development of children in its
southern border provinces are to be commended,
including its efforts to significantly reduce attacks on
schools, which is a grave violation against children.
Effective information on the prevalence of this
violation and strategies for prevention are clearly
crucial.
Of course, the gains that have been made must
not obscure the fact that there is much more work to be
done. The continued inability of the United Nations to
gain access to non-State groups in Myanmar in order to
make progress in discussions on action plans remains
of particular concern. That being said, we recognize
that the International Labour Organization continues to
have a positive and effective presence on ground in
Myanmar. We are pleased to see in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that continued operation of the
supplemental understanding complaints mechanism has
produced some results for the protection of children in
Myanmar’s conflict areas.
In
conclusion,
Australia
welcomes
the
improvements reported by the Secretary-General. But,
along with many other Council members, we caution
that further robust efforts and commitments by all
Member States are essential. The failure to protect and
rehabilitate children from harm and exploitation in
situations of armed conflict simply condemns us all.

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.

spared. Of the more than 4,000 people reported missing
in connection with the conflict, 48 are children.

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important open debate on children and armed
conflict and for your submission of a concept paper on
this topic (S/2010/314). Let me also convey our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report on
children and armed conflict (S/2010/181), which
reviews developments in a number of situations of
concern and stresses the progress made and the
remaining challenges. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for her comprehensive
presentation, as well as the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF for their briefings on the matter.

In recent years, the issue of children and armed
conflict has been inscribed firmly on the international
agenda and a solid body of international legal norms
and standards has been developed. Important steps
have been taken through the application and
enforcement of those norms and standards to achieve
accountability for grave child rights violations. Indeed,
the international community has taken some
unprecedented initiatives to address impunity.
Punishing
crimes
of
international
dimension
demonstrates how effective international justice can be
when there is political will to support it. The
engagement of the Security Council has increased the
general awareness of the need to protect children in
armed conflict, significantly advanced the scope of
action and created opportunities to improve common
approaches in this regard.

Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the European Union by
the acting head of the European Union delegation to
the United Nations. I would like to make a few
additional remarks in my national capacity.
We reiterate our commitment to continuing to
contribute to the activities of existing United Nations
mechanisms and other relevant organizations and
agencies with the aim of ensuring more effective
protection of child rights and improving the situation
of children affected by armed conflict. We commend
the significant and successful work done under the
leadership of Ambassador Heller of Mexico as Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Azerbaijan’s interest in the topic under
consideration is obvious and stems from its practical
experience in addressing the impact on children of the
armed aggression against my country and in engaging
international efforts to ensure respect by the relevant
Member State of its obligations under the United
Nations Charter and international law.
The war unleashed against my country and its
consequences exert considerable influence, inter alia,
on the humanitarian aspect of the problem, and
primarily affect the most vulnerable groups. Azerbaijan
continues to suffer one of the highest proportions of
refugees and displaced persons in the world, large
numbers of whom are children. The most serious
international offences have been committed in the
course of the conflict. Even children have not been

10-40838

However, although progress has been made in a
number of situations of armed conflict, children are
still suffering in many places worldwide and continue
to be the primary victims of war. That bitter truth poses
a profound challenge to the international legal order,
and therefore requires the international community to
redouble its efforts to protect children and prevent
child rights violations.
With regard to the most serious international
crimes, more should be done to put an end to the
culture of impunity. Particular consideration should be
given to internally displaced children in the context of
ensuring their inalienable right to return, and to the
implications for the protection of child rights of illegal
policies and practices in situations of foreign
occupation.
Another challenging issue that requires urgent
action is that of children taken hostage and reported
missing in connection with armed conflict. Azerbaijan
is the main sponsor of the biennial resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on
missing persons, as well as of those of the Commission
on the Status of Women on the release of women and
children taken hostage in armed conflicts, including
those subsequently imprisoned.
I would like to refer to the latest resolution of the
General Assembly on missing persons. Inter alia,
resolution 63/183 requests States to pay the utmost
attention to the problem of missing children and to take

41

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

appropriate measures to search for and identify such
children and reunite them with their families.
Meanwhile, at its fifty-fourth session, held in March,
the Commission on the Status of Women condemned
all violent acts against civilian populations and called
for an effective response to such acts, in particular the
immediate release of women and children taken
hostage in armed conflicts, including by strengthening
international cooperation to that end.
We look forward to the adoption of the draft
presidential statement before the Council, which will
continue to contribute to identifying long-term and
sustained solutions to this problem and to focus on the
ways and means by which the international community
can address existing challenges, including in particular
continued violations against children in situations of
armed conflict and measures aimed at bringing to
justice those responsible for such violations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): The Netherlands
fully aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union (EU) on behalf
of the EU, as well as with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends for children and armed conflict. I would like to
make a few additional remarks.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on children and armed
conflict and for the excellent work Mexico is doing in
this area. The Netherlands also appreciates the recent
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2010/181) and welcomes the steps taken in
the implementation of resolution 1882 (2009), as well
as the expansion of the Secretary General’s annexes to
include parties responsible for the killing and maiming
of children and for rape and other forms of sexual
violence committed against children.
We would also like to congratulate and thank
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
and her Office for their valuable work, such as the
inclusion in the action plans of the two new triggers.
The formats for action plans are instrumental in the
process of implementation and contribute to reducing
the risks for children in armed conflict.

42

In commending the work done by the Security
Council and the Special Representative to alleviate the
suffering of children in armed conflict, we would also
like to encourage them to pay equal attention to all the
six identified grave violations committed against
children and to strengthen the monitoring of all of
them. In our view, increased capacity should be made
available for that purpose.
The Netherlands would like to emphasize the
importance of the engagement of the United Nations
with non-State actors in the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions and the recommendations
contained in the Secretary General’s report, including
in the negotiation of action plans. We call on all
relevant parties to allow for such engagement, with a
view to protecting the rights of children in armed
conflict.
As has been said before in the Council, abuse
really stops only when perpetrators have been brought
to justice. Anything short of that means a continuation
of the violation of victims’ integrity. In most cases —
as the Netherlands also said in this debate last year —
the Security Council has, in our view, not done enough
to address accountability or to end impunity for
perpetrators of violations against children. That is
particularly true with regard to so-called persistent
violators. This year’s report of the Secretary-General
lists no fewer than 16 parties that have been on the
annex for at least five years. That is unacceptable. We
welcome the expressed readiness of the Security
Council to step up its action and to adopt targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators. We also stress
the role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
the investigation and prosecution of such crimes that
fall within its jurisdiction. Where national systems of
justice fail, the situation should be referred to the ICC.
In conclusion, the Netherlands would like to
express its strong support for the campaign for the
universal ratification of the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. In that regard,
the International Labour Organization Convention 182
concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for
the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour
and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children also deserve mention. The universal
ratification and effective implementation of all those
instruments lay the foundation for the safeguarding of
children’s rights and their effective protection from

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

violence, abuse and exploitation, including during
armed conflict.
With the integrity of our children, the integrity of
the Organization and everything it stands for is at
stake. In children we see our future, and in their
suffering during armed conflict we see the dark side of
humankind. We all have an urgent obligation to do
whatever we can to protect children from armed
conflict. That is a political and moral imperative for all
of us.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate. It is
most timely that the Council is considering this
important issue following the publication of the recent
report by the Secretary-General (S/2010/181). I would
also like to join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative
for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, the
Assistant-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations and the Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF for their vital contributions to the protection
of children and for their comprehensive briefings this
morning.
Despite the commitment of the international
community to addressing this issue, children are still
becoming targets and being used in many armed
conflicts. In that regard, we must adopt a strategy that
addresses the root causes of armed conflicts. That
requires promoting sustainable development, poverty
eradication, national reconciliation, the rule of law and
the protection of human rights in order to achieve
positive results in conflict prevention and enhancing
the protection of children.
The Myanmar Government has been seriously
addressing the issue of under-age recruitment into the
armed forces. Under the Myanmar Defence Services
Act of 1959, a person cannot be enlisted in the armed
forces until he has attained the age of 18. Those who
do not conform to the minimum-age requirement are
discharged from the armed forces. We have in place a
directorate that oversees military recruitment
regulations, orders and directives. But in some cases,
underage children who profess to be older or who have
no official birth certificate or other documents have
slipped into the military. We have therefore also put in
place stringent scrutiny at various stages of the

10-40838

recruiting, training and post-training periods. As a
result, a total of 344 persons were discharged from the
armed forces between 2004 and 2009.
With regard to the reintegration process, in 2009
a total of 100 children were returned to their respective
guardians. While underage children were discharged,
punitive actions were taken against military personnel
who failed to abide by existing recruitment rules and
regulations. In 2009, such punitive actions were taken
against 36 military personnel.
With regard to the action plan, my Government is
closely cooperating with the United Nations country
team in order to finalize it by updating our existing
plan.
On the advocacy and awareness-raising front, the
Myanmar Government, in cooperation with UNICEF
and international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), has been conducting seminars and workshops
for military and police personnel and social workers on
the subject of preventing the recruitment of underage
children. The Government is also working closely with
UNICEF and international NGOs to raise general
public awareness on preventing underage recruitment.
We strongly believe that such regular training and
advocacy programmes will widen the scope of
knowledge on those important subjects.
Moreover, through a high-level committee, we
have established a mechanism on the prevention of the
military recruitment of underage children. The
committee has been providing periodic reports to the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on a regular basis. The Secretary-General’s
report has recognized the concrete steps taken by my
Government. Myanmar will continue its support for
and full cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations country team.
My delegation would like to state categorically
that Myanmar is not a country in a situation of armed
conflict. Due to the Government’s national
reconciliation efforts, 17 armed groups have already
returned to the legal fold and the people are enjoying
unprecedented peace and stability in almost all corners
of the country. In that regard, we are of the view that it
is no longer relevant to discuss the situation of
Myanmar under the thematic issue of children and
armed conflict.

43

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

While the Government of Myanmar is sincerely
and seriously addressing the issue of the recruitment of
underage children, we very much regret that our
national army, the Tatmadaw Kyi, is still listed under
annex I of the Secretary-General’s report. We strongly
feel that, given our Government’s endeavours to put in
place the necessary rules, regulations and directives to
prohibit the recruitment of underage children, the
inclusion of the Tatmadaw Kyi on that list is grossly
misleading. My delegation would therefore like to urge
that the progress achieved by the Government be duly
recognized and that our national army be removed
from the list in future reports.
In my conclusion, I would like to say that
Myanmar culture and tradition do not support the use
of children in armed conflict. The Government is
therefore determined to continue to work closely with
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and with the United Nations country
team on this issue. We expect that Myanmar will be
de-listed from future reports of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
thanking you for, Mr. President, organizing this open
debate on children and armed conflict and by
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. My thanks also go to the entire membership of
the Security Council for its landmark resolution 1612
(2005) and all previous and subsequent Council
resolutions that seek to advance the agenda of children
caught in the middle of unfortunate conflicts, in
particular resolution 1882 (2009), from which this
debate emanated. Permit me also to thank the
Secretary-General for his very informative report
contained in document S/2010/181. We note with
appreciation the recommendations contained therein.
The adoption of the Council’s landmark
resolution 1612 (2005) was a move in the right
direction. My delegation views it as a more realistic,
effective and practical approach to addressing the
scourge of the recruitment and use of children as
soldiers. The establishment of the Task Force on
Children and Armed Conflict, which reports regularly
on grave violations, and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict gave more impetus to the

44

issue. Moreover, the resolution appeals to parties to
armed conflict to formulate specific action plans to
stop the recruitment and use of children as soldiers,
thereby providing a framework for compliance. Above
all, the resolution carries the message of combating
impunity, an issue that is very dear to my country.
My delegation is very much delighted to be a part
of this stocktaking exercise today. We believe that it
affords States an opportunity to examine efforts made
towards the implementation of the resolutions under
consideration. For us in Sierra Leone, it is yet another
opportunity to tell the international community that we
were not only determined to address the question of
impunity through the establishment of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court, but
are also committed to working with the rest of the
international community to address the scourge of
conscription and the use of innocent children in
conflicts, together with other grave violations.
In that respect, we reiterate our wholehearted
commendation to the Council for adopting resolution
1882 (2009), which further strengthened the protection
framework for children by extending the scope of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to include sexual
violence and killing and maiming in addition to the
issue of the recruitment of children. It is our fervent
hope that the Council will work speedily to include the
issues of abduction and denial of humanitarian access.
Having gone through a war that witnessed gross
and systematic violations of the human rights of
children, including but not limited to forceful
conscription, forced labour, rape and other forms of
despicable atrocities committed against innocent
children, we are left with no alternative but to join the
fight to end this heinous crime wherever it is
committed in the world.
As a State party to the relevant international
human rights instruments dedicated to the promotion
and protection of the rights of children, we have taken
the following practical measures to ensure our
adherence to resolution 1612 (2005) and all relevant
Security Council resolutions on the issue, including its
most recent, resolution 1882 (2009).
In February 2007, we endorsed the Paris
Commitments to protect children unlawfully recruited
or used by armed forces or armed groups. We enacted
child rights acts that raise the minimum age for
recruitment into the armed forces of Sierra Leone from

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

17.5 to 18 years of age. In 2002, we established a
national commission for war-affected children, which
is still functional. We also established a national
commission for human rights that has a mandate to
examine all cases of human rights, including those of
children. We set up a family support unit within the
police department to protect children against sexual
abuse and exploitation. We established a child
protection committee, headed by the Ministry of Social
Welfare, Gender and Children’s Affairs, that operates
in various parts of the country to take care of
vulnerable children. Finally, on 8 April 2009, the
Special Court of Sierra Leone handed down a verdict
against three members of the defunct Revolutionary
United Front for committing serious violations of
international law — namely, the enlistment,
conscription and use of children below the age of 15 to
actively participate in hostilities — which is a very
important precedent in ending impunity.
Sierra Leone cannot choose to remain silent on
this issue simply because we are no longer at war or
because we do not appear in annexes I and II of the
report before the Council. Although the war ended
some eight years ago, its vestiges are still evident in
our communities. We are still grappling with issues
such as youth unemployment, amputees, children born
of rape and roaming ex-child combatants, to mention
but a few. All of those challenges need to be adequately
addressed if our hard-earned peace is to be sustained.
Many laudable gains have been achieved thanks
to the support and assistance provided by our
development partners. Let me take this opportunity to
assure the Council that Sierra Leone will continue to
address this issue by regularly participating in the
debate on providing protection for victims and
punishing perpetrators of violations and abuses
committed against children.
It would be remiss of me if I were to conclude my
intervention without commending the roles played by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children in Armed Conflict, the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and the relevant Security
Council sanctions committees — but more especially
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for its
efforts in mainstreaming child protection into
peacekeeping missions.
I would like to conclude by calling on all parties
to armed conflicts the world over to adopt measures to

10-40838

halt the participation of children in hostilities by
working closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and all relevant actors to ensure that
the recommendations contained in the report before us
are adhered to in accordance with international child
protection standards.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): We would like to thank the
Mexican presidency for holding this thematic debate.
We listened with interest to the presentations made by
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
on Children and Armed Conflict; Mr. Atul Khare,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF.
Children are our future. A child, whether in the
developing or developed world, can be privileged or
underprivileged. No matter where they are, children
require our equal attention, focus and care. While
trying to tackle the present challenges, we all
consciously work towards ensuring a better and safer
future. That future lies in our children.
The central purpose of the United Nations
Charter, that is “to save succeeding generations”, is
linked to our children as we strive to save them from
the scourge of war. We face common cross-cutting
issues of health, education and protection, et cetera,
when addressing issues related to children in all
situations. However, the vulnerability of children in
situations of armed conflict requires more attention
than any other such issue.
We have carefully reviewed the latest
(S/2010/181) and past reports of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict. We would like to take
this opportunity to point out that the recent reports
have tried to overstretch the definition of armed
conflict. No one can deny the importance of caring for
our children, and any violation of their rights must be
reported and acted upon swiftly. However, we also
have to be careful when we overload a reporting
mechanism by stretching it beyond its mandate. That
results in weakening the message that should be
conveyed by a mandate and a report from the
Secretary-General on the subject of children and armed
conflict.

45

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

In the context of Pakistan, the latest report has
referred to our law enforcement action against
terrorists and extremists as an armed conflict; this
action cannot be defined as such under international
law. Pakistan has been obliged to undertake certain law
enforcement and anti-terror actions with the full
support of the nation, in particular that of the people of
the affected areas. This was necessary to promote and
protect the human rights of the people, especially those
of women and children.
We are deeply concerned at the few instances of
the abhorrent use of children by extremists in Pakistan
and have strongly condemned it. We, however, regret
that the situation is mentioned out of context in the
report. Let me reiterate that the Government of
Pakistan condemns in the strongest terms any use of
children by extremists or any other group to promote
their egregious agenda and is taking appropriate action
in that regard.
UNICEF is Pakistan’s key technical partner in the
area of children and is providing valuable assistance
for children in Pakistan. We have a robust UNICEF
country programme. In this debate, we would like to
acknowledge the role of UNICEF as the key lead
agency on issues of children. We also recognize that
the non-governmental organization community has
made invaluable contributions in this sphere. For a
sustained and meaningful engagement, it is important
that civil society should be sensitive in differentiating
among situations by maintaining objectivity.
We hope that the future reports of the SecretaryGeneral will be objective, so as not to lose sight of the
noble objective of saving our children from the scourge
of war.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Council and to speak in this open debate on
children and armed conflict. The Philippine
Government attaches utmost importance to this subject
and gives high priority to the promotion and protection
of the rights of children, irrespective of what
circumstances they may find themselves in.
The Philippine Government has been actively
cooperating with the United Nations on this matter
since the beginning. As Council members may note,

46

the collaborative work between the United Nations and
my Government started off positively. This was clearly
manifested when the Philippine authorities facilitated
the December 2008 visit of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Under-Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, to the Philippines, where she met
with relevant officials, civil society actors and women
and children affected by armed conflict.
During her visit, Ms. Coomaraswamy also had a
meeting with the leaders of the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front (MILF) to discuss concerns about the
presence of children within the ranks of that rebel
group. As a result of these talks, an action plan was
signed between the United Nations and the MILF on
30 July 2009.
Notwithstanding these positive developments, let
me reiterate the position of my Government that
engaging non-State armed groups, including for the
purpose of securing the protection of children, should
be approached in the most careful manner, taking into
account the larger peace processes that the Philippine
Government is pursuing with non-State groups in the
country, particularly with the MILF and the group
comprising the Communist Party of the Philippines, the
New People’s Army and the National Democratic
Front.
In addition, the Philippine Government has
actively pursued with great and sustained vigour the
Philippines’ comprehensive programme on children
involved in armed conflict by directing relevant
agencies to work closely to implement the national
programmes and monitor compliance with the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict.
I wish to stress that the Philippine Constitution
itself guarantees the promotion and protection of the
rights of children and mandates the State to promote
and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual
and social well-being, defend their right to assistance
and provide them special protection from all forms of
neglect, abuse, exploitation, cruelty and other
conditions harmful to their development.
At this point let me briefly address the concerns
regarding alleged violations committed by the Armed
Forces of the Philippines. The Philippines regards such
allegations with seriousness and deep concern. It is in
this regard that we immediately requested Manila to

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

investigate the allegations to verify the accuracy of the
negative reports. The response of the Armed Forces of
the Philippines to the allegations was duly forwarded
to the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. It
contains a point-by-point explanation regarding the
allegations contained in the report. With respect, for
instance, to alleged military operations mentioned in
the report, according to which children were adversely
affected, the point-by-point explanation stated that, in
fact, no military operation occurred on the dates sited.
Let me, however, assure the Council that the
Philippine Government will remain untiring and
vigilant in the investigation of the allegations and will
enforce the necessary measures to ensure the protection
of children wherever they may be and whatever
circumstances they may be in.
Challenges, of course, remain as we move
forward to address the difficult situation of children in
conflict areas. But cases of children in difficult
circumstances in armed conflict in the Philippines, we
would like to stress, are not really rampant.
The new Administration of President Benigno
Simeon C. Aquino III will take further steps and
measures to implement a long-lasting solution in
ensuring the protection of children in difficult
circumstances. With that, we hope that we will soon be
de-listed from annex II of resolution 1612 (2005) so
that the Council can devote more of its time to its core
competencies in accordance with the United Nations
Charter.
We await the conclusions and recommendations
of the Security Council’s Working Group on Children
in Armed Conflict, to be released next month. We stand
ready to continue to work with the United Nations and
other stakeholders to uphold and carry out the
protection of the rights of children, including those in
the midst of armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his ninth report on the issue, contained in
document S/2010/181. We believe that his
recommendations merit careful consideration and
subsequent implementation and compliance by

10-40838

Member States and parties to armed conflict. Having
said that, I would like to mention that reporting might
preferably be confined to, and carefully concentrate on,
the mandates of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
We commend the Security Council and its
Working Group for their continued efforts in ending
violations against children in armed conflict. Those
initiatives have yielded significant and tangible
successes. As reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report, last year, too, several listed parties to armed
conflict signed agreements to adopt action plans to end
their recruitment or use of child soldiers. The United
Nations system-wide response to this issue is also
laudable. In that connection, I take this opportunity to
thank UNICEF for its leadership role in the monitoring
and reporting mechanism. The Special Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
Ms.
Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and her team deserve our particular
praise for their dedicated efforts.
While addressing this matter, we have to focus a
bit more on the supply side of the issue. The use of
children by non-State armed groups does not take place
in a vacuum. A range of conditions, many of which
underlie the conflict itself, also make children
vulnerable to joining groups that participate in that
conflict. Conditions that might make children in those
settings vulnerable to recruitment include poverty,
discrimination, inequality, exclusion, hopelessness and
desperate situations. They also include a culture of
political violence, tensions over issues of religion and
identity and a history of the use of child soldiers, all of
which combine to create a situation where conflict is
possible and where children can be used or abused by
armed groups. Success in ending children’s
involvement in armed conflicts therefore depends
largely on addressing the root causes of motivation and
desperation and on building societies where the rights
and dignity and the hope for a better future of all
children are upheld.
Needless to say, we still have a long way to go.
The pace of progress is still slow, and its impact is not
yet felt by the thousands of children in the ranks of
fighting forces. While progress has been made through
action plans to release child soldiers in several
situations of concern, the overall situation of children
in armed conflict remains grave. There are 55 entities
on the list contained in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, out of which 16 have been there for at

47

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

least 5 years. Some kind of enforcement criteria should
be contemplated to make parties listed in the annexes,
particularly persistent violators, comply fully with the
action plans in a time-bound manner. Caution,
however, has to be taken to make sure that such
enforcement in no way hurts the very vulnerable group
we are addressing here: children.
Peace remains the main hope for securing the
release of child soldiers from armed forces and groups.
While we appreciate the gradual expansion of child
protection provisions in peacekeeping missions, we
would nevertheless like to see such provisions be made
an integral part of the mandate of all ongoing and
future peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding
missions.
The issues of children under foreign occupation
need to be appropriately addressed. In line with
paragraph 198 of the Secretary-General’s report, we
hope that all parties in situations of armed conflict will
adhere to international normative instruments
protecting educational facilities from attacks.
It has been 10 years since the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict entered into
force. We note with sadness that one third of the States
Members of the United Nations are still not party to it.
We would like to urge those States to become parties to
the Protocol. Children are the future of our world and
they bear the torch of the culture of peace. It is our
solemn duty to protect their physical safety and their
right to live on planet Earth with their minds free of
fear and filled with hopes and dreams.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. Allow me also to
commend and thank Manju Gurung, a Nepalese former
child soldier, for her presentation on this topic, which I
am sure touched everyone in the Chamber and
highlighted vividly the plight of children affected by
armed conflict. We also express our gratitude to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her commitment, tireless
efforts and outstanding work to ensure that children
live and grow in peace and dignity.

48

Armenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the European Union earlier
today. I would like to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.
Conflicts have devastating consequences on
children. Their protection deserves the utmost attention
of the international community and should be a
primary responsibility of all of us, because it is a
serious humanitarian concern and a significant security
issue. The protection of children therefore requires a
multidimensional approach.
Armenia takes note of some positive trends in
recent years in the area of the protection of children in
armed conflict. A set of legal instruments has been
adopted that provide a comprehensive framework for
addressing the issue. As a country that has already
acceded to the Optional Protocols to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, Armenia welcomes and
strongly supports the Special Representative’s
campaign for the universal ratification of those
important international instruments, which can bring
about positive change in the process of uniting our
efforts to protect children.
We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his recent report (S/2010/181) and its
recommendations, and we commend the work of the
Security Council Working Group on the issue, which
has earned sound public and political acknowledgment.
It is unfortunate that, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, children continue to suffer in conflict
situations. I come from a region that, over the past two
decades, has witnessed a number of armed conflicts. As
mine a country that has hosted tens of thousands of
refugee children, the issue on today’s agenda is of
particular concern for the Government of Armenia.
Despite past and current socio-economic hardships in
our country, the post-conflict rehabilitation of
children — in particular issues of health care and
education — continue to be at the centre of the
Government’s attention.
Today, a final resolution of the conflicts in the
South Caucasus is still pending. A no-war/no-peace
situation cannot ensure a safe and decent future for
children and young people who have already witnessed
atrocities of war. It is our belief that only a
fundamental and comprehensive political settlement of
the current disputes can bring long-lasting peace and

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

stability to the region, thereby securing the rights of
our children to a peaceful future.
Having had the privilege of chairing the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-fourth
session, in March, I would like to emphasize that
special attention needs to be paid to children who are
victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence,
especially girls, who are usually the largest group of
victims in armed conflicts. In addition to physical
damage, sexual violence often leaves lasting harm and
stigma.
This year again, by recalling the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council on children and armed conflict, as well as
relevant provisions contained in the instruments of
international humanitarian law relative to the
protection of civilian populations, the Commission on
the Status of Women expressed grave concern about
the continuation of armed conflicts in many regions of
the world and the human suffering and humanitarian
emergencies that they had caused.
To that end, efforts to address sexual violence
could greatly benefit from more collaboration among
various United Nations and regional organizations that
are focused on the protection of children, as well as
those working on issues relating to gender equality and
empowerment and the rights of women and girls.
Armenia commends the work of civil society in
developing effective policies for the protection of
children in armed conflict and the direct help that many
non-governmental organizations provide on the
ground, sometimes in the most dangerous situations.
All relevant stakeholders should continue to work
closely and actively on the issues of gender-based
violence in armed conflict, and we encourage similar
cooperation between non-governmental organizations
and the Security Council and other international
organizations working on the protection of children in
armed conflict.
Child protection is everyone’s responsibility, and
the future of children is dependent on the actions we
take today. Armenia has worked and will continue to
work closely and constructively with the United
Nations and other interested institutions and
organizations concerned with bettering the situation of
children around the world, including those affected by
armed conflict.

10-40838

The President (spoke in Spanish): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the ninth report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict
(S/2010/181) and the recommendations contained
therein, as well as the positive developments
referred to in the report, and notes the continuing
challenges in the implementation of its resolution
1612 (2005), 1882 (2009) and other relevant
resolutions reflected therein.
“The Security Council reiterates its equally
strong condemnation of all violations of
applicable international law involving the
recruitment and use of children by parties to
armed conflict, as well as their re-recruitment,
killing and maiming, rape and other sexual
violence, abductions, attacks against schools or
hospitals and denial of humanitarian access by
parties to armed conflict. The Council condemns
all other violations of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, committed against children in
situations of armed conflict. The Council
demands that all relevant parties immediately put
an end to such practices and take special
measures to protect children.
“The Security Council expresses deep
concern about the growing number of attacks or
threats of attacks in contravention of applicable
international law against schools and educational
facilities, and teachers and pupils, in particular
the specific targeting of girls, and in this regard
calls upon all parties to armed conflict to cease
immediately these violations of international
humanitarian law.
“The Security Council welcomes the steps
taken by the Secretary-General in the
implementation of resolution 1882 (2009) by
including in the annexes of his report those
parties to armed conflict that engage, in
contravention of applicable international law, in
patterns of killing and maiming of children and/or
rape and other sexual violence, in situations of
armed conflict.

49

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

“The Security Council calls upon the
Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to
ensure the strengthening of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism’s capacities with a view to
the implementation of resolution 1882 (2009) to
allow for prompt advocacy and effective response
to all violations and abuses committed against
children, inter alia, by ensuring that all relevant
United Nations agencies actively help to collect
accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable
information on acts of rape and other sexual
violence committed against children; and also by
ensuring synergies and avoiding overlap among
relevant United Nations entities at the
headquarters and country levels, as requested by
resolutions 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009).
“The Security Council reaffirms its decision
in operative paragraph 11 of its resolution 1882
(2009) to continue to include specific provisions
for the protection of children in the mandates of
all relevant United Nations peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and political missions, encourages
the deployment of child protection advisers to
such missions and calls upon the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that such advisers are recruited
and deployed in line with the Council’s relevant
country-specific resolutions and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations policy directive on
mainstreaming the protection, rights and
well-being of children affected by armed conflict.
It further underscores the importance of training
on child rights and child protection for all
personnel
involved
in
United
Nations
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political
missions, and in this regard welcomes the
ongoing efforts by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in developing the
policy implementation plan, including training
programmes and materials.
“The Security Council welcomes the
progress made in preventing and responding to
violations and abuses committed against children
especially with regard to the signing of action
plans by some parties, as mentioned in the ninth
report of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on
parties to armed conflict listed in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict that have not already done so to

50

prepare and implement, without further delay,
action plans to halt recruitment and use of
children, patterns of killing and maiming of
children and/or rape and other sexual violence
against children, in violation of applicable
international law, in situations of armed conflict.
“The Security Council also reiterates its call
on all parties listed in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict to address all other violations and abuses
committed against children and to undertake
specific commitments and measures in this
regard.
“The Security Council expresses deep
concern that certain parties persist in committing
violations and abuses against children, and
expresses its readiness to adopt targeted and
graduated
measures
against
persistent
perpetrators, taking into account the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 1539 (2004), 1612
(2005) and 1882 (2009).
To this end, the Council invites:
(a) its Working Group on Children and
Armed
Conflict
to
exchange
pertinent
information with relevant sanctions committees,
in particular through the communication of the
Working Group’s relevant recommendations;
(b) its relevant sanctions committees to
consider inviting more regularly the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict to brief them on
specific information contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports;
(c) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict to share specific information contained
in the Secretary-General’s reports with the expert
groups of relevant sanctions committees.
“The Security Council expresses its
intention, when establishing or renewing the
mandate of relevant sanctions committees, to
consider provisions pertaining to parties that are
in violation of applicable international law
relating to the rights and protection of children in
armed conflict.

10-40838

S/PV.6341 (Resumption 1)

“The Security Council expresses its
readiness to consider specific recommendations
from its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict on violations and abuses committed
against children by parties listed in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s reports, whenever they
occur, with a view to considering action on them,
without prejudging or implying a decision by the
Security Council as to whether or not to include a
particular situation in its agenda.
“The Security Council calls on concerned
Member States to take decisive and immediate
action against persistent perpetrators of violations
and abuses committed against children in
situations of armed conflict and further calls on
them to bring to justice those responsible for such
violations that are prohibited under applicable
international law, including with regard to the
recruitment and use of children, killing and
maiming, and rape and other sexual violence,
through national justice systems and, where
applicable, international justice mechanisms and
mixed criminal courts and tribunals, with a view
to ending impunity for those committing crimes
against children.
“Given the regional dimensions of some
armed conflicts referred to in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the Security Council reiterates
its request that United Nations peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and political missions, as well as
United Nations country teams, within their
respective mandates and in close cooperation
with the Governments of the concerned countries,
develop appropriate strategies and coordination
mechanisms for cooperation and the exchange of
information on cross-border child protection
issues.
“The Security Council welcomes the overall
work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and highlights the importance of her
field visits in enhancing dialogue with concerned
Governments and parties to the conflict,
including by negotiating action plans, securing
commitments,
advocating
for
appropriate
response mechanisms and ensuring appropriate
attention and follow-up to the conclusions and
recommendations of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

10-40838

“The Security Council also welcomes the
efforts undertaken by the United Nations
Children’s Fund in carrying out its mandate on
child protection by supporting the overall
development and implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and
ensuring an appropriate response to the question
of children in armed conflict, and encourages it to
continue to follow up, through the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms of the country task forces,
on relevant conclusions and recommendations of
the Working Group of the Security Council on
Children and Armed Conflict.
“The Security Council welcomes the
sustained activity of its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and stresses the
importance of continuing to adopt timely
conclusions and recommendations in line with
resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009).
Furthermore, the Council invites the Working
Group
to
fully
implement
its
toolkit
(S/2006/724), inter alia, by carrying out a
country-specific visit within one year to examine
a situation referred to in the annexes of the
Secretary-General’s report in order to better fulfil
its mandate and enhance its capacity to protect
children affected by armed conflict.
“Recalling previous presidential statements
on children and armed conflict, as well as
paragraph 18 of resolution 1882 (2009), the
security Council reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General to provide administrative and
substantive support for its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and further requests
the Secretary-General to take action on this
subject within one month of this date.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report by May
2011 on the implementation of its resolutions and
presidential statements on children and armed
conflict, including the present statement.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/10.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 8 p.m.

51
