A

INITED
lATIONS

General Assembly
m mr

Л

oistr.
GEHERAL
X/8ES/45/61
17 December 1990

Forty-fifth session
Agenda item 59

RESOLUTIOH ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/45/781)]

45/61.

Science and technology for disarmament

The General Assembly.
Convinced that science and technology can profoundly contribute to solving the
problems of mankind, especially to promoting its social and economic development,
Kotina the interest of the international community in disarmament-related
applications of scientific and technological achievements.
Recognizing the contributions that may be offered by scientific and
technological progress for implementing arms control and disarmament agreements,
inter alia, in the fields of verification and of compliance, by parties, with
agreements on arms control and disarmament as well as of weapons disposal.
Welcoming related international activities undertaken so far in this area.
Considering the need for intensified international co-operation, with a view
to using scientific and technological achievements for disarmament-related
purposes, inter alia, in the fields of verification of compliance with agreements
on arms control and disarmament, application of technologies for improved means of
verification and weapons disposal.
Noting the United Nations conference on New Trends m Science and Technology:
Implications for International Peace and Security, held ac Sendai, Japan, in
April 1990, and the United Nations conference on Conversion: Economic Adjustments
in an Era of Arms Reductions, held in Moscow in August 1990, which contributed to
promoting international co-operation in this field.

90-35997

2963Z (E)

/...

X/RES/45/61
Page 2

1.
Welcomes national and international activities to use scientific and
technological achievements for disarmament-related purposes;
2.
Calls upon Member States and relevant intergovernmental organizations to
intensify and extend such activities and to keep the United Mations informed about
progress in this field;
3.
Invites all Member States and relevant international organizations to
develop international co-operation in this area« with a view to using scientific
and technological achievements for disarmament-related purposes, inter alia, in the
fields of verification and of compliance, by parties, with agreements on arms
control and disarmament and application of technologies for improved means of
verification and for weapons disposal;
4.
Recommends that the United Mations should give appropriate attention to
the collection and dissemination of information on scientific and technological
developments in these fields;
5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh session
the item entitled "Science and technology for disarmament".
54th Plenary meeting
i Peceinher 1990
