RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED AND DECISIONS TAKEN
BY THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN 1960
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES ET DECISIONS PRISES
PAR LE CONSEIL DE SECURITE EN 1960

Part I. Questions considered by the Security
Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security

Premiere partie. Questions examinees par le
Conseil de securite en tant qu'organe responsable du maintien de la paix et de la slcurite internationales

QUESTION RELATING TO THE SITUATION
IN THE UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

QUESTION RELATIVE A LA SITUATION
EN UNION SUD-AFRICAINE

Decisions

Decisions

At its 851st meeting, on 30 March 1960, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of the Union of
South Africa, India, Ethiopia, Ghana, Pakistan, Guinea
and Liberia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

A sa 851 8 seance, le 30 mars 1960, le Conseil a decide
d 'inviter les representants de I 'Union sud-africaine, de
l 'Inde, de l 'Ethiopie, du Ghana, du Pakistan, de la
Guinee et du Liberia a participer, sans droit de vote, a
la discussion de la question.

At its 853rd meeting, on 31 March 1960, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Jordan to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

Asa 853 8 seance, le 31 mars 1960, le Conseil a decide
d'inviter le representant de la Jordanie a participer,
sans droit de vote, a la discussion de la question.

134 (1960). Resolution of 1 April 1960

134 (1960). Resolution du ter aml 1960

[S/4300]

[S/4300]

The Security Council,
Having considered the complaint of twenty-nine
Member States contained in document S/4279 and
Add. I 1 concerning " the situation arising out of the
large-scale killings of unarmed and peaceful demonstrators against racial discrimination and segregation in
the Union of South Africa",
Recognizing that such a situation has been brought
about by the racial policies of the Government of the
Union of South Africa and the continued disregard
by that Government of the resolutions of the General

Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant examine la plainte formulee par vingt-neuf Etats
Membres dans le document S/4279 et Add.1 1 apropos
de « la situation resultant du massacre de manifestants
sans armes qui protestaient pacifiquement contre la
discrimination et la segregation raciales en Union sudafricaine »,
Reconnaissant qu'une telle situation resulte de la
politique raciale du Gouvernement de }'Union sudafricaine et de l 'inobservation persistante, par ce gouvernement, des resolutions de l 'Assemblee generale

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fifteenth Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1960.

1 Voir Documents officiels du ConseU de secllritl, quhuiim, Ollllh,
Supplement de Janvier, fevrler et mars 1960.

1

l'invitant a reviser sa politique et a la rendrc conforme

Assembly calling upon it to revise its policies and bring
them into conformity with its obligations and responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking into account the strong feelings and grave
concern aroused among Governments and peoples of
the world by the happenings in the Union of South
Africa,
1. Recognizes that the situation in the Union of
South Africa is one that has led to international friction
and if continued might endanger international peace
and security;
2. Deplores that the recent disturbances in the Union
of South Africa should have led to the loss of life of
so many Africans and extends to the families of the
victims its deepest sympathies;
3. Deplores the policies and actions of the Government of the Union of South Africa which have given
rise to the present situation;
4. Calls upon the Government of the Union of South
Africa to initiate measures aimed at bringing about
racial harmony based on equality in order to ensure
that the present situation does not continue or recur,
and to abandon its policies of apartheid and racial
discrimination;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Government of the Union of South Africa,
to make such arrangements as would adequately help
in upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter
and to report to the Security Council whenever necessary and appropriate.

aux obligations et aux responsabilites que Jui impose

la Chartc des Nations Unies.
Tenant compte de I 'emotion profonde d de la vivc
inquietude que Jes evenements survenus en Union sudafricaine ont suscitees parmi les gouvernemcnls et Jes
peuples du monde,
I. Reconnait que la situation en Union sud-africaine
a entraine un desaccord entre nations et que sa prolongation risquerait de menacer la paix et la securite interna ti onales;
2. Deplore que les troubles recemment survenus en
Union sud-·africaine aient entraine la mort de tant
d'Africains et exprime aux families des victimcs sa plus
profonde sympathie;
3. Deplore la politique et Jes actes du Gouvernement
de !'Union sud-africainc qui ont provoquc la prescnte
situation;
4. Invite le Gouvernement de !'Union sud-africainc a
prendre des mesures pour assurer entre les races une
harmonie fondee sur l'egalite, de far;on que la situation
actuelle ne se prolonge ni se reproduise, et a abandonner
sa politique d'apartheid et de discrimination raciale;
5. Demande au Secretaire general, en consultation
avec le Gouvernement de )'Union sud-africaine, de
prendre les dispositions qui contribueraient efficacement
au respect des buts et principes de la Charte et de faire
rapport au Conseil de securite chaque fois que cela
sera necessaire et approprie.
Adoptee a la 856• seance par
9 voix contre zero, avec 2 abstentions ( France, RoyaumeUni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Jrlande du Nord).

Adopted at the d56th meeting
by 9 votes to none, with 2
abstentions ( France, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland).

QUESTION OF RELATIONS BETWEEN
THE GREAT POWERS

QUESTION DES RELATIONS
ENTRE LES GRANDES PUISSANCES

135 (1960). Resolution of 27 May 1960

135 (1960). Resolution du 27 mai 1960

[S/4328]

[S/43281

The Security Council,
Minqful of its responsibility for the maintenance of

Le Conseil de securite,
Soucieux de la responsabilite qui Jui incombe pour le

international peace and security,
Noting with regret that the hopes of the world for a
successful meeting of the Heads of Government of
France, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ire-

maintien de la paix et de la sccurite internationales,
Notant avec regret que les espoirs que le monde avait
mis dans le succes d'une reunion des chefs de gouvernement des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, de la France, du
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagnc et d'Irlande du
2
