,

UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
,RECORDS

I.j,,jit!, “_,
‘;,
‘.;,‘Z
q>A<
\I#

th

1538

MEETING:

NEW

12 MAY 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/1538)

., . . . . . ,. , . . . . . . .. , , . , , , . . . . . . . . . .. .

1

of the agenda , , . , . , . . . . . , , , . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794) . . . . . * . . . . . , , . * . * , . . , . . . . . * , . . . . . . . . . . . . * . . * . * ..; . . . . . . . . :
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795) * . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . , . , , . . . . * . . . . . . * * . I . . . . . . * . , . . . . . I . . . . 8.

S/PV. 1538

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . I . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Of$cial Records
of the Security Council. The

date of the document indicates the supplement
information about it is given.

in which it appears or in which

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resohttions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

/

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 12 May 1970, at 4.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Jacques KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET

(France).
Presem: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,

Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Statesof America
and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l538)
1,

Adoption of the agenda.

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9794).

3.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9795).
Adoption of the agenda
The ngendn was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795)
I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation .fiom French):
In accordance with the decision taken this morning
by the Council 11537th meeting], I intend to invite the
representatives of Lebanon, Israel, Morocco and Saudi
Arabia to participate
in the debate without the right
to vote, In accordance with the practice followed in

the past, I propose to invite the representatives of the
parties directly concerned, that is, the representatives

of Lebanon and Israel, to take seats at the Council
table. In view of the limited number of seats at the
table, the other representatives will be invited to take
the places reserved for them in the Council chamber
on the understanding that they will be invited to sit
at the table when it is their turn to address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanorz) and Mr. Y. Tekocrh (Israel) took p&es at
the Security Council table, und Mr. A. T. Benhima
(Morocco) and Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took
the places reserved for them.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the item on its agenda. The first speaker on
my list is the representative of Morocco. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table in order to address
the Council.
3. Mr. BENHIMA
(Morocco) (inte?pretntion from
French): Mr. President, I should like to express to
you and to the members of the Council my gratitude
at being allowed to participate in this debate. This is
not the first time that a representative of my country
has come to the Security Council table to speak about
the increasingly serious events in the Middle East. I
have done so very frequently as representative of
Morocco, carrying out our responsibility as a Member
State, anxious to express the views of my country on
the peace which is constantly being jeopardized in that
part of the world. It is my privilege today to appear
not only in that capacity but also as Chairman of the
Arab Group for the month of May, and I am pleased
that my colleagues have honoured me by asking me
to come here to express their anxieties, their feelings
and their views.
4. Before I go on to the heart of the matter, I should
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Council, although I am sorry
that I have not been able to do this in other circumstances. These pleasant comments to you, Mr. President, are my only consolation, for the rest of my statement will contain comments which will not, I must
confess, be to everyone’s liking.
5. The relations between Morocco and France were
given expression recently by the highest authorities
of both our countries when the Sovereign of my country
made a trip to Paris. It would be immodest to add
anything here to the sincere and courteous words which
were said then about our relations and the co-operative
spirit that exists between us. I can assure you that

what both our Heads of State said at the highest level
will constantly be reflected in the relations which the
delegations of France and Morocco will have in the
future. Our relations in the future with you, Sir, will
be exactly as they have been in the past with your
distinguished predecessors.

of Israel has here, announced the attack: he claims that
the Council is not prepared to take a harsh view of
the matter and as he mentioned the composition of
the Council, might I point out that it is no different
from what it was on 1 January. His real meaning is
doubtless that the international picture at the present
time is such as to make it possible for the Council
to deal with this matter in a manner not conducive
to peace.

6. This morning we heard a statement about the complaint by the delegation of Lebanon concerning Israeli
aggression. We heard a brand of euphemistic rhetoric
in the Council which stopped short of calling things
by their proper name. The penetration of troops in
foreign territories has always been called in all languages a deliberate act of aggression. For certain subtle
reasons some people may wish in the Council to avoid
use of this term in describing what actually took place,
So it is then within the context of the full meaning
of this term that we shall set forth our views.

10. Today Lebanon has been chosen as the victim.
This choice, I believe, was based on three considerations. The first was military: Israel could afford to
confront a country whose peace-loving traditions and
desire for a balanced budget had always induced it
not to consider itself in a permanent state of war with
Israel or Israel’s equal in terms of arms. So militarily,
this attack was a walkover. From the political point
of view the Security Council by a unanimous resolution
in December
1968 [resolution 262 (1968)j drew the
attention of Israel to the consequences of renewed
attacks on Lebanon. And certain major Powers used
the Council, international forums and bilateral diplomacy to explain to Israel what the consequences of
such a position would be. In taking this stand, Israel
is provoking the Council, which has already pointed
out the danger of repeated acts of aggression. It has
also issued a challenge to the major Powers which
through diplomatic channels have drawn its attention
to the value of respecting the territorial integrity of
Lebanon. But these calculations coincide with certain
international
circumstances which insure Israel’s
impunity. And this is what I mean. Today an attack
of this scale has been undertaken after efforts had been
made basically from the beginning of this year to provoke in Lebanon disturbances and conflicts between
Palestinian
resistance fighters and the Lebanese
Government.
But these attempts have failed. The
Palestinians, who are not refugees in Lebanon but COW
batants on Arab territory, have reached an understanding in very specific circumstances with the Government
of Lebanon to exercise their rights, Consequently, this
manoeuvre has not been fruitful.

7. I shall not add anything to the actual concrete facts
which were set forth comprehensively
this ‘morning
by the representative of Lebanon, who spoke on behalf
of the victims. But, with your permission, I would,
if I may, change somewhat the focus of this debate
and put it in its true political perspective. This is not
just an invasion by Israeli troops of another territory
in the Middle East. This is not the first such act and
it will certainly not be the last, although it is likely
to last longer than others have in the past because
it has been overshadowed by recent events in other
areas of the world which bear the stamp of authority
conferred by might and which have set an example,
although I shall refrain from .saying what kind of
example.
8. The Council in our opinion should certainly not
just concern itself with the violation of principles over
which it has jurisdiction.
I would beg the Council to
go further, to consider more than just the human and
material loss which has been caused in Arab countries
over the past three years. I think the Council should
consider the motivations behind this large-scale attack.
Why was it made in the present circumstances and
what are its true implications? The campaign to prepare
for this attack was no surprise to those who can read
between the lines of reports from Tel Aviv, or to those
who realize that a general who is Minister of Information has a habit of linking propaganda to strategy. Very
recently the delegate of Israel gave an interview over
the Israeli military radio which made the news. That
is, the Israeli delegate was simply told indirectly that
he should prepare his case and call in his lawyers.
This is what Mr. Tekoah stated:
“The United Nations and its Members are already
accustomed to the idea of Israel answering in kind
and retaliating. Thus, an operation from the Israeli
army into the interior of Lebanese territory will surprise no one. Likewise, the present membership of
the Security Council is such that it is practically
impossible to expect the United Nations to take
action in order to bring about peace.”

11. Secondly, another purpose of this undertaking has
been, as a result of the size of the attack, to distort
one’s understanding of the situation in Lebanon, to
destroy the social, political and institutional balance
and to make it possible for some rather influential
people to turn Lebanon into a Cambodia.
12. I assume the responsibility of making this parallel
and suggesting a similarity between these two situations, because Israel’s initiative and the diplomatic Preparations behind it are clearly within this context; and
this is clear to anyone who is not naive. The major
Powers of the world, when they take such initiatives
in various areas of the world are invited to look beyond
their own objectives, and try to anticipate what effect
their action in certain areas of the world will have.
It is well known that those who enjoy the protection
of the major Powers can safely, and with impunity,
act very much as they do. It would be very difficulty
around this table, to find anyone who would suPPort

9. Just taking this paragraph, although I am not a
specialist in rhetoric, we can say that the representative
2

I
(

or remain silent about interventions, whatever their
military nature, which rest on a principle of international law that has never been recognized in the Council-namely,
the condemnation of the right of pursuit.
The Council has brought this out time and time again.
The last such case was unfortunately in 1963-the dispu te between Cambodia and Viet-Nam--and.the
Council came out against the right of pursuit. If political
and military force has brought about this upheaval in
other areas of the world, how can one be surprised
to see those who for protection cling to the coat-tails
of certain major Powers, pursuing their own goals with
the certainty that there will not be a “call for peace”
in this Council?

~
/
i

13. Whether it is the Parrot’s Beak (that is the kind
of name places seem to have nowadays) or the Fishhook, or the grottoes in northern Jordan, or the mountains in southern Lebanon-the
similarity of political
situations seems to lead to a similarity in geographical

in Lebanon. According to the information which we
have, I can assure yowl that they are still there.
18* There may be certain acts of intervention which,
in view of military problems, the size of the territory,
and the strength of the adversary, might take four
weeks or six months to complete. But between dawn
and dusk it is possible for Israel to do in Lebanon
what it might take six months to do elsewhere.
Lebanon, until those troops are withdrawn, will be
living its longest day. But it is not a long day only
for Lebanon: it is a most important day indeed for
the Council. The international situation is such that
one cannot say that events are isolated. The propaganda campaign which we have been hearing now
for several weeks is based on certain events familiar
to us all and the main parties concerned are fully awajre
of the realities. Suddenly there was talk of a change
in the situation in the Middle East, which supposedly
required a reassessment-meaning
that what had been
suspended as being too serious could now justifiably
be undertaken. The danger here is that one side is
trying, as it were, to prepare clean texts, while Israel
seems to be satisfied with its old rough drafts. It is
difficult for the Council to condone such manoeuvres,
however.

1

llarnes.
14. I think that it is here in such matters that the
1 Council should go beyond mere events, and consider
e the whys and wherefores and the political implications
i of what is happening. When people are invited to speak
[ in the Council, obviously they are strongly tempted
E to be discreet; but it is equally important not to have
1 any compunction
about stating the political truth in
/ a political body, no matter what the consequences.
/ We are not simply a highway patrol out to establish
1 the facts as they actually occurred. Our task is to
~ safeguard peace, We must go beyond the mere facts,
especially when they conceal long-range intentions.

1
I
I

19. We heard a typical piece of Israeli propaganda
this morning. There was no justification for it on the
basis of what had happened in the Council, but the
Israeli representative suddenly came out with some
Arab-Russian propaganda. When the representative of
Lebanon speaks about what is happening in his
country, there is no need for him to read the Russian
press; although it may be necessary to read Tel Aviv
prose to find out the exact intentions of Israel. Israel’s
aim has been to make it appear as if there is collusion
between certain parties to convey the impression that
the whole problem really boils down to an international
confrontation with the super-Powers pitted against
each other. Of course all this requires some admission
as to where Israel’s support comes from. The Israeli
delegate was not tactful enough, however, to be discreet about the support he receives. I was surprised
when obvious allusions were made to this bupport that
such strenuous attempts were made to prove it.

15. For three years now the Arab world has been
witness to this succession of events, and peace-loving
Lebanon, which has not been active in the war in such
a way as to make it possible for Israel to. say it is
an adversary or an opponent in war, has now become
a victim,, because that is the paru-tof the world where
Israel can act as it chooses.
16.

This morning

the Council

endeavoured

to dis-

charge one of its primary responsibilities:
it gave priority to an interim resolution to demonstrate its aware-

I

I
j

ness of the gravity of the situation. It reached a decision
which, pending a continuation of the debate, was
designed to put a stop to aggression. But we witnessed
certain manoeuvres which I wish to denounce one after
the other. The representative of Israel even said, with
a kind of miive childishness: “Gentlemen,
the troops
have withdrawn; the Council should no longer consider
this draft resolution.”
When he said the troops had
withdrawn he was careful not to say that they had
first gone into Lebanon and had caused considerable
damage and his implication was that the Council should
be satisfied with t;hat statement, that we should consider the case closed and that we should all go off
to lunch.

20. The procrastination
which we witnessed this
morning to avoid an urgent vote calls to mind what
happened in the Council in June 1967, when, after the
cease-fire decision on the Israeli-Egyptian
frontier,
here in the Council we saw the same kind of manoeuvre.
At the head of some delegations there were people
who were doubtless most conversant with the kind
of courtroom manoeuvres calculated to delay the work
of the Council; and they wasted valuable hours in the
Council before Israel’s army let us know when it would
finally implement the cease-fire. But more time was
requested. We were told that order could not be
restored for a few hours because of the size of the
armies involved. We witnessed this same manoeuvre
on 9 June, when at its meeting at dawn the Security
Council called for a cease-fire on the Syrian frontier,
but it took Israel nine hours to carry out the cease-fire,

17. The representative of Lebanon, directly thereafter, countered that manoeuvre, saying that, according to information
received, Israeli troops were still
3

and during that time it occupied the Golan Heights,
part of Syrian territory which today was used in o?der
to penetrate into Lebanon more easily.
,

sion recognized by the Government of Israel and recognized by the Council as a whole. It is therefore up
to the Council to consider not only the facts. It should
bear in mind what Jules Romains said about the Battle
of Verdun, “Let us forget the victory and seek its
reflection”.
We would invite those who have undertaken military operations to follow us and the Council,
for it is our duty as member States to say how far
we shall go. If what is happening today in Asia should
tomorrow come about in the Middle East, we may
all, due to our habit of remaining silent, become
accomplices.

21. It is this kind of situation which is really more
the result of Israeli propaganda than Arab-Soviet propaganda. It is this constant, relentless desire to have
one believe that there are ilot just Arabs and Israel
in the conflict, but that behind it all there are major
Powers: and instead of there being a relevant debate
in the Security Council on a specific situation, there
is a desire to have the emphasis placed on a controversy
which is of long standing and not about to come to
an end. We ref&e to let the Council be taken in by
this invitation which has been issued with a certain
amount of arrogance. It is our duty, no matter who
our friends may be, no matter what our relations may
be with others, to pause for a moment and rid ourselves
of the compunctions whicli some,may have to speak
the truth; and in this body, above ‘and beyond our
own special interests, we must all say tihere we believe
the international danger lies.

26. I would not conclude without referring to something which was said this morning by the representative
of Israel, who, I assume, knows many Lebanese
proverbs. He said that those who sow thorns should
not expect to harvest grape. I can assure him that it
is not the victims who are sowing thorns. Again this
morning he was accused of sowing thorns in the Middle
East. I do not know what the harvest will bring to
him and those who so clearly support him on the international level.

22. I should like to stress this point because once
again this morning, contrary to the way the Israeli press
used to handle this sort of thing some time ago (it
used to say for example that Syrian and Israeli planes
had clashed without specifying the nature of the
planes), Israel reported that there had been a confrontation between MIGs and Phahtdms. The implication
clearly was that the war was ‘not between the States’
of the Middle East but between certain categories of
planes, which, of course, put the whole problem in
the wrong perspective.
:,
,,’
:
:
23. This morning the Council reached its first de&ion
and we .are pleased with it. As’an inteiim resolution
it expresses the desire of thi Council to accord priority
to the most immediate and serious aspect of the. situation in the Middle East, the tieed for ari imniediate
cessation of Israeli aggression. Call it what you will
-each in his own language-but
when we think of
realities let us use the most appropriate word.

27. Sure of my facts and expressing the concern not
only of all the Arab capitals but also that of the international commuriity, I have drawn attention not only to
the gravity of the situation in the Middle East, but
also to the implications of that situation and how it
could possibly spread and lead to more serious incidents with which we may have to deal in the future.
I have shown that I am not in the habit in the Council
of even alludigg to events in certain countries which
are national problems requiring our respect and discretion, but there are some things which have symbolic
value in the world, and there are those in this country
who have expressed their concern about intervention
in the affairs of a country which is not involved in
a conflict. I would hope that the conscience of this
country will not only be reflected by its youth, but
also by distinguished political personalities of whom
fortunately there are many in this country. If this conscience is fair, it must be aware that intervention in
Lebanon is no different from intervention in Cambodia.

24. We do not wish simply t6 appeal to both sides’
to cease fire, for those appeals ,make ‘it sound Yery
much as if there is an internatidnal confrdntafion, e’specially if we say: “S@ military o$e&ion$ in the area”.
Lebanon is a country with clearly defined bordei-s.
And when the Council is to idvite the party responsible
for aggression to stap‘aggressic)n, it should specify by.
name from what area it should withdraw. Elsewhere,
in the world the word ‘“area” first covered. d. very
specific part of a continent1 Subskqtlently,
as a result
of references to history the term came to apply to a
whole country in the vocabulary of politics and the
press and then it was taken to refer to a larger region,
the boundaries of which may very well go on expanding. In the Middle East we would not like to see this
kind of escalation in geographical terms, in the vocabulary of politics or in international confra;ntations.

28. I should like to reserve my right to speak again
in the futui-e, though I trust I shall not need to do
so.
29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretu<ion from French):
The second speaker on my list is the representative
of Lebanon, on whom I now call.
30. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): This morning we heard
the representative of Israel repeating, as usual, sOme
of his worn-out distortions. At least we owe him the
recognition of having told the truth on one point and
that is his admission that the troops of his country
have in fact invaded southern Lebanon. In his delaying
tactics unfortunately, supported by other members of
the Security Council-to
prevent quick action by the
Security Council regarding the immediate withdrawal
of the aggressor, that is, the Israeli troops, from
Lebanon, he tried to convince the Council that according to his dispatches those forces had begun their with-

25. We must consider the case of Lebanon. Once
again it has been the victim of a specific act of aggres4

drawal from Lebanon. I owe it to the Council to state
the real facts. At this stage, according to telephonic
communications
I had with Beirut just before entering
this Chamber, the Israeli forces are still in large numbers in the region of southern Lebanon and do not
show any sign of withdrawing.

Place recently in Cambodia. Israel could have benefited
from international machinery to investigate its claims
if they were truly founded; but it undertakes acts of
aggression against Lebanon and expects the world to
have faith in its pretences and approve its conduct,
It has unilaterally denounced the Lebanon-Israel
Armistice Agreement of 1949 and opened for itself a
door-the door to violence, to attack, to murder, to
death and destruction in the southern part of my
country.

3 I. Another distortion of the representative of Israel
was the fact that the troops of his country were attackingcommando regions and that they were not attacking
or engaged in any action with the Lebanese army. The
latest figure I have is that already five Lebanese soldiers have been killed and seven soldiers wounded in
their fight to repel the aggression. The Israeli artillery
has been constantly shelling the defensive positions
of the Lebanese army in the region of Heyam, Marjayoun, Nabatiyye and other places.

36. Gn a previous occasion my delegation stated in
the Council our respect for the Armistice Agreement,
which is binding on both parties to it, This view has
been held very strongly by our esteemed SecretaryGeneral. I quote from the Secretary-General’s
introduction to the annual report on the work of the
Organization for the period 16 June 1966 to 15 June
1967, in which he said:
“There is no provision in them”-that
is, the
Armistice Agreements-“for
unilateral termination
of their application. This has been the United
Nations position all along and will continue to be
the position until a competent organ decides
otherwise.“’

32, However, I should like to extend to members
of the Council the gratitude of my delegation for the
prompt action they have taken unanimously on the
resolution presented by the representative of Spain and
seconded by the representative of Zambia. Now it is
for the Council to judge, to see whether its authority
is going to be effective, whether the Israeli troops are
going to withdraw forthwith as the resolution has
demanded.

37. Strict adherence to the Armistice Agreements was
strongly advocated by Israeli representatives themselves in the past. At the 433rd meeting of the Security
Council, on 4 August 1949, Mr. Abba Eban, then
Israel’s representative at the United Nations, stated
that: “The effective position, therefore, is that these
Agreements have no time limit and can be altered only
by agreed amendments . . ,“.

33. We have always had misgivings about the Israeli
tactics in this Council. At one time we described these
tactics of the Israeli representative
as those of a
“Johnny come lately”. They are already known to
the members of the Council. The Israelis undertake
military action and then come to the Council as if to
seek its sanction, They accuse, they fabricate the pretexts; they distort the facts; they believe their own
manufactured story; they take the law in their hands
and carry out their sentence. They are in a way the
accuser, the judge and the executioner at the same
time. It follows that in international law there are two
concepts and two law standards: one for the international community,
for all of us, and another one for
Israel-for
Israel considers itself above the law of the
international community.

38. Mr. Ralph Bunche, the Under-Secretary-General
for Special Political Affairs who witnessed and was
instrumental in the formulation of these agreements,
stated in his report to the Security Council of 21 July
1949: “Any breach of their terms”-that is, the Armistice Agreements- “would involve a most serious act
of bad faith.“2
39. None other than Mr. Rosenne, the Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel, in his essay entitled

34. When the international
community,
and in our
case more particularly
the United Nations, adopts
resolutions and takes decisions against Israel, Israel
unabashedly shows its contempt. This august body has
witnessed many manifestations
of Israel’s contempt
for international
law and institutions.
The Security
Council itself has not been spared. Had Israel really
had serious complaints or grievances, as its representative comes here and laments, it could have had easy
access to the Council, as we have, by lodging its own
complaint and not waiting until the victim of aggression
had done so. But it has arrogated to itself the right
of reprisals, of what is known as “the hot pursuit”-a
measure not recogmzed by international
law and
morality, and least of all by this Council.

~smd’s

Armistice

Agreements with the Arab States ,’

published in 19.51, came to the conclusion that the
parties to the general Armistice Agreements “intended
what was essentially an accord between States in armed
conflict with one another, the accord taking effect
within the context of the special law of the United
Nations”. Mr. Rosenne opined that it would be “a
mistake to confuse this transiency with any contemporariness; on the contrary, the agreements themselves
are agreements concluded for an indefinite duration”.
40. The Secretary-General mentioned here in the
Council only this morning that he had deployed efforts
by proposing to both Lebanon and Israel the Posting
1 See Offi&/
Records of the General Assembly,
Twenty-second
Slrp’plement No. IA, para.43.
2 See OjJcia/ Records of the Security Council, Fosrth.Yeur,
Supplementfor
August 1949,documentS/1357.

35. My colleague and brother, the representative of
Morocco, very eloquently expounded on this theory
a few moments ago and found an apt parallel between
what has taken place in my country and what has taken

SESSION,

a Tel Aviv, International Law Association,19.51.

5

of an adequate number of observers on both sides of
the Lebanese-Israeli border or, as he calls it, the ceasefire line, in his note of 18 August 1969 [s/9393]. He
was moved by the increasing seriousness of the situation in the Israeli-Lebanese
sector and considered it
to be his duty to propose to both the Governments
concerned that United Nations observers should be
stationed there in adequate numbers to observe effectively any breach of the Security Council cease-fire.

Nations-and
today the territory of a fourth-are
occupied by armed forces resulting from aggression
of another Member State of the United Nations, a State
that owes its very existence to this Organization, to
which it pledged, when it. was admitted to it, respect
for its Charter and its decisions.
45. That “respect” has been translated by complete
disregard of all the resolutions that were passed during
the last twenty years by the various organs of the
United Nations regarding the Palestinian refugees,
regarding the legitimate right of the Palestinian people
to their homeland and to their homes. It took the form
of disregard for the resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly about Jerusalem, the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Commission regarding the practices of Israel in violation of human rights and the Geneva Convention4 in
the occupied territory-occupied
militarily by force by
Israel in disregard of so many resolutions of the Security Council and, in our case, in disregard of resolutions
262 (1968) of 3 1 December 1968 and 270 (1969) of 26
August 1969.

41. The Lebanese Government has informed the
Secretary-General,
in its letter dated 18 August 1969
[S19393/Add.l],
of its willingness to co-operate with
him by strengthening the United Nations machinery
within the framework of the Armistice Agreement
should Israel agree to the United Nations observers
resuming their function and discharging their duty. It
is a known fact that Israel has refused for the last
two and a half years to allow them to fulfil their mission
on her side of the border. Were they there, I think
the Council would have had easy access to reports
from neutral observers to substantiate what the Lebanese delegation imparted to the Council this morning.

46. The representative of Israel always finds an
excuse for the actions of his Government and the Israeli
armed forces in the fact that we have Palestinian people
on Lebanese territory. It is a fact; nobody denies it.
We know it. We have been living with it here in the
United Nations for twenty-two years. We have been
discussing, on and on, the problem of the Palestinian
refugees. Israel wants them to live, to breed, to vegetate in misery in their camp. It will not acquiesce
to the calls of the United Nations to allow them to
return to their homeland. These refugees are 300,000
human beings. They are like any one of us here, with
brains, with hearts, with feelings, with ambitions, with
love for their homeland, a homeland which was usurped
by the Israeli aggressors.

42. Another point which I should like to rais& at this
stage-and I should like to make it clear from the outset
that it is a very important point to us-is that the agenda
adopted this afternoon deals with two separate complaints: our complaint contained in document S/9794
of this morning, and the alleged Israel complaint contained in document S/9795 also of this morning. We
expect the Council to deal with our complaint and
decide on it separately. We have strong objections to
equating them and allowing some negotiators to try
to strike a just balance by placing on the same level
the wicked aggressor and the victim as if they were
pharmacists
doling out a prescription gramme by
gramme; that is to say, by counting words,, letters and
paragraphs to be allotted to Lebanon and those to be
allotted to Israel in a so-called attempt to be fair and
even-handed, This we consider to be in utter disregard
for justice, equity, fairness and international law.

47. I should like here at this stage-although
it has
already been recorded in the annals of the Security
Council, in document S/9713 of 18 March 1970-to
recall once more the position of the Lebanese Government regarding this matter. The proverb says that it
does not matter if we repeat something because it is
better understood if repeated twice. I quote from that
letter, representing the official view of the Lebanese
Government:
“The latest Israeli raids”-1
am not speaking
about today’s raid, but about previous raids; there
have been many against Lebanon during the last year
and a half-“against
the Lebanese population have
been referred to in a note from the delegate of L&anon to the Security Council.
“Apart from and in addition to that note, and leaving aside even the most recent acts of aggression,
we have another duty towards all Governments and
in particular towards those who through their permanent membership of the Security Council assume
even more urgently the duty of anticipating and Pre-

43. The attempt this morning to add a rider to the
resolution presented by the representative of Spain was
in this direction. It was intended to stop all military
operations in all areas while we were dealing here with
one complaint, and only one complaint, resulting from
a definite, wanton, premeditated aggression launched
by Israel against Lebanon, and we hope that the me&
bers of this Council will understand our position. If
by the application of such formulas the intention is
to save the sickly peace in the Middle East, the result
would be, in our opinion, really to give it the coup
de grace. There is a better means to save that sickly
peace from dying. It is by administering to it the justice
and fairness which has been denied the Arabs for a
long time.
44. I said this morning that Israel was celebrating
its twenty-second anniversary during the celebration
of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
Let us remember, all of us around this table, that the
territories of three Member States of the United

4 Geneva Convention relative to the protection of civilian Persons
in time of war, signed on 12 August 1949 (United Nations, TreW
&vies,
vol. 75 (1950), No. 973).

6

“It is also our duty to alert the Security Council
to another aspect of the problem.
“Through
its threats and its aggression Israel
intends to compel Lebanon to force its 300,000 Palestinian refugees, through the use of armed force, to
resign themselves indefinitely to the miseries of their
exodus, under penalty of itself suffering further aggression by Israel. Thus Israel’s aim is none other
than to destroy Lebanon either from inside or from
outside, by confronting it with the alternatives of
undergoing Israeli raids against its own territory and
its population or practising towards its own brothers
who are resident in its territory a permanent policy
of violence and civil war.
“Confronted
with this dilemma, Lebanon has
already undergone seven months of political crisis
whose origin can only be attributed to Israel. Today,
Israel intends to push the Lebanon to every kind
of violence, both along its frontiers and within its
territory.
“Lebanon is a model of peaceful and fraternal
coexistence among the various communities which
make up the population, united in a single faith in
God and mankind. It is also one of the most open
countries in the world to everything human and universa].
“The significance of the harmonious synthesis
which it is achieving goes beyond the frontiers of
Lebanon. It represents, in fact, a solution to many
problems in other countries. On the international
level, it corresponds to the ultimate aspirations of
all men for an era of understanding and fraternal
co-operation. If because of the Palestinian drama,
for which Lebanon is hardly responsible, and which
inter nlia calls in question the justice and authority
of the Security Council, this human experiment
which hitherto has been successful should be compromised, this would surely be a condemnation of
the principles, activity and purpose of the United
Nations, and in the eyes of history would constitute
a real backward step for mankind.
“These words are addressed to al1 peoples. Lebanon urges their representatives to the United Nations
and the Security Council to make the voice’of conscience and reason prevail over the hypocrisy which
marks Israel’s propaganda. Among the members of
the Security Council, this appeal is addressed in particular to the four great Powers which bear special
responsibility
and, even more particularly, among
the great Powers, to that or those which through
their conduct are allowing Israel to persist in its violence.
“While defending itself against the raids on it,
which are increasing, Lebanon wishes to remind
mankind and its conscience that, in accordance with
the laws of inexorable justice, the blood of innocence
is always visited upon those who shed it and those
who wash their hands of the matter.
“Lebanon also proclaims its unshakable conviction that the justice and law to which it has bound
its own destiny will take for it and will allow it to
take the resounding revenge which history has
always reserved for the victims of inequity.”

venting threats to security. It is important
to
denounce more clearly and ‘solemnly than ever
before the hypocrisy and deception of Israeli propaganda consisting of accusations and threats, the
escalation of which especially in recent weeks is preparing Israel for every kind of violence”-we
saw
it-“and
attempting to lead international opinion to
regard such violence as abts of reprisal against
Lebanon, because of the presence and activity of
the Palestinians.
” 1. If there are 300,000 Palestinians in its territory,
it is not Lebanoti which is responsible, but Israel,
which drove that Palestinian population from its
homes,
“2, If, despairing of exercising their right of return
which is recognized by the international community,
these refugees become, wholly or in part, combatants
bearing arms in support of their cause, it is not Lebanon which is or can be responsible, but Israel, which
has refused to implement the United Nations resolutions concerning inrer alia the right of return of the
Palestinians which it dispersed.
“3. It is Israel which must bear the responsibility
for the failure to implement the United Nations
resolutions adopted both before and after the war
of 5 June 1967, and for the consequences of that
failure. It shares that responsibility with all other
countries which,give it direct support. It can on no
account shift the responsibility on to Lebanon.
“Indeed, of the whole international community,
Lebanon is without a doubt the country which least
deserves to bear the responsibility for the Palestinian
presence and activity for which Israel claims to be
punishing it.
“This evidence cannot but echo resoundingly in
the conscience of all countries and all men of good
faith. Taken as a whole, they show that Israel, in
hounding the victims which it dispersed, wishes to
label Lebanon as guilty of not .finishing them off,
in other words of not eliminating them systematically
or killing them, through systematic violence, the
need, pushed to the point where it becomes violence,
to regain their homeland.
“Another way of presenting this same evidence
and of fixing the original responsibility for the acts
of resistance of which Israel is complaining would
be to say that it would be sufficient for Israel itself
to respect international
law and United Nations
resolutions,
in particular those of the Security
Council, in order to put an end to the disturbances
on the frontier between the Lebanon and Israel and
to restore throughout the whole region the only possible peace, a peace which is based on justice.
“Even now the internal law of most countries recognizes and embodies the principle whereby no one
is justified in invoking his own misdeeds, in other
words, inter nlin, in deriving new rights and new
justifications
from the results of an injustice which
he himself caused. The same principle must apply
in international
relations; no one can invoke as an
excuse for further aggression the claimed need to
defend himself against the victims of an earlier aggression which he has committed arid perpetuated.
7

sometimes through aid, sometimes cajoling people in
the developing countries so that they might be at their
command, or through economic pressure or, as in the
case before us, aggression by proxy. This is a Western
aggression by proxy. After the mantle of power fell
on a country which, out of courtesy, I shall refrain
from naming-it
knows itself-it
has been fighting us
by proxy. What for?

4X. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The representative of Saudi Arabia has asked to be
allowed to speak. I therefore invite him to take a seat
at the Council table so that he may address the Council.
49. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
I must thank you and members of the Council for allowing me to address the Council on the item before it.
Before proceeding any further, I should like to say
that it is indeed a privilege and an honour for me to
take the floor under your chairmanship, I shall not
embarrass you by praising you and your country. The
admirable way in which you have been conducting the
Council’s meetings is more eloquent than any words
of mine.

53. The Khazars hailed from Europe. There is
nothing wrong with being a Khazar. These Khazars
became jews in the eighth century. They are European
in culture and in language. Although the language is
Yiddish, it is a mixture of German and other vernaculars of the area, with a sprinkling of Hebrew. They
were sent to our area because they succeeded in railroading the United States into the First World War
in 1917. The United States had declared itself isolationist and did not join in the First World War until 1917,
They sold our people down the Thames river and in
1947 down the Potomac river. These strangers remind
me of the Crusaders, who were a foreign element in
our midst. They were not Jews; they were Christians.
There was a divergence in the eleventh century on
account of the awakening of the vassals of the Pope,
who in those days exercised religious and temporal
power over Europe. Peter the Hermit was the propagandist and hordes from Europe marched into the
Middle East, allegedly to wrest the Holy Sepulchre
from the hands of the infidel. Who was the infidel?
The indigenous. people of Palestine who were Christians and Moslems and who believed in Christ, This
is a repetition, a crusade of the .twentieth century
initiated by Western Powers, the Anglo-Saxon pair,
as my friend, said. I look their representatives in the
face and feel sorry for them, because they are good
friends of mine. What have we done to those Anglo-Saxons all those years? We opened our doors and our
trade to them, What have we done to them that they
should allow Israel, the usurping State, to exercise
that proxy?

50. Yesterday we were jubilant because of the harmony and concord that prevailed in this Council when
the report of the Secretary-General
on Bahrain was
discussed and endorsed unanimously in this chamber
[153&h. nzeeting]. It was magnanimous of our sister
State, Iran, that-as its representative, none other than
my good friend, Mr. Vakil told the Council-his
Majesty the Shah and his Government decided to leave
it to the Secretary-General
to ascertain through Mr.
Winspeare Guicciardi the desires and aspirations of
the people OFBahrain on the basis of the right of selfdetermination
enshrined in the Charter and reaffirmed
time and again not only by covenants on human rights
but by various resolutions of the General Assembly
since its inception.
51. I must declare that the nobility, not merely in
title but more essentially in character, of our illustrious
colleague, Lord Caradon, representing an erstwhile
colonial Power, was exemplary in the way he told us
about the disengagement of his Government from representing Bahrain in the field of foreign affairs. Lord
Caradon’s Government was, like His Majesty the Shah
of Iran, cognizant of the fact that Bahrain should exercise its right of self-determination.
What a tragic contrast we have witnessed today in having to deal with
the aggression of an artificial State which came into
being by pressuring this Organization, by the partition
in 1947 at Lake Success and subsequently by the recognition of that State, which has ever since usurped the
homeland of the Palestinian people. What a contrast.
What a shame. There was harmony and concord yesterday regarding Bahrain because the various parties who
were interested in the ultimate pdlitical fate of Bahrain
were brothers; whether Iranians or Arabs, they were
brothers. In contrast, there is dissent and conflict
today, when we have to deal with the aggression of
an external element coming from eastern and central
Europe, using Judaism, a noble religion, as a motivation for political and economic ends.

54. I have heard Mr. Tekoah time and again say:
“You Arab States, suppress those Palestinians, and
everything will be all right.” I have been telling this
Council since 1965, even before the conflict of 1967:
“First of all, no Arab State wants to suppress the Palestinians who are fighting for their homeland.” And if
any one of those Arab States or Governments were
to suppress the Palestinians, not only would the Palestinians make short shrift of the Governments, but also
the people who have been galvanized from Morocco,
from the shores of the Atlantic, to the confines of Iran,
down to the Sudan and the Arabian peninsula-all
the
people are behind those so-called terrorists who are
nothing but fighters seeking to liberate their country
from the Khazars that hailed from Eastern Europe,
as a proxy in order allegedly to defend certain economic
and strategic interests.

52. At one time I took exception to the term “neocolonialism”.
I told my African and Asian colleagues
that as far as I was concerned it had no content, legally
or otherwise. However, when the erstwhile colonial
Powers knew that their people would not be burdened
by taxes to sustain colonial rCgimes abroad, some of
the Powers had to find new machinery, new devices,
to place foreign people under their yoke, more subtly,

55. Sanctuaries of those freedom fighters or terrorists
as they are called by Israel, exist in those countries
that are contiguous with Israel, namely, the four States
of the United Arab Republic, Jordan, Syria and
Lebanon. Really, Sir, to be frank with you and mY
8

colleagues, I do not know whether there is a new style
in international relations or in approaches towards solving certain problems. Those sanctuaries remind me
that only a few days ago-was it ten days ago or so-a
big nation declared that there were sanctuaries in Cambodia and it went in to clean out the people who were
fighting from that part of the world. I do not know
who apes who-whether
a big nation apes a small
nation or that small proxy nation apes the big nation.
I have to find out. There is such close interrelation
that having been here twenty-five years I am still sometimes confused whether the United States is a client
of IsraeI or Israel is a client of the United States. I
have not yet discovered how it is. Maybe they are
clients of each other, I do not know.

59. The the interviewer asked him: “Do you support
el Fatah?” “ No. I can sympathize with them from
only one point of view . . , they are oppressed.” Then
he is asked: “But Israel is at war. People ask me,
‘What would you do if someone was threatening your
children!’ They asked this young gentleman, who is
incidentaIly about thirty-eight, he is a little old for the
rebellious youth all over the world, but I think he still
has in him the spirit of youth. “But we are threatening
their children, too”-that
is what he said-“But
we
are threatening their children too”-meaning
the Arab
children. “This is a fact . . . a fact for fifty or sixty
years. I was born here in 1932. And I was educated
in the Zionist system of education . . . It is a fact of
history that the Zionist State in Palestine was built
on the ground of another nation.”

56. But do not think that there is only an American
youth that has awakened. There is an Israeli youth
that has awakened. And I substantiate what I am saying
to put things in their own perspective.

60. Who can refute that? The Security Council? Or
the Genera1 Assembly that was fixed-and I was sitting
in 1947 at Lake Success-to obtain the votes for creating that usurping State. I repeat that “the Zionist State
in Palestine was built on the ground of another
nation’ ’ -by pushing another nation out. A question
of self-determination,
pure and simple.

57, The New York Times or the New York Post, for
reasons of their own, do not publish such interviews,
but a small paper called the F/illnge voice has the courage to publish what at least some of the youth of Israel
think. The ‘C/illnge Voice has a modest circulation and
because it has a modest circulation, I find that it is
my duty to famili,arize this august body with the contents of that interview which reflects the youth of
Israel. I will not read all of it, it is too long; but I
will give you the gist of it, and let nobody say that
Baroody is reading out of context. The interview will
be open to anyone who would like to consult it. I will
be happy to send a copy to anyone who would like
to consult it, or they can subscribe or buy the issue
from the village voice. It was published on 16 April
1970. The interviewer, or the one who inserted the
interview, was Michael Zwerin-it sounds like a Jewish
name, but there are some good Jews around who are
not Zionists. We have no quarrel with the Jews as
such.
We have said that time and again, just as our
friend here, Mr. Malik, Mr. Federenko before him and
Mr. Vishinsky,
have cited many illustrious Jews in
the Soviet Union. They are pillars of the Soviet Union.
They h&e no quarrel with Jews. We have no quarrel
with Jews. We have quarrels with political Zionism
-not even with spiritual Zionism: spiritual Zionism
is something of the conscience.

62. Another question: “Are you saying Israel is
racist?” “It is.” That is what this gentleman said.
“And it will get worse and worse, because the Jewish
people were for many years very oppressed in
Thank God he does not say “in Asia”,
Europe.”
because we never oppressed the Jews in Asia; the Jews
in Asia were amongst the most illustrious Arabs in
my part of the world. Look at Maimonides. I can cite
many Jews. Just as there are now distinguished Jews
in the Soviet Union, we had distinguished Jews. We
did not call them Jews; we called them Arabs and they
wrote in Arabic.

58. A certain Mr. Oded Pilavsky-now,
Mr. Tekoah,
do aot go and try to hunt him down and muzzle him,
because the Arabs who are living in that State are
not allowed to know what he says. He is only allowed
to publicize what he wants in his inner circle. This
is part of what he said in answer to the question: “What
is it you would like to see happen in Israel? What
are you fighting for ?” Here is his reply in part: “There
are problems of a nationalistic nature; we have them
up to here. But we try to fix solutions on social grounds.
SO that when we say that the way to peace is through
the recognition
of the right of self-determination
of
the people, we mean the Palestinian Arab people and
the Jewish Israeli people.“’

63. And, incidentally,
for Mr. Tekoah’s
information-because
he hails from Shanghai, but he must
have read the books-even
the Jews when they were
in Palestine spoke Aramaic, which is the Syriac language; they did not speak Hebrew. Did you know that?
They did not speak Hebrew. Incidentally,
Christ spoke
Aramaic. You still have a couple of villages in Syria
where they speak the same language, and they profaned
the Syrians. The language of Jesus was renounced by
the Western world-leave
aside the theological part.
They renounced Him too as a moral teacher. On Sunday they go to church and pray, and on Monday they
begin to cut one another’s throats. Why should they
not cut your throat and my throat? They are Christians.
Shame. Hypocrites. Why?

61. Then they asked him about labour conditions:
“Do. Arab workers
have equal rights
with
Jews?” -meaning inside the State. His reply was-and
I shall not read everything, because this is a long interview; I shall read merely the points relevant to selfdetermination
and to the human dignity of the
individual and to the question of discrimination-and
the reply of this young gentleman was: “When there
is recession, it is much worse for Arabs; they will be
unemployed faster. Buy, you know, a human being
does not live on wages alone.”

9

64. I substantiate. You think that Jesus, according
to the New Testament, was sold for thirty pieces of
silver? Here. Look at this large advertisement. It is
easy; you do not have to do any research; we provide
you with the research: The Nelzl York Times advertisement: “A Christian response to Arab Terrorism”.
Look: in The Nemo York Times on Friday, 8 May 1970.
65. Nobody raised his voice in advertisements like
this in Tile Nell) York Times when Deir Yassin was
obliterated. And who are these people? Jews? No, the
Jews have much more sense. They are ministers,
priests, bishops. What do they know about Palestine?
I do not know whether the Zionists gave them some
Bibles, or built them an extension to their churches,
the Iscariots. Poor Iscariot: I feel sorry for him-thirty
pieces of silver. I do not know how much these people
are receiving; there are so many of them listed in all
this small print that I shall not read all their names
as it would take half an hour and, as usual, they say,
“To be continued”. They are collecting money, these
Christians here, in order to suppress us. They are collecting money.
66. By what have the Zionists bribed them? By what
have they brainwashed them? By what have they convinced them? By what have they persuaded them?
What do they know about the Holy Land, except,
perhaps, from reading the Bible? Fundamentalists?
Some of them are not fundamentalists.
I looked into
their past history. What is behind this advertisement?
Why do they sell the indigenous people of Palestine?
I do not know whether it was with silver, gold, or
eroded, inflated dollars. In inflated dollars the price
goes higher, as we all know.

sia is a big State, and it probably would like to trade
in the future and extend its relations with the Arabs
and it is doing so successfully. And they frighten us.
Now, this bogey does not frighten us any more; it
is an artificial fear.
69. My good friend our peace-loving SecretaryGeneral, whom we all admire and hold in high esteem
for his dedication to world peace, cannot of course
articulate this and say it with me, but I believe all
of you, including the Secretary-General-because
it
is our Organization, and we have a right to pronounce
our fears-would
agree that this Organization has
become a shadow of what it was meant to be in 1945.
I witnessed the signing of the Charter; I am not talking
through my hat.
70. I still remember the signing on 26 June 1945 at
San Francisco when the war was not yet over. Most
people then had high hopes that our respective national
interests would be subordinated and that the Charter
would transcend spheres of influence-gradually
perhaps, not overnight-and
power politics. But what
do, we find today? We find fear of a confrontation of
two major Powers in the Middle East and South-East
Asia-not
so much in South-East Asia. I think the
Chinese are wise; they are biding their time there.
71. What do you find in my area? The United States
claims that it has interests there. We never said that
we want to work against their economic interests. In
fact, they are, economically speaking, the preponderantly interested Power. Why should they treat us like
this? What have we done to the United States? I am
talking of the Arab world. We have opened our doors
to them. We respected them. We admired them. Not
so much now, but in the past the people admired them
for their ideals. Now the people, I am sorry to say,
tell you that at one time they thought, “God in the
heavens and the Americans on earth”. Now if you
talk to the Arab people-I talked to them last summer,
as I go on fact-finding trips every year-those who
liked the United States will say, as they told me, “God
in the heavens, yes, but the devil incarnate is theunited
States”. It pains us because we do not want to spoil
our relations with the United States. We do not want
to spoil our relations with the Soviet Union or with
any Power. We are a peaceful people. We may bicker
among one another, the Arab States, like members
of a family will bicker; but when it comes to that
extraneous element which caused an abscess in the
body politic and the body social of the Arab world,
we cannot but have a fever. A foreign element in the
body politic and the body social causes a fever. It
is an abscess. It is not because they are Jews. It is
because they have a different culture, a different way
of life, like all those invaders who came to our area
from Alexander the Great downward to the time of
the mandates. Luckily for us the mandatory Powers
left in peace, and we have excellent relations with them.
But the mantle of power subsequently fell on those
whom we had admired greatly, none other than the
United States, and what are they doing n’ow? They
are espousing the cause of Israel. I have heard that
Mr. Abba Eban will be here by way of Canada two

67. The whole of Christendom,
when the three
astronauts were in danger, went to the churches and
prayed. Men of religion prayed-and
do not think that
they were only Christians: some of us Moslems also
prayed; we prayed that they should return to their
fathers and mothers and their wives and children. They
were young; they were human beings, three astronauts.
Of course, going to the moon fires the imagination-and
rightly so-people;
but because the lives of these
astronauts were endangered, prayers were offered in
churches. Even His Holiness-and
rightly so-prayed
for their safe return. Mr. Nixon left the affairs of State
and travelled to the South Pacific and we all commended him for his humanity-that
he thought of the
worth of the person and of human dignity.
68, But when the Arabs were terrorized during the
days of the Mandate, between 1920 and 1939, and when
we recall to our friends here what happened to the
indigenous people of Palestine, nobody says anything.
Oh, the Russians have an interest in us, Of course
they have an interest in the Middle East. Why should
they not have an interest? After all, they are only five
or six hundred miles from the area; it is only human
for them to have an interest. Brother and brother have
interests between themselves; interests bind people.
Oh, beware of communism. I am a monarchist; I am
very wary of communism.
It has nothing to do with
communism; that phobia does not work any more. Rus10

days from now to ask for more Phantoms. What are
you going to use against the Arabs, the sling of King
David? They should use the sling of King David. But
they do not; they use the most sophisticated weapons
to kill our Palestinian and other brothers. Millions have
been spent-1 do not say in what currency-to suppress
those who are fighting to retrieve their homeland. I
warned this Council-I
have warned it in the past and
today I warn it again -that no Arab dares to suppress
the Palestinians in the Arab world. No one dares to
suppress them-not
even Arab Governments.
The
people would see to it that those Arabs who tried to
suppress them would be trampled underfoot or would
be shot like birds.

74. Who are the honorary chairmen? Thomas E.
Dewey, the erstwhile presidential candidate of the
Republican Party. I recall-and you would be amused,
Mr. President, I do not know where you were
then-that when Mr. Truman was campaigning for the
presidency after the tenure of his first term had
finished, there was a campaign in 1946; I was in this
country and he said that 100,000 immigrants should
be admitted into Palestine from Europe, a hundred
thousand. And Mr. Dewey, in campaigning,
said:
“What,
a hundred
thousand-several
hundred
thousand.” You see, it was an auction, who could
get more votes, Mr. Truman or Mr. Dewey, Mr. Truman was perhaps more of a wheeler-dealer and he got
the votes.

72. What do you opt for, our friends from the United
States? Do you want anarchy? Do you want revolution?
Do you want upheaval? Will your interests be secured
and preserved if there is anarchy, if there is upheaval,
if there is turmoil, if there is conflict in the Arab world?
Well, the might of Israel ‘is so great that 10 per cent
of 3 per cent-how did I come to those statistics? I
have been living here for a long time. The United States
has only 3 per cent of the Jewish faith and only 10
per cent of that 3 per cent are active Zionists-that
10 percent of 3 per cent want to dominate the American
political
scene and I am afraid that they have to a
large extent dominated the American political scene.
How do I know? Well, I am only making use of recent
documents. One does not have to do the same research
as that done when we were talking about the historical
argument of past Jewish association with Palestine or
about the fait accompli.

75. The second one on the list is the illustrious Mr.
John V. Lindsay. I hope those workers will not hit
him on the head with a stone down in Wall Street.
Then there is Mr. Nelson A. Rockefeller. There are
two groups. Our friend David Rockefeller pushes one
and Nelson Rockefeller pushes the other. One is certainly pro-Israeli, and one, they say, is allegedly proArab. I do not know, I am lost.
76. Then we have Franklin D. Roosevelt, Jr. and
Robert F. Wagner, the politicians. Another name is
Lucius D. Clay. 1 have marked them here. Look at
it. These are not Jews. Accordingly, you do not have
to be Jewish to care. The next name is James A. Farley.
I think he is from Coca Cola. Has Coca Cola gone
to the Soviet Union, or not yet? Other names are
Charles F. Lute, Bill Moyers-it
strikes me that he
was in the Kennedy administration-and
Eugene Nickerson-he is a small fry William S. Paley, and this
Greek who reminds me of’the Vice-President, Spyros
P. Skouras. It says “Committee
in formation”,
as if
it is not large enough. And they lent their names. There
are a few missionaries who went to our part of the
world and who come and shed crocodile tears to us.
They say: “Oh, our sympathy is with you; those American figures are misled”.

73. Those questions are now behind us. But here in
this month of May, I again turn to The New York Times,
the iHustrious Nevv York Times, that only prints the
news that is fit to print. This is another advertisement
from The New York Times, I do not know how much
it costs. It used to be $5,000 per page. A friend of
mine used to insert advertisements. Now it must be
$20,000 per page. I do not know. The New York Times,
Monday 4 May-this
current month of May shows the
title of an advertisement in bold letters, “You don’t
have to be Jewish to care”. Here is the advertisement,
with not a single Jewish name. In the subway-if any
of you still use the subway-they advertise so-called
Jewish bread. Have you ever heard of Jewish bread?
“YOU don’t have to be Jewish to enjoy it”. One day
they put in the advertisement the picture of a Chinese
and on another day they put that of a Russian. I have
not yet seen the picture of an Arab enjoying that bread.
Yen don’t have to be Jewish to enjoy that Jewish bread,
as though bread has a nationality and a religion too.
Look at those mass media of information, at Madison
Avenue, at the crooks who sell you anything. I am
not talking about news, They sell news but they are
more subtle about it and affect the subliminal mind.
That is another question, We worked here, Sir-maybe
you recall, but it was before you were here-between
1949 and 1951 on the draft convention on freedom of
information,
It is all in the record, information concerning advertising affecting the subliminal mind of man.
That is advertising: “You don’t have to be Jewish to
care”.

77. Some Americans here formed The American
Friends of the Middle East. I never went to their
luncheons, and some of my friends who were members
of The American Friends of the Middle East asked
me: “Baroody, all your Arab colleagues come and
attend our luncheons. We do not see you. Why?” I
said: “You do not have to profess as individuals your
friendship to us. We know you. Some of you represented your Government very well in the Arab world
and we like you as persons, But why do you want
to profess your friendship? Instead of professing your
friendship collectively,
go to your Government and
open its eyes to the fact that you are alienating the
Arab people and espousing the cause of an element
that came from Eastern Europe and is larding it in
Palestine.”
78. I never went to their luncheons. Finally we found
out something; thanks to this great country, the United
States, which is still great-not
in might; we do not
care about might. In our area only God or the designer
11

of the universe or the forces of nature are mighty.
Who is man? A shadow on this earth, a grain of sand
on the shore of eternity. Who is man? That constipated
biped who needs to be psychoanalysed nowadays when
he does not go to the priest to confess. That was easier
and cheaper. Who is man? What did they do, those
Friends of the Middle East? They were subsidized by
the so-called CIA. What is it, the Central Intelligence
Agency? There are so many abbreviations. They sell
us a bill of goods, and some of them, in fairness to
the members, did not know that they were financed
by the CIA. They could not see me any more. Perhaps
they were happy that I did not go to their luncheons.

suffer. We Arabs can afford to lose 20 million, 30 million. We are very prolific, incidentally. We do not have
to use those birth control pills yet.
83, So what? The Zionists might involve you,
Sir-not
you personally, Mr. President but all of
you-in a world war because they have the mass media
of information at their behest and command in many
Western countries. I do not know about the Soviet
Union. I do not read Russian. Is Lebanon now the
Cambodia of the Middle East? Is it a sanctuary for
the people who arefightingfor their self-determination?
84. Many have told us here, and repeatedly: “Never
mind now, this is afait accompli. Try to adjust yourself,
you Arabs, to the situation, and if you do not make
peace with Israel at least face the facts that the Zionists
are there.” This argument is not accepted by the people
who were usurped of their homeland. What shall we
do with them? Argue with them? Even if we were
to argue with them, we would get nowhere with
them-1 mean the Palestinian people.

79. Whom are we fooling around here? Baroody talks
long. He takes his time. What have we got except
words, people like myself who represent an Arab State
which has no power to exercise? Even representatives
of big Powers like France, like the USSR, like the
United States and the United Kingdom seem to be
paralysed by this Zionist movement. What can we do
except talk? This is our stock in trade, hoping that
the mass media of information will let my voice be
heard by the American people. But the Zionists try
to interfere with that. They would not give me coverage
because they are afraid that the American people will
learn the truth. The American people know nothing
about the truth.

85. If we look into this in retrospect, I said that this
country-the
United States, the host country-was
railroaded into the First World War to a large extent,
by the efforts of the American Zionists with whom
the Zionists in the United Kingdom during the Second
World War communicated, Those American Zionists
met at the Savoy Plaza, which was demolished a few
years ago, on its site is the General Motors Building,
I have known some of those people who attended the
conference of those American Zionists, They SUCceeded in railroading this host country into the First
World War in spite of the fact that it was isolationist.

80. Recently somebody used the words “Silent
majority”.
How do I know what the silent majority
is thinking? We are of the articulate minority. Perhaps
one day the silent majority will listen to the articulate
minority. What other recourse have we but words?
Baroody talks. I talk frankly, sometimes perhaps
rudely, but frankly. The truth wounds. Far be it from
me to put salt on the wounds of my friends, but we
have no other recourse except to tell the truth as we
see it.

86. Then there was a quarrel in Europe during the
Second World War amongst the Allies and the Germans. I recall the 1ate’Mr. Roosevelt saying in this
country: “Again, and again, and again I promise YOU
that I will not send our boys to perish on foreign battlefields.”
But just as Mr. Wilson during the First
World War began as an isolationist and had his hand
finally forced to go into the First World War, SO the
Zionists unfortunately
succeeded in enlisting the
Government of this country to enter the Second World
War. Why? Because they made sure of succeeding
as they had done before. Can we not draw any lessons
that the Zionists might yet succeed in pushing the whole
world into a third world war? This is a serious matter
for us all to ponder.

81. We stand to be corrected if we are wrong about
self-determination,
about the population of Palestine
which in 1919 constituted 94 per cent of the population,
and which in 1945 was still more than two thirds of
the population.
When
they tald about
selfdetermination,
whom do they think they are fooling?
This is a new crusade, and the Arab people have to
suffer until those who are there are either assimilated
in time or accept, like this youthful gentleman from
Israel whom I have cited, a state of affairs whereby
the Jews will forget their political Zionism and the
Arabs will not be intensely nationalistic,
and where
they will live side by side as people who revere the
memory of Christ, of the Jewish Prophets and also
of the Prophet Mohammed.

87. Now our British friends would like to forget the
Balfour Declaration. This Balfour: had he a power Of
attorney from God? Was he so sacrilegious as to give
those Eastern European Jews, converts into Judaism
in the eighth century, a right to Palestine? He had
a vast empire. Why did he not give part of it to them.
And Mr. Truman, hailing from the Middle West, was
a very good haberdasher with this Mr. Jacobson or
Jacobs, whatever his name was, and they admitted
Mr. Weizmann-all
this is written in Mr. Truman’s
memoirs-through
the back door of the White House
and concocted this State which has usurped the Arab
world, the Palestinians.

82. The three monotheistic religions are there, had
their roots there in Palestine. The Jews have no
monopoly on it. The land belongs to the indigenous
people, whether they be Arabs, or whoever they may
be, and no external people from outside can lord it
over us. You try to kill us, we Arabs. Try to kill us.
We are 110 million, I would not like to see any Jew
or Gentile hurt. I would be sad if I saw all this happen
because it would mostly be the innocent who would

12

Israel, the usurping State set the tone of its policy
in Deir Yassin and, Joshua-style, killed the men, the
women, the children, the animals, cut off the trees.
This is the European way of doing things-thC brutal
European way-and, of course, imperialism.

88. I am afraid there might be confrontation among
the great Powers through miscalculation. No doubt the
wisdom of the American people--especially
the youth
whom I salute-and
the wisdom of the young in’the
Soviet Union will prevail so that there may be no confrontation. But let us not be too sure; the stakes are
high. Why do they not leave Asia alone-both
sides
of Asia? Do you want to contain Asia? Six per cent,
my dear friend, Mr. Buffum: you constitute 6 per cent
of the population of the world. Mr. Malik’s State constitutes 7 l/2 per cent, but Mr. Malik’s country or
Government is not trying to contain Asia. Why try
to contain Asia? Asia is a big giant-somebody
mentioned a giant the other day in a speech-it is a physical
giant and also a moral giant. You cannot contain Asia,
in South-East Asia or in the Middle East. You will
become bankrupt soon if you try to police the world.

92. And now Mr. Tekoah comes today and, as usual
in his sonorous voice, tries to rationalize why they
are attacking Lebanon. And he talks about twenty-two
settlements and villages that had been allegedly
aggressed upon inside so-called Israel by people from
across the border in Lebanon. But he forgot that it
was Palestinian land. He forgot that altogether. He
forgot that the Israelis, the Zionists, hanged British
“Tommies”
-1 was in the area in those days-British
“Tommies”
from the mandatory Power, they hanged
them from the trees. There was the King David Hotel;
they blew it up. They were the precursors of blowing
things up. That was in the twenties and thirties, when
I was a young man; I was not born yesterday. They
used terror against Britain, the mandatory Power that
promised them a national home. And now violence
breeds violence and the Palestinians are using the same
violence.

89. But why should we Arabs pay the price just
because those Zionists have the means to brainwash
certain Western peoples? I feel very apprehensive
about some Jews who are friends of mine; they might
become the scapegoats if things go wrong in the Western world. Was Germany part of the Western world
or not? When things went wrong in Germany, economically speaking, they said: “The Jews are at the root
of all our ills” -which was not true. The Jews were
not at the root of their ills; it was the Versailles Treaty
that was at the root of their ills, and Mr. Clemenceau
and Mr. Lloyd George who incorporated part of the
German people in Czechoslovakia and carved a corridor separating Danzig. Instead of the great Powers
learning from the First World War the lessons of this,
what did they do? They partitioned Berlin into four
zones; they partitioned Germany; they partitioned
Korea; they partitioned Viet-Nam and they created
in our midst an artificial State from outside.

93. It is deplorable, but how can the Palestinians fight
in an open battlefield, when this country, the United
States, provides Israel with the most sophisticated
weapons, including Phantoms? We Arabs cannot fight
the United States. The United States if fighting us by
proxy. Why should the GIs go to Palestine and fight
us Arabs? They can do it through their agents, their
clients.
94. What have we done to the United States? We
like the United States. We are constantly trying to
improve our relations with the United States, and the
more we do so the more the United States opts for
Israel. Their representatives come here to the Council
and argue about procedure, with this skilful gentleman
here-Mr.
Malik whom I have known since 1948. I
smile. My good friend Mr. Malik qgues with Lord
Caradon and my other good friend Mr. Yost-together,
the pair. He called their bluff. Mr. Malik is an old
hand. What is wrong with being an old hand? I am
an old hand too.

90. You ask why we should have trouble? Is it any
wonder that this United Nations is paralysed? These
are herculean problems that cannot be settled by us
diplomats because those who are behind us have special arrangements and special treaties and relations of
expediency. There might be confrontation one day.
91. We talk of Hitler. Many still malign Hitler. No
doubt Hitler was a sort of a tyrant, but there were
other tyrants. The Germans were not war criminals.
There are many war criminals amongst the victor
States. Nobody brought them to task. Those who
destroyed
Dresdep
and those who destroyed
Hiroshima
and Nagasaki got off Scot-free. Why?
Because they were the victors. What did Hitler do
in Lidice, I asked my erstwhile Czech colleague in
the General Assembly about twenty years ago. He told
me: “They rounded up for retaliation the able-bodied
men-nobody
under eighteen or maybe twenty, and
nobody above fifty-and shot them. They also spared
the women and the children.”
What is hapening in
this world today? Poor Hitler. What is happening?
What is happening in South-East Asia when, by pushbutton, cities, civilians, are erased, when poor soldiers
have been driven mad in an unjust war and go and
kill right and left? What did Hitler do in cdmparison?

95. No money spent there will supress thefeduyeen,
the freedom fighters, Israel is, unfortunately for her,
a beleaguered State, and it reminds me of those fortresses-1 do not know if you have made a trip to
the Middle East-the fortresses built ‘py the Crusaders,
where the tourists visit from all over the world.
96. In Northern Arabia we have a tribe called the
Sulbiah tribe, the tribe of the Cross. They do not know .
a word of Arabic or French or any European language.
We assimilated them-not
in Saudi Arabia; there was
no Saudi Arabia then. These remnants of the Crusades
found refuge among the hospitable Arab tribes and
became Arabs. They do not know a word of French
or English. Richard the Lionhearted pledged to Saladin
twice that he would not fight and twice he broke his
pledge. With the Arab magnanimity of those days, he
let him go free. He did not hang him as they hanged
13

people at Nuremberg. He did not decapitate him, or
do to him what they did to Yamashita in Japan.

104. While the text adopted is irrelevant, there is
ominous relevance to the situation in the non-adoption
by the Council of the call for an immediate cessation
of all military operations in the area.

97. No magnanimity. Well, this is not strange because
Europe is only recent. It has a comparatively recent
history and culture, but we Asians go back to 4,000
BC. We imbibed a little culture of the spirit because
of our suffering throughout the .millenia.

105. Once again the Security Council has addressed
itself to Israel only. Even though Israel had already
announced that its forces were deploying to leave
Lebanese territory, the Security Council thought it
appropriate to go through the motion of calling onIsrael
to do something it was already doing in any case,

98. In fairness to my friends around this table, I must
bring this statement of mine to a close, with one last
warning: that Asia will no longer accept the domination
of anyone from outside-whether
it is in South-East
Asia or in the Middle East. And if the international
this
community,
the States
that
constitute
Organization,
do not heed my warning it will not be
too long before not only the United Nations founders,
like the League of Nations before it, but the whole
world may blow up and no one will be left to tell the
tale.

106. The Council has refused, however, to call even
in general terms for a cessation of all military operations
in the area, a call which would have encouraged us
in the hope that Lebanon and other Arab States would
put an end to the acts of aggression against Israel that
are being perpetrated in violation of the cease-fire and
the United Nations Charter. My delegation believes
that this development must not go unnoticed and that
those interested in peace in the Middle East will give
it serious thought.

99. However, I must say that it would indeed be
ludicrous for us to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of this Organization at San Francisco and engage
in ceremonies. I have not yet decided whether I will
go or not. His Majesty left the choice to me. I was
at San Francisco in 1945 with His Majesty the King.
But what are we going to celebrate this year-the aggression against the Asian continent? What a sad commentary on making justice the central theme of our
Charter-the
disillusionment
of the world, to which
the United Nations is unfortunately becoming a laughing stock. I am talking as one who has been involved
with this Organization since its inception. I am committed to the United Nations and hope to remain committed until I die.

107. In this ominous development the representative
of Lebanon will also find an eloquent reply to his alleged
surprise that Israel finds it futile to initiate debates
in the Security Council on the Middle East situation.
108. As for his attempt to question the statement of
the spokesman of the Israel Defence Forces that Israeli
troops have completed their combing operation and
are deploying to leave the area, I should like to observe
that it is already night in the region and that the Israeli
forces which are still on Lebanese soil are refraining
from moving during the night in order to avoid shooting
incidents in the darkness that might involve civilians.
The operation was directed against the terror organizalion and the terror bases and the Israeli forces intend
to avert civilian involvement.

100. There is only one hope left. Our hope resides
in the youth of the world, including the youth of Israel,
which has awakened and which will not be at the behest
and command of the old fogies of my generation, the
cheap politicians.
This is the only salvation that
remains for us. It remains to be seen whether wise
men will direct their affairs of state in consonance with
the principles of the United Nations,
101. The PRESIDENT
(ilzterp~stntiolz~om
I call now on the representative of Israel.

109, The Lebanese representative has again tried to
create the impression that the Israeli mission was
directed against the Lebanese army. I would simply
say to Ambassador Ghorra: the Lebanese army knows
better.

Frerzclz):

110.
The nature and scope of the operation will
become clear from the following first report of its
results:

102. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): Following my rather
instructive experience at this morning’s session, when
I asked for the floor to make a brief remark, I cannot
but express my sincere admiration for the patience
of the Security Council-most
profoundly impressive
patience displayed this afternoon in listening to representatives of Member States.

“In
the Habariya Village eleven structures
occupied
by the terror
organizations
were
demolished;
a bunker
containing
Katyushalaunchers, Katyusha rockets, small-arms, machineguns, sabotage equipment was demolished. Two
jeeps belonging to the saboteurs and three other vehicles containing arms and ammunition were blown
up. Two heavy anti-aircraft machine-guns and other
equipment were seized.

103. My delegation has taken note of the fact that
the Security Council has already adopted a text which
is one-sided and ignores the facts. At this morning’s
meeting, I drew the Security Council’s attention to
this, but the Council has chosen to disregard it, The
resolution has little relevance to the situation and simply underlines Israel’s difficulties in getting a fair hearing at this table.

“In the Kafar Hamam Village eleven structures
were demolished. These served as equipment stores
and living quarters for the terror squads. Two vehicles loaded with ammunition and one jeep with a.
recoilless gun belonging to the saboteurs were
14

destroyed. Six members of the terror organizations
were captured, while four were killed. Quantities
of arms and ammunition
were seized.
“At Rashiya el Fahar two structures in which
ammunition
of the terror organizations was stored
were blown up. An A/A position containing aCbarre1
machine-gu’n, two rifles and two bazookas were
destroyed. A Land Rover ambulance belonging to
the saboteurs was seized.
“At
Shuba Village
fifteen structures were
destroyed of which nine served as living quarters
for the saboteurs and the others belonged to persons
assisting them. Two vehicles of the saboteurs were
destroyed. One member of the terror organization
was killed,”
111. The representative of Lebanon has once more
sought to defend aggression from Lebanese territory
against Israel by reference to the presence of refugees
in Lebanon. Israel is not the only one to dismiss this
pretext completely. Lebanese leaders themselves have
publicly condemned it. Thus the Middle East News
Agency reports on 30 March 1970 that Mr. Jumail,
the leader of the Christian Phalanges Party, declared
that his party was opposed to the fedayeerz activities
carried out from Lebanon.
112. Saut-el Uruba of Beirut reported on 4 September
1969 that Mr. Raymond EddC, leader of the National
31oc, attacked thefedayeen organizations since they
were aiming at the “ Jordanization”
of Lebanon and
he expressed total rejection of the presence offednyeen.
on Lebanese soil. Would it not be wise to heed these
counsels which can in no way be charged with being
pro-Israeli?
113. Finally, we have heard much about Lebanon’s
peaceful nature. We in Israel are prepared to give Lebanon the benefit of the doubt. We still hope that Lebanon
will terminate the use of its territory as a base for
armed attacks against us. However, we still remember
the declaration made in this very Council by Lebanon’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs on 30 May 1967. Mr.
Hakim said:
“Look at your maps, gentlemen; examine them
carefully. The Arab world extends from the Atlantic
to the Indian Ocean. It occupies a vast territory with
immense oil resources. Its strategic location is well
known. It is inhabited by one hundred million people.
Countless more millions support them. In a total
war the Arabs willuse all means to defeat their enemy
In such a war, the Arabs would distinguish their
f%eAds from their enemies. The interests in the Arab
world of those who would become their enemies
would be completely eliminated. It would be a long
war, with no cease-fire until final victory. No one
can foresee the consequences, no one can foresee
the dangers to world peace.” 11344th meeting, para.

115. It seems that Lebanese policy has been guided
recently more by these statements than by the professions of innocence the representative of Lebanon has
produced for the sake of the present debate. In fact
it is not difficult for Lebanon to prove its good faith.
All it has to do is to terminate the violations of the
cease-fire that are being perpetrated from its territory,
to return the Israeli citizens recently kidnapped by
raiders from Lebanon and to agree to peace with Israel.
116. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Today the Security Council was called upon to hold an urgent meeting by the
representative of Lebanon in his letter dated today,
in which he informed us:
“Israeli armoured and infantry units in large proportions have penetrated Lebanese territory. Israeli
air force and-artillery are at this time bombarding
several towns and villages.” [S/9794.]
117. In the discussions that ensued afterwards, and
while the representative of Spain submitted his draft
resolution which was seconded by the representative
of Zambia, the delaying tactics resorted to by the Israeli
‘representative, together with the United States-United
Kingdom duo, resulted in the failure of those delaying
tactics and the resolution, which was adopted unanimously by the Security Council at 1.30 p.m., reads
as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Demands the immediate withdrawal of all Israeli
armed forces from all Lebanese territory.”
[Resolution 269 (197Oj.j
That is the decision of the Security Council in
accordance with Article 25 of the Charter which states:
“The Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter.”
118. We listened to the representative of Israel and
his communiqu& about the capture of so manyfedayeen
and arms. I am sure that those of us who listened
to the news on CBS or NBC or ABC at 7 p.m. would
have heard a similar United States communiqui about
what the United States Army has done inside Cambodia, The pattern is the same; the argument is the
same; the fallacy is the same; the sophistry is the same.
119. Now we have heard from the mouth of the Israeli
representative himself that the attacking and occupying
Israeli Army inside Lebanon cannot withdraw because
of the darkness. However, you will recall, Mr. President, that you were called very early in the morning
by the representative of Lebanon, and the attack on
Lebanon started last night. It was 3 or 4 a.m. So the
darkness last night did not prevent the Israeli aggressors from perpetrating their attack on Lebanon, but
now the night is preventing them from withdrawing.
This is the pattern of Israeli logic.

21.)

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of peaceful, innocent
Lebanon,
114. Eight months later on 16 February 1968 we find
the Prime Minister of Lebanon, Al-Yaffi, stating in
the Lebanese Parliament:
“Lebanon is in a state of
wx
with Israel”.
15

120. I insist that this resolution, adopted unanimously
by the Security Council, is a decision of the Security
Council, and the Israeli representative has to declare
here and now that he abides by it. In the event of
failure to do so, I cannot but repeat what I have already
quoted in my last intervention at this afternoon’s meeting-the last sentence of Article 40 of the Charter which
reads:
“The Security Council shall duly take account of
failure to comply with such provisional measures.”

“The two delegations agreed on regarding armed
struggle as the only way open to the Arab nation,
Hence the Arab nation must mobilize
all its
economic, military and manpower resources and
capabilities for the battle of destiny. The two delegations believe that the plans put forward for solving
the so-called Middle East crisis on the basis of the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967
would definitely lead to the liquidation of the Palestine question and the vindication of aggression, and
therefore the two sides announced their firm rejection of all these plans and reaffirmed that armed
struggle was the only way.”

121. A provisional measure has been adopted. The
Israeli representative did not abide by it, and his
Government has denied it. He said it was one-sided.
It was adopted unanimously by the Security Council,
including those who were using delaying tactics, and
by that I mean the United States and the United
Kingdom.

127. These views and this policy deprive Syria of
any right to give counsel on the present state of the
Middle East conflict-not
to speak of the travesty of
law and justice resulting from Syria’s membership of
the Security Council.

122. The second point is this. Mr. President, when
you opened the meeting this morning we heard a report
from the Secretary-General,
coming from UNTSO in
Lebanon. My delegation would ask whether the
Secretary-General
has received further reports. If he
has, I am sure the Council would appreciate hearing
them. In the event that he has not, we would request
that reports from UNTSO be communicated to us at
tomorrow’s meeting.
123. The PRESIDENT
(imerpretationfi’om
I call on the representative of Israel.

128. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The irrelevance of the
remarks made by the representative of Israel, which
reflect his utter bankruptcy regarding the points I
raised, is as dark as the darkness of the night which
prevents the Israeli Army from withdrawing from the
territory of Lebanon.
129. The gimmicks used by the Israeli representative
in bringing side issues into the debate are already well
known to the members of the Council. The election
of Syria to the Security Council has absolutely nothing
to do with the agenda that was adopted today.

French):

,

124. Mr. TEKOAK
(Israel): It is interesting to find
Syria coming to the support of Lebanon in its complaint
before the Security Council. In The New York Times
of 9 March, for instance, we read the following report
from Beirut:

130. The peaceful intentions of Syria cannot be
refuted by the claims of someone who as a criminal
should be before the bar of justice but who, as in
Dante’s purgatory, sits here and has the freedom to
speak. He spoke about Syria’s rejection of resolution
242 (1967). What about resolution 235 (1967), adopted
at 2 p.m. on 9 June 1967, demanding that Israel should
cease hostilities forthwith? Because of the tactics of
Lord Caradon, who was at that time sitting on my
right-and
I am sure he remembers-the
Israeli army
was able to occupy the Golan Heights, in spite of the
fact that both Syria and Israel had accepted the ceasefire. Then another resolution, 236 (1967), was adopted
on 11 June, paragraph 4 of which states:

“Syria warned today that she would act ‘strongly
and firmly’ against ‘any attempts to suppress the
Palestinian commando movement’.
“The warning made by President Nureddin elAtassi appeared to have been indirectly aimed at
Lebanon.
“During the crisis between the Lebanese Government and the guerillas last October”-that
is,
October 1969--’ ’Syria, in support of the guerrillas,
closed her border with Lebanon.”

“Calls for the prompt return to the cease-firepositions of any troops which may have moved forwmd
subsequent to 1630 hours GMT on 10 June 1967”.

125. Of all the Arab States waging war against Israel
in violation of the United Nations Charter, Syria is
the most extreme. Of alI members of the Security
Council, Syria is the last one to be entitled to speak
in the interest of peace. Syria has rejected peace, It
has rejected Security Council resolution 242 (1967),
calling for the establishment of a just and lasting peace
with Israel. It has refused Ambassador Jarring’s peace
mission. It has made war the principal instrument of
its policy in the region.

13 1. On 12 May 1970 the Israeli Army is still-in OCCUpation of the Golan Heights, in Syrian territory, and
it was from that territory that it penetrated in the
darkness, like thieves, last night, and it is still in occupation of Lebanese territory.
132. My question remains related to the agenda
adopted by the Council: the complaint of Lebanon
about the attack on Lebanon by Israeli regular troops
which are still in occupation at this very hour as confessed by the Israeli representative, and contrary to
the unanimous decision adopted by the Security &ancil this morning.

126. In a joint Syrian-Algerian
communique issued
on 6 February 1970, President el-Atassi joined President Boumedienne
of Algeria in declaring irzter alia:
16

133. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
1 calI on the representative of Lebanon.

the Secretary-General on Israel’s implementation
of
the resolution adopted by the Council today, which
is firm, clear and categorical and calls upon Israel to
withdraw its troops immediately from the territory of
Lebanon.

134, Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Allow me, Mr. President, to make only a very brief remark. The solidarity
Of Lebanon and Syria in the face of Israeli aggression
does not need a bill of health from Mr, Tekoah, nor
does Lebanon’s solidarity with all the Arab States,
victims of Israeli aggression, All that is beside the issue.
The issue before the Council is that the Council adopted
a resolution this morning, a clear-cut resolution calling
on Israel to withdraw its forces immediately
from
Lebanese territories. From the mouth of the representative of Israel we understand that these forces are
still in occupation of part of southern Lebanon. We
request that the decision of the,Council be made effective immediately as was intended by the Council when
it was adopted.

138. Secondly, it might be advisable to decide the
question of the Council’s next meeting tomorrow rather
than today and to confine ourselves today to a decision
that we will meet tomorrow morning as you said, Mr.
President.
139. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
I see no objection to agreeing to the second proposal
of the representative of the Soviet Union. We will
indeed have time tomorrow morning to decide when
to meet next. I just wanted to give some indication
to help us prepare our work. As to his first suggestion,
I shall transmit it, of course, to the Secretary-General
who was taking note of the point while the representative of the Soviet Union was speaking.

135. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
For the organizatiori of our work I believe that there
arises a question of a time-table. I want to conduct
these proceedings as diligently as possible in view of
the seriousness of the events, and that is what we have
done hitherto, However, I have been told that the
Secretary-General,
who legitimately wishes to attend
our meeting, would not be able to be here tomorrow
afternoon, because of other official duties. I propose,
therefore, that the next meeting take place tomorrow
morning at 10.30, In order that each representative
may prepare himself, I would say right away that the
meeting after that will be held on Thursday at 3 p.m.

140. I call on the Secretary-General.
141. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President,
regarding the request made by the representative of
Syria and reiterated by the representative of the Soviet
Union concerning the need for the submission of a
report at tomorrow’s meeting, I can assure you and
the members of the Council that I shall submit whatever
information I can get tonight and tomorrow morning
from UNTSO in the field.

136. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I should like to say
two things.

142. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
The next meeting of the Security Council will be held
at 10.30 a.m. tomorrow.

137. First, I hope that tomorrow morning’s meeting
of the Security Council will begin with a report from

The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m

17

MOW

TO OBTAIN

UNlfRD

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publiMians
the world.
Consult
your
6r Geneva.

may
bookatqro

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Los publications
des
d6porltolres
du monde
Nations
Units,
S&ion

from bookstores
and distributors
foi United
Nations,
Solos Sectlen,

HIAAHWk

COMO

PlJBL~C#~IONES

DPPAHHBAUHH

-

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

les librairiss
et Ier ogences
librairie
ou cK(resrrx-vour
6:

HAUHil

UNIDAS

on venta
o dirljare

I .OO (or equivalent

thmghout
New York

UNIBS

OB’bEAHHEHHblX

0s LAS NACIONES

Las publlcticiones
de los Nocionss
Unidas
srtcin
dn todos patter’del
nrundo.
ConsuIte
a su libmro
Ventor,
Nuwd
Vork o Ginebra.

Litho

DES NATtONS

Nations
Unier
sont en yente
dans
dntlar.
Informer-vows
auprbr
de volre
des ventes,
New York ou Qenivr.

HAH IlOnY’f~lb

CONSBGillR

be abtoincd
or writ*

en librerfas
01 N&ones

in other

currencies)

y cases dirlrlbuideros
Unidos,
Secci6n

de

820.5%June

1973~-?,050
