United Nations

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6642nd meeting
Friday, 28 October 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Kuljanin
Mr. Vargas
Ms. Li Xinyan
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Riquet
Mrs. Onanga
Mrs. Fries-Gaier
Mr. Murari
Ms. Tawk
Ms. Vaz Patto
Mr. Tolkach
Ms. Kota
Mrs. Stevens
Ms. Edelstein

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598)
Letter dated 20 October 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/654)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-57075 (E)

*1157075*

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3:15 p.m.
The President: I would like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Fiji and Mexico. In
accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite those representatives to
participate in the meeting.
I wish to inform the Council that I have received
a letter dated 28 October 2011 from the representative
of Germany, in which he requests that the NATO
Civilian Liaison Officer to the United Nations,
Ms. Eirini Lemos-Maniati, be invited to participate in
the consideration of the item in accordance with rule
39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Ukraine.
Ms. Boiko (Ukraine): I would like to begin by
commending you, Madam President, for convening this
debate. It allows Member States to reaffirm their
commitment to implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), to assess progress, exchange
views and develop new approaches to such an
important issue. Our appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Executive Director of UN-Women, to the
President of the Economic and Social Council and to
the representative of the NGO Working Group for their
thoughtful insights into today’s topic.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement by
the delegation of the European Union, I will make few
brief points in my national capacity.
The eleventh anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) is an opportunity to strengthen the global
agenda on women and peace and security. We welcome
the latest report of the Secretary-General on this issue
(S/2011/598*) and take positive note of its
recommendations. My
country
remains
fully
committed to the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000), 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009).

2

Ukraine considers that ensuring gender equality,
gender mainstreaming and the empowerment of women
is not only an important objective, but is also an
essential part of the pursuit of democracy and
development. This year’s awarding of the Nobel Peace
Prize to three distinguished and inspirational women is
an acknowledgement of the crucial role of women as
defenders of human rights and contributors to political
settlements, conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In recognition of the essential
contribution of women towards achieving those
objectives, Ukraine co-sponsored a draft resolution on
women and political participation.
Despite all international efforts, women and girls
continue to be the most vulnerable victims of armed
conflicts, targeted with sexual violence, sexual
exploitation and other forms of gender-based violence.
Eliminating impunity is critical for preventing genderbased crimes. In 2010 Ukraine became a co-sponsor of
Council resolution 1960 (2010), which concerned
sexual violence in armed conflict. We remain ready to
undertake further steps, in particular as a member of
UN-Women.
Ukraine recognizes the instrumental role that a
stronger United Nations gender architecture could play
in advancing women’s rights. It is a great responsibility
for my country to be represented on the Executive
Board of UN-Women. Ukraine’s activity in this entity
is focused on implementing policies and practices that
seek to reduce gender inequality in all its
manifestations in every sphere of life, including
decision-making and leadership, the elimination of
violence against women and girls, and trafficking in
women and girls.
We welcome the Council’s efforts to pay special
attention to the concrete needs of women and girls
affected by armed conflicts in such spheres as health,
education, legal support, and water and sanitation.
The focus of today’s debate on the participation
and role of women in conflict prevention and
mediation could not be more timely. Ukraine has
always stressed the need for the widest possible use of
the potential of women in the spheres of preventive
diplomacy, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We
believe that there is still much to be done to redress the
current underrepresentation of women in decisionmaking with regard to conflict resolution so as to make
their voice heard loud and clear in peace negotiations.

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

In that context, we welcome the adoption of the
first-ever resolution on “Strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution” (General Assembly
resolution 65/283). In that document, all Member
States resolved to promote the equal, full and effective
participation of women at all levels of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as to provide adequate gender
expertise for all mediators and their teams.
My delegation prides itself on the long record of
participation of Ukrainian women, as civilian police
and military observers, in United Nations peacekeeping
efforts. Currently, they are deployed in five United
Nations peacekeeping operations — in Côte d’Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, South
Sudan and Timor-Leste. Their dedicated service to
peace is one of the concrete ways in which Ukraine
contributes to advancing the agenda of today’s meeting
on the ground.
The importance of women’s participation in
peacebuilding can hardly be overestimated. The issue
is one of the priorities of Ukraine as a member of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and one of it current Vice-Chairs.
We see a great deal of merit in strengthening
collaboration between the PBC and UN-Women in this
field. From that perspective, Ukraine was one of the
initiators of the first-ever joint high-level meeting of
those bodies aimed at promoting advocacy for
women’s participation in peacebuilding, in line with
the Secretary-General’s thematic report.
In conclusion, Ukraine calls on Member States to
renew their commitments under resolution 1325 (2000)
and to launch new strategies to address gender equality
issues in peace and security processes. Ukraine is
resolved to do its share.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): My delegation
would like to begin by thanking Nigeria for the
initiative to hold this meeting.
We also would like to begin by associating
ourselves with the statement to be made by the
representative of Vanuatu on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS). We present this
statement in our national capacity.

11-57075

One of the six main goals of the UN-Women
strategic plan, 2011-2013 (see UNW/2011/9), deals
with women’s leadership in peace, security and
humanitarian response. That plan has outcomes with
targets and indicators by which we can measure
progress over time.
As a country emerging from conflict, we have put
in place a number of peace and security initiatives. We
have adopted traditional and external mechanisms. We
have borrowed the South African Truth and
Reconciliation Commission model, which has a gender
chapter to it. I am pleased to say that during its work it
has accumulated data relevant to resolution 1325
(2000) that we will feed into our national policy
framework when the Commission’s mandate comes to
a natural end next year.
Given our lack of capacity and resources, much
of the work on gender in Solomon Islands is externally
supported and heavily consultant-driven. That said, our
homegrown faith-based gender components have been
in existence for the past couple of decades. We are
assisted by the Regional Assistance Mission to the
Solomon Islands (RAMSI). Gender equality is factored
into the Mission, led by Australia and supported by
New Zealand and all our Pacific neighbours. I am
pleased to say that by the end of this year, RAMSI will
have a new coordinator, who is a Tongan professional
woman. My Government looks forward to working
with her.
United Nations relations with Solomon Islands
are by remote control through a regional office abroad.
Our concern is that the United Nations gendersupported early warning system initiative, initiated
years back, unfortunately did not grow roots nationally
and went silent after completion of the project. In that
regard, we have been calling for an enhanced United
Nations presence in Solomon Islands to ensure that
there is a permanent partnership in transferring projects
within the country.
Nationally, two ministries are leading the charge
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), namely, the
Ministry of National Unity, Reconciliation and Peace
and the Ministry of Women, Youth and Children’s
Affairs. Their work on gender goes beyond resolution
1325 (2000), as has been clarified in the concept paper
(S/2011/654, annex). It covers the other resolutions,
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960
(2010).

3

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

My subregion is in a permanent state not of
conflict, but rather of adapting, mitigating and
addressing the various challenges of climate change
and combating poverty. We are in a transitional phase
of providing and improving women’s access to food,
water, health, education and economic opportunities.
The results have been mixed and the problems are
growing. Five Pacific SIDS are classified as least
developed countries (LDCs).
The Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020 has a
gender orientation to it. It calls for investment in the
productive sector within our countries, especially in
infrastructure, agriculture and energy, with the
ambitious goal to transform and graduate 50 per cent of
LDCs by 2020.
As my colleague from Vanuatu will state later on,
the Pacific SIDS are developing a regional action plan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which will be complemented by a national action plan.
On that note, Solomon Islands wishes to register its
appreciation to UN-Women, which has provided
financing to assist us in working on our national action
plan.
My delegation is mindful of the deep gaps within
resolution 1325 (2000), as it deals merely with peace
and security, not development. Our reading of the
resolution is that it engages women becoming agents of
change in conflict prevention, management and
peacebuilding, acting as fire-fighters putting out fires
without looking at the causes of conflict. Peace and
security, however, can be sustained by having a
sustainable development context to them.
Solomon Islands is also one of the 17 members of
the g-7, a small group of countries emerging from
conflict and having the objective of trying to improve
and reform global policies towards countries emerging
from conflict, focusing more on State peacebuilding
and State-building in relation to aid effectiveness. The
recommendations of the group will be presented at the
forthcoming High-level Forum on Aid Effectiveness, to
be held in Korea this year.
One of the root causes of conflict today is climate
change. The swallowing of land due to sea-level rise is
disempowering women landowners in matrilineal
societies in Solomon Islands. Challenges with regard to
drought, food and water are reversing the achievement

4

of the Millennium Development Goals all around the
world.
Today — not tomorrow — we need the leadership
of the developed countries to adopt ambitious targets to
reduce greenhouse gases in order to stabilize
temperature increase to below 1.5 degrees Celsius.
Currently, we are on a path with weak pledges on the
table that will see the temperature rise to more than
5 to 7 degrees Celsius unless something drastic
happens in five weeks’ time in Durban, South Africa.
Once we reach that point, resolution 1325 (2000)
will become irrelevant. I hope that this presentation
will contribute to providing us with an early warning
that will be reflected in the discussions to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): My delegation fully aligns
itself with the statement made earlier by the
representative of the European Union.
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the encouraging remarks he made this
morning.
For a start, I would like to emphasize that
women’s security is part of overall peace and security
and that women can contribute to peace processes and
are very able to do so. Here, I would like to use the
same quotation of Aristotle that the Estonian President
used during the General Assembly’s general debate this
year (see A/66/PV.11, p. 47). Aristotle noted that where
the state of women is bad, almost half of human life is
spoiled. That is no less true today — and it will remain
so. I therefore welcome this Security Council debate to
discuss women’s participation and role in conflict
prevention and mediation. The involvement of women
in peacekeeping operations and conflict prevention is
of the utmost importance to ensure the success of the
operations, as it is the only way to reach the whole
population.
In October of last year Estonia adopted its first
National Action Plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions,
which sets out our priorities for the future. We are now
in the process of reviewing the implementation of the
Action Plan over the past year. The purpose of the
National Action Plan is to ensure that Estonia’s
international military and civil contributions and
development cooperation take women’s needs

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

systematically into account. It contains commitments
to include the gender perspective in those activities.
One of the countries closely connected to the
implementation of our Action Plan has been
Afghanistan, where NATO and Estonia have jointly
endeavoured to promote the involvement and
advancement of women. In November 2010, Estonia
organized an international conference, entitled
“Women, Peace and Security — the Afghan View”,
focused on the cooperation between national and
international contributors.
The National Action Plan also includes Estonia’s
commitments regarding resolution 1325 (2000) that
stem from our role as a contributor to international
peace and security through our active participation in
international civilian and military operations, as a
donor country and a member of the European Union,
NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations.
The Action Plan also seeks to raise general
awareness and interest in gender-related issues in our
own society and to increase gender-related expertise.
We support women’s participation in posts related to
peace and security and will take further steps to
increase women’s participation in military, police and
rescue services. In the future, we would like to
integrate the gender perspective into our pre-mission
training even more. It is also our aim to consider
gender-related issues during the general training of
officers and non-commissioned officers.
At the international level, we want resolution
1325 (2000) to remain an important political subject in
the United Nations, OSCE, the European Union and
NATO in an ongoing way. We welcome the United
Nations strategic results framework and the set of
indicators on women and peace and security, which
guide the implementation of resolutions, and we also
welcome the comprehensive report on the NATO/
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council policy on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions. In addition, we believe that the
International Criminal Court has an important role to
play in ending impunity in crimes against women.
Finally, let me note our appreciation of the work
of Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director of
UN-Women, whose leadership in that role is of crucial
importance to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We also expect that UN-Women will play an

11-57075

active role in helping to turn the principles of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security from words on paper into reality. I would also
like to extend our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed
Conflict for their involvement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset, Madam President, to thank you
for organizing this debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and to commend the SecretaryGeneral on his report (S/2011/598*).
The political will of the Government of Burundi
to promote gender equity and gender equality is well
established. Indeed Burundi has subscribed to
international agreements such as the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and other international conventions and
agreements on equality and non-discrimination on the
basis of gender, and has implemented a national gender
policy.
To implement resolution 1325 (2000), the
Government of Burundi has decided that no strategy
will be adopted or implemented without taking into
clear account the gender dimension, so as to guarantee
the full participation of women in decision-making, in
prioritizing plans of action and in implementing them.
As things stand, our National Plan of Action on
resolution 1325 (2000) has been drafted and its
adoption by the Council of Ministers is expected next
month. The plan is designed to respond to the
Government’s national and international priorities,
which are reflected in national policy documents, such
as the “Strategic Framework for Combating Poverty,
Second Generation”, “Vision 2025” and the revised
version of the national gender policy.
The substance of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security is chiefly built around
four pillars — participation, prevention, protection and
recovery. In terms of participation in decision-making,
Burundi has made significant progress. For example,
the 30 per cent rate stipulated by the country’s
Constitution has been exceeded during the postelection nominations in 2010. Nine of the

5

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

21 ministerial positions are currently held by
women — equal to 43 per cent. With that percentage
Burundi leads the rest of Africa. Our rate of women’s
representation in the Senate places Burundi in first
place in Africa and in second place worldwide, after
Bolivia.
In hiring practices for both civil service and
private industry, women and men go through the same
selection process and have an equal chance. In many
cases, applications from women are strongly
encouraged. In matters of peace and security, Burundi’s
National Security Council includes 2 women among its
seven members. Plans for gender integration in the
police force and the army have already been adopted
by the relevant ministries, and currently women are
increasingly included as part of peacekeeping missions
on the ground in other countries.
In the area of prevention and protection, the
Government of Burundi has taken stern measures to
discourage abuse of girls as wives or sex slaves, by
instituting a police unit for minors and morality under
the ministry that handles public security. As part of the
fight against gender-based violence, training sessions
are regularly conducted for the military and the
national police forces. On top of everything else, a
national strategy to fight gender-based violence has
been drawn up and will soon be adopted by the
Government. The implementation of that strategy will,
however, require strong support from the international
community.
In terms of recovery, the Government encourages
women to form associations, so as to be able to receive
assistance and support from the Administration and
other benefactors. As part of implementation of the
action plan under resolution 1325 (2000), the
Government would like to establish a support fund for
income-generating initiatives in order to enhance the
economic power of women. The Government also
encourages
women
entrepreneurs
to
create
organizations, as that will facilitate the search for
funding to bolster their companies and their
management capacities.
Many challenges, such as the eradication of
violence against women, the struggle against poverty,
changing mindsets and capacity-building of women for
their empowerment, remain to be met for effective
implementation of the resolution. I want to conclude by
thanking, on behalf of my Government, all our

6

development partners, who continue to give all the
necessary support to enable Burundi women to assume
their rightful place.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Anderson (Ireland): The award of the 2011
Nobel Peace Prize to President Johnson Sirleaf,
Leymah Gbowee and Tawakkul Karman recognized the
importance of encouraging and empowering women to
play their full part in working for peace. In its citation,
the Nobel Committee recognized the non-violent
struggle of those three women for the safety of women
and for women’s right to full participation in
peacebuilding work.
The
latest
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2011/598*) covers the four themes of prevention,
participation, protection, and relief and recovery.
Justifiably, protection issues have received much
attention. Special Representative Wallström and her
team, with their unstinting efforts to help prevent
sexual violence in conflict and end immunity for the
perpetrators, deserve our full support. We expect to
announce shortly a significant Irish financial
contribution to her Office.
However, as has so often been emphasized, a
focus on the way that conflict can victimize women
should not lead us to obscure the role that women can
play as agents of conflict resolution and recovery or, in
the words of the Nobel Committee, lead us to ignore
the great potential for democracy and peace that
women can represent.
More than simply asserting the right of women to
participate in peacemaking or peacebuilding — which
is, of course, their right — the report of the SecretaryGeneral acknowledges what women bring to the table
and what their absence from the table implies. Efforts
at peace that accord women prominent and active roles
have a better chance of successfully addressing key
post-conflict issues. The corollary is equally clear:
“[The e]xclusion of women and lack of gender
expertise in negotiations leads to irreversible setbacks
for women’s rights” (S/2011/598*, para. 18).
While the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the four subsequent resolutions on the topic
represented a paradigm shift in relation to women and
conflict, there remains a striking reluctance in many
quarters to include women as full and equal partners in

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

peace efforts. Of the nine peace agreements signed
during the course of 2010, only two have provisions
ensuring women’s rights.
There is a basic design flaw that needs to be
addressed: peace processes in general are not set up to
engage non-traditional actors like women’s groups or
other civil society organizations. That has to change.
Processes need to be structured from the outset to draw
more fully on non-formal and non-traditional
influences, where women, woven into the social fabric
of societies, have so much to offer.
The mediation phase, when things remain in flux,
presents a good opportunity to empower and include
such groups. As the Secretary-General points out in his
report, it is critical that women peacebuilders and
mediators be engaged as early as possible in the
conflict prevention and resolution cycle — and not just
by the inclusion of women negotiators, but by a
broader gender perspective, so that gender is
established as a thread running through all major
peacebuilding issues, rather than being parked on its
own as a discrete topic. Gender is not a box to be
ticked, a nod to political correctness. Its place is not at
the end of a long list; it is a concern that should
condition the approach from start to finish.
The promise and potential of women
peacebuilders was evident to a delegation of women
ambassadors, including Ireland’s Ambassador to the
African Union, who paid a visit to the Sudan earlier
this year and met with a cross-section of women
peacebuilders, legislators and internally displaced
persons. The delegation’s report noted the
determination of women to play a full role in conflict
prevention efforts and recommended that international
organizations take on more responsibility for
implementing women and peace and security priorities.
The Arab Spring provides a crucible for
addressing the questions of the representation and
participation of women. The striking and inspirational
roles played by women in the early stages of events in
Cairo, Benghazi and elsewhere have given way to a
sense of women being side-lined. The risks for women
are obvious; revolutions begin on the streets but, at a
later stage, key decisions may be taken in smoke-filled
rooms. In that transition, women all too easily lose out;
their courage helped to make the revolution, but their
inexperience of power allows others to shape the
outcomes.

11-57075

Special Representative Wallström has previously
referred to the risk that the Arab Spring could turn into
a cold winter for Arab women. As those societies and
interim Governments continue to adjust and settle, the
international community must use its leverage to
ensure that democratic changes under way are seen
through and that the full role promised to women is
realized.
Our watchwords must be “delivery” and
“urgency”. Good intentions and solemn commitments
are of value only to the extent that they are acted upon.
All of us must step up to the plate.
Ireland’s principal pledge at last year’s debate on
women and peace and security was to develop, adopt
and launch a national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000) (see S/PV.6411). I am pleased to announce that
Ireland has recently adopted its national action plan
and that this plan will be officially launched in the
coming weeks. The plan was informed by a crosslearning initiative that brought together women from
Timor-Leste, Liberia, Ireland and Northern Ireland to
discuss the most critical issues facing women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict settings. As we implement
our national action plan, Ireland will continue to listen
to the voices of women affected by conflict, strengthen
institutional capacities through comprehensive training
of personnel deployed overseas, and support
programmes that promote women’s participation.
In its Peace Prize citation earlier this month, the
Nobel Committee wrote that “[w]e cannot achieve
democracy and lasting peace in the world unless
women obtain the same opportunities as men to
influence developments at all levels of society”. That is
not just a worthy sentiment in a citation; it is a bald
statement of reality and one that demands our full and
urgent attention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this open
debate on an issue of the utmost importance and to
express our deep appreciation for your valuable efforts
in this field.
Further, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive and pertinent report (S/2011/598*).
We welcome the concept note on women’s
participation and role in conflict prevention and

7

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

mediation (S/2011/654). Let me also state that we
welcome with satisfaction the progress that
UN-Women has achieved under Ms. Bachelet’s
visionary leadership.
Since the adoption of landmark resolution 1325
(2000), progress has been achieved across a broad
range of issues aimed at enhancing the protection and
promotion of the rights of women and girls in conflictaffected situations. A stronger gender perspective in
post-conflict processes, as well as in United Nations
programming and reporting, has been steadily built.
The issues of gender equality and the empowerment of
women have become critical components of political
deliberations and actions. All in all, a better
understanding is taking hold. We heartily welcome and
commend the United Nations entities, nongovernmental organizations and women’s organizations
that are working selflessly in this area.
Yet as today’s debate and the Secretary-General’s
report have shown us, there remain formidable
challenges before us. Many structural and institutional
impediments persist. Women continue to be largely
marginalized in the national and international decisionmaking spheres because of persistent challenges, such
as discriminatory laws, cultural stereotypes, lack of
education, inability to access basic services, and sparse
economic opportunities, to name a few. We firmly
believe that the participation of women and the
incorporation of gender perspectives in all contexts are
vitally important.
We must expand the role of women everywhere.
We need women to play a greater role in preventive
diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping. We need
women to play a greater role in post-conflict
reconstruction and institution-building, and we need a
greater role for women in sustainable development and
as agents for social transformation.
The integral link between peace, security, gender
equality and development is evident. This interaction
renders women’s participation in peace processes and
sustainable development mutually reinforcing. The
issue of women’s security should therefore be
addressed through holistic methodologies rather than
ad hoc solutions. In that regard, while we should put
gender equality and the empowerment of women at the
core of our efforts, we should further encourage and
support their participation in the work of peace,

8

including post-conflict recovery
sustainable development process.

efforts

and

the

In this context, we are particularly pleased to note
that the interconnection between security and
development has been acknowledged by the
international community in broader terms. Millennium
Development Goal 3 — promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women — will no doubt help
emphasize the effectiveness of the efforts in this area. I
should also recall that the Programme of Action (see
A/66/134) agreed on at the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least-Developed Countries in
Istanbul in May proposes a number of joint actions on
gender equality and the empowerment of women,
concrete steps to be taken jointly by least-developed
countries and their development partners.
The positive ramifications of increasing women’s
participation in every context and at every stage of
political transition are widely recognized and critically
important. Situations of political transition should be
perceived as providing opportunities for enhancing
women’s roles in decision-making at every level. It is
equally important to redouble our efforts to combat
impunity. Unfortunately, armed conflict and postconflict disorder hit women and children the hardest.
Targeted measures should be directed at the
perpetrators of sexual violence and rape. We should all
ensure that effective international mechanisms are
established to respond to such crimes and bring their
perpetrators to justice.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing my
country’s strong support for the full implementation of
all Security Council resolutions on women and peace
and security. Mindful of the positive repercussions of
women’s increased participatory role in global affairs,
we should strive to address the root causes of the
challenges to it. Turkey is committed to promoting the
rightful place of women in the economic, social and
political life of our society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Madam
President, for organizing this important open debate on
women and peace and security in the Security Council
today. I thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, the President of the Economic
and Social Council and the representative of civil

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

society for their briefings this morning. We greatly
appreciate the establishment of UN-Women, which will
certainly raise the profile of women’s issues on the
global agenda.
Resolution 1325 (2000) brought to the fore the
importance of women as peacemakers and
peacebuilders. The resolution was a historic shift from
the traditional perspective, which saw women as
passive recipients of the suffering produced by
conflict. It rightly stressed the role of women as active
participants with important and indispensable parts to
play in peacemaking and peacebuilding. The resolution
rightly urged Member States to mainstream the gender
perspective by ensuring an increased representation of
women at all decision-making levels in the areas of the
prevention, management and resolution of conflict,
post-conflict reconstruction and institution-building.
On the eleventh anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), it is high time to take stock of
our achievements, identify challenges and share
experiences of successes and difficulties to ensure an
enhanced level of effort and support for the effective
implementation of the resolution. There have been
many notable efforts in a broad range of areas by
Member States, the United Nations system, and civil
society organizations towards the resolution’s
implementation. Yet there are areas where our
concerted efforts are needed. Countries emerging from
conflict are in need of genuine partnership and
cooperation from the international community to fill
the gaps in the financial resources and human and
technical expertise needed to rebuild their societies.
The lofty goals and vision of resolution 1325 (2000)
will remain unfulfilled if countries coming out of
conflict are left without adequate financial and human
resources and capacity-building.
The Government of Nepal is proud to inform the
international community that it has adopted a national
action plan for the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008) for the five-year period from
2011 to 2015. For Nepal, a country coming out of
conflict, the adoption of a national action plan is a
manifestation of our commitment to making the role of
women in peacebuilding and the country’s overall
governance prominent. Our national action plan is
time-bound and structured around five pillars, namely,
participation, protection and prevention, promotion,
relief and recovery, and monitoring and evaluation.
The plan was prepared with the broadest possible

11-57075

consultations with all stakeholders, and as such it
implies their important role in its implementation. In
particular, the growing awareness of the rights of
women and their increasing role in local governance,
women-specific issues and development-related
activities are good signs of progress, which we can
attribute to the recent transformation in Nepal.
We are ready and eager to collaborate with the
international community for effective implementation
of our national action plan. As enshrined in Nepal’s
Interim Constitution, one third of Parliament is
represented by women. This political representation
will be continued down to village-level elected bodies.
Local peace committees are functioning in all districts
with at least 33 per cent of participation of women, and
are empowered to address post-conflict-related issues
at the local level.
Nepal has been implementing gender-based
budgeting for some years, through which gender
mainstreaming gets special attention in all
development activities. We have introduced a policy of
affirmative action in various areas, including the civil
service, with a view to ensuring that women are placed
at public sector decision-making levels. We are also
committed to increasing the number of women in our
army and police forces.
The Government of Nepal has accorded a high
priority to the protection and promotion of women’s
rights. We believe that it is only in an inclusive process
that our progress and development become sustainable
and equitable. Besides that, women are major
stakeholders in any country’s progress, since their
promotion has a strong multiplier effect in many
economic and social sectors.
We have adopted various measures to fight
against gender-related violence, including setting up a
toll-free hotline at the Office of the Prime Minister,
and establishing a gender violence prevention fund and
various gender violence control committees in all
districts throughout the country. We are committed to
establishing women’s and children’s service centres in
police stations across the country for the expeditious
investigation and prosecution of sexual and genderrelated violence cases.
With the support and cooperation of all, we
intend to translate our commitments into actions.
Ensuring the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) will have a long-term salutary impact on

9

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

the international community as a whole. It ensures the
rightful place of women as peacemakers, peacebuilders
and peacekeepers in this turbulent world. That is what
we need the most at this time. This debate is therefore
a step forward in charting our course for the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I give
representative of Bangladesh.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the presidency
of Nigeria for organizing this important event. I also
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, UnderSecretary-General Michelle Bachelet, Executive
Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, and other
speakers on women and peace and security on their
insightful statements.
Eleven years ago, the Security Council adopted
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. Bangladesh, a member of the
Council at that time and one of the core sponsors of the
resolution, was closely associated with the adoption of
that historic document, which endeavours to ensure
women’s rights and roles in peace and security. The
decisions adopted in the document apply not only to
States, but also to actors involved in the post-conflict
peace process. We take a modicum of pride in what we
did a decade ago.
Thereafter,
several
resolutions,
such
as
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and
1960 (2010), have been adopted to buttress the process
initiated in resolution 1325 (2000). We are, however,
disappointed to note that violence against women and
girls continues, as detailed in various reports. As we
have mentioned in the past, women and girls suffer
most as victims of conflict, while in the peace process
they are mostly deprived of the dividends. Therefore,
the onus lies on us to ensure that the oppression of
women and girls, particularly that based on gender, is
stopped forever.
We are well aware that poverty, the struggle for
scarce resources, and socio-economic injustice and
unfairness lie at the heart of conflicts, and that all of
them sadly create breeding grounds for social blights,
including violence against women and girls. The
resulting impact not only leads to insecurity for women
and girls, but also impairs political and economic
stability, as well as national security. Therefore,
protecting women’s rights is not an option, but an

10

obligation that requires coordinated action from all of
us.
We recognize that empowering women will lead
to their taking command of resources and acquiring
adequate leadership capabilities for the efficient
management of those resources. Therefore, we
emphasize the fulfilment of women’s economic needs
and the necessity of their engagement internationally at
all levels and in all forms of decision-making.
While the former could be achieved by ensuring
women’s access to and participation in incomegenerating and entrepreneurial activities, such as
micro-credit, education, vocational training and public
health, the latter could be ensured through the
recruitment of women, particularly to senior positions.
In order to more clearly understand the needs of the
women of the South, we must ensure that women from
the global South get due recognition in the
consideration of such recruitment. For proper
coordination with the field, the fair representation of
troop- and police-contributing countries must be
ensured, as decided previously by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations of the United Nations.
We believe that women’s participation can be
ensured through an inclusive process. At the policy
level, this requires the creation of a mechanism to
integrate women into decision-making processes,
which should be supported by the necessary capacitybuilding initiatives at the community level that would
enable women to effectively participate. We strongly
believe that our debates and discussions, instead of
being confined to our respective capitals, should
transcend borders and reach women at the grass-roots
level, women who may sometimes be unable even to
find the words to express their agony. This has to be
done by empowering the people, especially women, at
the grass-roots level. If we fail to do so, our progress
will be slow.
In Bangladesh, through our experience of nationbuilding and women’s empowerment, we have
embraced that view and developed what our Prime
Minister, Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina, calls a peace
model. The central message of the model is to
empower people, including women and vulnerable
groups, by providing them with an education and
helping them to build their skills, by ensuring that they
exercise their right to vote and participate in

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

governance, by raising their income level, by ending
poverty and hunger and by eliminating all forms of
discrimination and terrorism. In her address to the
General Assembly (see A/66/PV.22), the Prime
Minister of Bangladesh presented her model to the
world community, as she is convinced that if peace is
attained, development and prosperity will follow. We
would be happy to share our experiences with
interested delegates.
In Bangladesh, women occupy the top political
leadership posts in the country. The Constitution of
Bangladesh guarantees the equality of men and women
within the broad framework of non-discrimination on
the grounds of religion, race or gender. The
Government has adopted a national policy for women’s
advancement and a national plan of action. A women’s
development implementation committee, headed by the
Minister for Women’s and Children’s Affairs, monitors
the implementation of policies for women’s
empowerment. It has also introduced gender-based
budgeting. The results have been highly positive. To
cite just one example, the enrolment of girls in both
primary and secondary level schools exceeds that of
boys, helped by tuition waivers and the provision of
stipends for girls in secondary schools.
The Government has enacted laws to protect
women against domestic violence and is currently
implementing a number of projects to develop the
capabilities of women. Many affirmative actions have
been taken that help women in distress and elderly
women. In order to involve women in decision-making
processes, the Government has adopted a quota system
for women in the national Parliament and in the
recruitment of our civil service officers, in addition to
direct elections and open competitions.
In the maintenance of international peace and
security, we take pride in our modest contribution of
troops and police forces to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The recruitment of women to
the police forces and the military amply demonstrates
our commitment to women’s empowerment in both the
national and the international arenas. We are pleased
that we were able to deploy a full contingent — an allfemale formed police unit — to the friendly country of
Haiti following the devastating earthquake there.
I am pleased to report that our all-male troop
contingents are fully briefed on gender issues. We
provide the necessary on-the-job training to reinforce

11-57075

their understanding and sensitivity in that regard. We
are aware that we need to mainstream a gender
perspective into all conflict prevention activities and
strategies, develop effective gender-sensitive early
warning mechanisms and institutions and strengthen
efforts to prevent violence against women, including
various forms of gender-based violence.
In conclusion, I would reiterate that we in
Bangladesh have been making our best efforts to
ensure women’s empowerment and participation in all
spheres of life, as we believe that educating a boy
means educating a person, while in contrast, educating
a girl means educating a family. We are willing to
replicate any good practices that we come across
globally in our national policy and are similarly ready
to share our relevant experience with others for the
good of humankind.
The President: I
representative of Kenya.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me the floor. Kenya welcomes the
leadership shown by Nigeria in holding this debate on
women and peace and security during its presidency of
the Security Council. Kenya also appreciates your role,
Madam, as President of the Executive Board of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. It is indeed a clear
demonstration of your dedication to issues of
fundamental importance to women and the
international community at large.
There is no doubt that matters of women and
peace and security begin with women themselves. It is
women who have the strongest and most sustained
voices in championing women, peace in their societies
and security in their lives. Last month, Kenya, and
indeed the entire world, lost a great champion of the
cause of women. Ms. Wangari Maathai, a Nobel peace
laureate, passed on. We will miss her and her courage.
It is with consolation that Kenya welcomed the news
that 2011 Nobel Peace Award had gone to three
distinguished women — Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and
Leymah Gbowee, both of Liberia; and Tawakkul
Karman of Yemen — for their non-violent struggle for
the safety of women and for women’s right to full
participation in peacebuilding work.
Last year, we commemorated 10 years since the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000).
That resolution, together with other international

11

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

instruments, constitutes the basis for cooperation
among all actors engaged in this field and contributes
to the wider agenda of gender equality and
empowerment of women. The issue that we are
addressing today — women and peace and security —
deserves the international community’s utmost
attention and unequivocal support. In this regard, I
wish to reiterate Kenya’s commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), together
with the follow-up resolutions.
Prevention is undoubtedly the cornerstone of any
strategy to address the challenges that society faces.
We note with satisfaction the various actions that have
been undertaken by Member States, the United Nations
system, civil society and other actors in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). We believe that countries must
systematically integrate and mainstream womenspecific issues in their action plans in order to tackle
the growing problem of sexual and gender-based
violence during conflict and even in peacetime. In this
regard, it is important that more support be extended to
countries in order to buttress preventive measures and
support their institutions to combat these vices.
Sexual abuse is indeed one of the most pervasive
crimes of our time. It is imperative, therefore, that the
international community support national systems and
institutions — such as the police, prosecution and the
judiciary — to combat this despicable crime. My
delegation wishes to underscore the importance of
education and communication as tools to prevent and
combat violence generally. It is in this connection that
my delegation urges UN-Women to continue
prioritizing education and public communication
within its mandate.
My
delegation
believes
that
women’s
participation enhances social harmony and inclusivity
and reduces the chances of conflict. Women, therefore,
should participate as full partners in governance
institutions. The new Kenya Constitution has
entrenched women’s participation in all aspects of
Kenya’s governance structures and social life in
general. Furthermore, the national policy on gender
and development has set up an ambitious agenda aimed
at integrating women into the mainstream of decisionmaking processes through regulatory and institutional
reform.
These efforts have begun to bear fruit. Kenya’s
next Parliament will have 48 and 16 seats reserved for

12

women in the National Assembly and the Senate,
respectively, in addition to those who will be
competitively elected in the various constituencies.
Furthermore, in all cases where special interests are
represented in the legislature, the seats will be divided
equally between men and women. Currently, women
serve as members of constitutional commissions, such
as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the
Commission on the Implementation of the Constitution
and the Public Service Commission, to name just a
few. Additionally, the top two positions of any public
body cannot be held by people of the same gender, thus
giving an equal chance to women to either lead or
eventually ascend to the top leadership positions of all
public institutions.
As I have intimated before, Kenya condemns all
forms of violence against women, including sexual
violence, and has consistently urged compliance with
humanitarian and human rights law during times of
conflict. Issues of peace and security cannot be dealt
with in isolation from other themes. Women must have
access to resources, entrepreneurial skills, including
job creation, and land, housing and property. It
behooves us, therefore, to emphasize a multi-pronged
approach to eliminating violence against women.
The Security Council has an important role to
play in dealing with peace and security matters
internationally. States, however, bear the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens from violence. It
is in this regard that my delegation calls for more
concerted efforts by the international community and
the United Nations system to support national efforts to
prevent and address the myriad issues surrounding
conflicts. Indeed, countries in conflict and those
recently emerging from conflict have unique
challenges that, if not comprehensively addressed, will
lead to either a continuation or a relapse into conflict.
Finally, Kenya expresses its gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/598*) on this agenda item, which, inter alia,
showcases the key sectors where tangible progress has
been made by countries, and identifies gaps and
challenges in implementation. Kenya is particularly
grateful for the thematic indicators under which
Member States reports were compiled. My delegation
will seek to engage further with all Member States and
stakeholders in order to see to it that the indicators
achieve the widest possible acceptance.

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, I wish to once again reiterate
Kenya’s commitment to implementing resolution 1325
(2000). In so doing, we must ensure greater coherence
and coordination in addressing women’s issues in
conflict and post-conflict situations in a holistic
manner. I emphasize once again that the establishment
of UN-Women accords us a very strong platform for
addressing issues affecting women in general, and the
acceleration of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in particular. It is Kenya’s expectation that
UN-Women will rise to the challenge expeditiously.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As we
deliberate the issue of women and peace and security
today, it is my pleasure to see 11 women at the head of
their countries’ delegations in the Security Council.
This in itself is proof that the role of women in the
world has been strengthened.
I should like to reiterate my congratulations to
you, Madam, as you crown your presidency of the
Security Council by devoting this open debate to the
issue of women and peace and security 11 years after
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on the basis of
which the United Nations has adopted a strategic
framework and standard indicators to assess the
implementation of the resolution and its time frame at
the regional and international levels, as reflected in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/598*) before
us.
On this occasion, we evoke the need to push
forward in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in the
coming decade by adopting comprehensive and
cohesive regional action plans. In that respect, we note
the importance of strengthening the capacities of
countries emerging from conflict, especially given the
fact that the issue of women and peace and security has
become one of the most prominent items on the
Council’s agenda over the past decade.
With respect to women’s issues, I can state with
pride that the Sudan has long-standing, pioneering
initiatives in this respect. Sudanese women have been
real partners in political life and in decision-making.
They participated in the election of the first Sudanese
Parliament in 1954, prior to the declaration of
independence; that success was followed by the
election of a woman to Parliament in 1964, after
independence.

11-57075

My country has applied the principle of equal pay
for equal work since 1967. Legislation and laws
concerning women have been developed, especially in
2003, when a law was passed equalizing the age of
retirement for men and women.
With respect to the promotion of the rights of
Sudanese women in the area of political participation,
there has been a qualitative development in the form of
the electoral law of 2008, which increased the
percentage of participation by women to 25 per cent in
the federal and State Parliaments and was fully
implemented during the elections held in the country
last year. Thus women constitute one quarter of the
membership of the Sudanese Parliament, while the
report before the Council (S/2011/598*) states in
paragraph 23 that women make up 19 per cent of
parliamentarians globally.
Regarding the level of participation of Sudanese
women in the civil service, which has reached 66 per
cent, I wish to note by way of example that in the
judiciary alone, there are 79 women judges. Many such
judges eventually become Supreme Court judges.
Sudanese women have held high diplomatic posts, and
many of them serve as ambassadors to various
countries. A large number of women are doctors and
specialize in various fields of medicine. In addition,
they have assumed leading posts in the armed forces,
the police and the security forces.
Concerning the issue of violence against women,
the Government of the Sudan in 2007 adopted a
national strategy elaborated at both the official and the
popular levels. The strategy includes six principles on
strengthening and revitalizing the participation of
women in the maintenance of peace, and on their right
to participate in terms of decision-making, economic
development, education, health, the environment and
the settlement of disputes. The strategy has been
implemented at both the federal and the state level. In
that respect, the priorities included in paragraph 3 of
the report of the Security Council are almost identical
to the criteria included in our national strategy.
The Government of the Sudan has also
established several specialized centres at the federal
and state levels for the coordination of women’s efforts
in the areas of peace and development, and for
providing guidelines and advice on the principle of
equality between men and women and on the gender
perspective.

13

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

Our national programmes on resettlement,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration have
given priority to the situation of women, in close
coordination with the relevant United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM). In that respect, we
commend the relationship of cooperation with
UNIFEM in connection with women’s issues and its
role in the implementation of the aforementioned plan
of action. We hope that the Fund, through the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), will take on a
more important and active role in enhancing national
capacities and efforts aimed at advancing the situation
of women in the country.
We would like to highlight the sections of the
report of the Secretary-General that relate to the role of
women in the implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals. Supporting the capacities of
developing countries so as to enable them to attain
those objectives is the best way to ensure the
advancement of women. The provisions of the Beijing
Platform for Action must be taken into consideration,
especially given the strong interlinkage between the
Platform for Action and the realization of the MDGs,
as well as the impact of such realization on the
empowerment and advancement of women.
Last year, the Government of the Sudan
celebrated the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.
In our capital, Khartoum, a broad-based workshop was
organized and a special day held to celebrate that
anniversary, in coordination with the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan and the country offices of the
United Nations agencies in the country, notably
UNIFEM. That celebration was an excellent
opportunity to disseminate the policies of the
Government of the Sudan aimed at enhancing the
status of women and putting an end to all forms of
violence against women, within the context of the
national plan to combat gender-based violence. The
implementation of that plan began in 2005 through
specialized entities in the context of the Human Rights
Consultative Council, the Sudan Police Administration,
the Ministry of the Interior, and the department for the
combat of violence against women, within the Ministry
of Justice.
The situation of women in armed conflict is
closely linked to the integrated efforts to deal with the

14

root causes of conflicts. We therefore agree with what
is stated in the report as regards the plan of action,
which is based on the principle of dealing with the root
causes of conflict, including poverty, lack of
development, climate change, and given the fact that in
the end, war is war. Wherever war occurs, its negative
consequences affect vulnerable sectors of society,
including women and children. My country therefore
once again stresses the fact that a comprehensive and
sustainable political settlement to conflict is central to
addressing the issue of women in conflict situations.
My delegation also reaffirms the need to base the
Council’s measures on country reports submitted by
States and on accurate information contained in the
Secretary-General’s periodic reports on the issue, not
on
information
contained
in
reports
by
non-governmental organizations and media sources.
My country also encourages the United Nations
and its bodies to directly organize workshops and
seminars with countries that are affected by conflict, in
order to share expertise on the situation of women
affected by armed conflict.
In conclusion, my country looks forward to
today’s deliberations leading to the development of an
integrated approach to deal with the important issue of
women, peace and security. Women make up half of
society — indeed, women are the foundation of
society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, I wish to thank you and the delegation of
Nigeria, Madam, for having organized this important
debate. Kyrgyzstan welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/598*) and his recommendations,
including the strategic framework to clearly guide
actions to implement resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national, regional and global levels in the next
10 years.
Kyrgyzstan has made significant headway over
the past two years in promoting the participation of
women in the country’s political life, conducting
democratic reforms and peace-based initiatives. The
2010 national referendum resulted in the election of the
first female president in Central Asia. Today, women
occupy nearly one-third of the parliamentary seats.
They also hold the posts of President of the Supreme

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

Court, Prosecutor General and President of the
National Bank. Women also hold posts as ministers,
governors and heads of various non-governmental
organizations.
Following the inter-ethnic conflict in southern
Kyrgyzstan in 2010, special importance was given to
supporting female initiatives in the area of conflict
resolution,
peacebuilding
and
post-conflict
reconstruction. In that difficult time, women activists
joined together to form women’s peacekeeping
networks in order to put an end to conflict and violence
and to prevent a recurrence of the tragic events.
My country notes the timely and swift reaction of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, which funded
projects to promote national reconciliation and postconflict
reconstruction.
Today,
the
women’s
peacekeeping network includes 20 local women’s
peace committees and serves as the link between local
communities and the central Government.
Kyrgyzstan believes that the key role in
coordinating
agreed
measures
on
women’s
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts should be played by the new entity UN-Women.
Through close partnerships with UN-Women, UNICEF,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in May the network of Kyrgyzstan women
peacekeepers began to implement 11 projects aimed at
fostering inter-ethnic harmony and ensuring peace in
post-conflict areas of Kyrgyzstan. We also consider it
necessary to more actively promote that component in
the action strategy of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.
Kyrgyzstan believes that United Nations
peacekeeping operations serve as the main tool for
maintaining peace in conflict zones. In that respect, my
country supports the efforts to enhance the role of
women in the field missions of peacekeeping
operations. It would be relevant to expand the targeted
training programme for women to relevant positions in
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
In the future, Kyrgyzstan intends to increase the
number of women serving in the military and police
contingents
of
United
Nations
peacekeeping
operations. We have developed draft legislation on
principles and procedures for the participation of the
Kyrgyz Republic in the maintenance of international

11-57075

peace and security, which also incorporates a gender
perspective.
Preventive actions in post-conflict countries,
including comprehensive reform of judicial and law
enforcement systems, are important as the only way to
ensure the rule of law and better protection of the
rights of women, particularly in protecting them from
violence and increasing their participation in the law
enforcement sector. My country believes that positive
experience in that area must be mainstreamed and
disseminated.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that work
has begun on a draft national strategy on achieving
gender equality in the Kyrgyz Republic by 2020, as
well as a draft national plan of action on achieving
gender equality for the period 2012-2014. Those
documents will stipulate further measures for
strengthening the role of women in the area of peace
and security, including in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank you, Madam, for
convening this important meeting on women, peace
and security. We endorse the statement made by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the States
members of the Human Security Network.
My delegation thanks Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive report (S/2011/598*)
and strategic framework for the period 2011-2020. The
report reveals that while progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the situation
of women in conflict and post-conflict situations has
nevertheless not improved significantly. We therefore
welcome the strategic framework proposed by the
Secretary-General for the period 2011-2020. Likewise,
my delegation welcomes the briefing by Ms. Michelle
Bachelet,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
There can be no doubt that the establishment of
UN-Women constitutes a milestone in the defence of
the rights and the protection of women. In June, UnderSecretary-General Bachelet submitted to Member
States a first strategic plan, which my country fully
supports.

15

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

Eleven years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the Council has continued to make progress in
providing guidelines on strengthening the protection of
women in situations of armed conflict. To that end, in
2008, the Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008),
which noted that attacks on women in armed conflicts
continued to occur. On 16 December 2010, the Council
adopted resolution 1960 (2010). One important aspect
that has been highlighted is the need for increased
participation by women in political processes,
particularly in mediation and in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. In that respect, the meeting
organized by UN-Women in the context of the sixtysixth session of the General Assembly on women and
political participation takes on particular importance.
My delegation feels that the meeting should be
replicated at the regional, national and local levels.
With regard to the peacebuilding process, Chile
notes the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the vision of gender equality that the Commission has
brought to its work, in keeping with the resolutions that
led to its creation. It is also noteworthy that the
Peacebuilding Fund has allocated significant resources
to incorporating the gender perspective in the projects
it funds.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
not the exclusive province of the Security Council or of
the United Nations system; it is also incumbent upon
the international community as a whole. In that respect,
the formulation and development of a national action
plan is crucial. Chile has had such a plan in place
since 2009. By involving a broad swath of civil society
in its development, and by incorporating the SecretaryGeneral’s earlier recommendations, we designed an
integrated action plan that brings together, as
effectively as possible, agencies charged with the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, all
with the comprehensive inclusion of a gender
perspective. The main action lines of that document are
to apply a gender focus to the respect and promotion of
human rights; to promote the equal participation of
women both in peacekeeping operations and in related
decision-making bodies; to bring a gender perspective
in the broadest sense of the term to bear on the design,
implementation and execution of our international
cooperation policies; to strengthen the technical
capacity of both public officials and civil society with
regard to gender issues and security and conflict; and
to promote the regional implementation of resolution

16

1325 (2000) through the exchange of experience and
international cooperation, both bilaterally and via the
regional peacekeeping operations in which Chile takes
part, particularly in the context of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
In conclusion, we support today’s presidential
statement of the Council (S/PRST/2011/20), which
reiterates this principal organ’s commitment to the
complete and effective implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009)
and 1960 (2010) on women, peace and security, as well
as previous relevant presidential statements.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Chuquihuara (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks you, Madam President, for
the initiative of holding an open debate on the role of
women and the theme of peace and security. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/598*), as well as to note the importance of the
statements made throughout the day.
Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted 11 years ago,
represents a fundamental milestone, because ever since
its adoption the issue of the role of women in peace
and security has occupied an important place on the
agenda of the Security Council. As a result, it has taken
on an important and essential role in the achievement
of international peace and security. The resolution has
served as the point of departure for subsequent
developments on this issue in the Security Council
when it comes to ensuring the participation of women
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding and, most
especially, with regard to combating sexual violence
against women and girls. For that reason, along with
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, resolution 1325 (2000) and
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and
1960 (2010) provide the international community with
a normative framework for considering the needs of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations.
As we all clearly acknowledge today, women are
decisive actors in every stage of long-term
peacebuilding processes, which is why we concur with
the Secretary-General on the need to encourage
women’s participation as an integral part of efforts to
establish, maintain and build peace.

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

In that context, my delegation would like to point
out that my country is a contributor of military
observers. I am pleased to announce that, this
November, Peru will deploy women on the ground in
peacekeeping operations.
We have already said repeatedly that we should
never allow sexual violence to be seen as the inevitable
consequence of armed conflict. We therefore welcome
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence and abuse
that the Secretary-General has been introducing into
peacekeeping operations. We also believe that training
and consciousness raising for military personnel
deployed on the ground are fundamental to enable
them to respond in a timely and appropriate fashion
when faced with situations of sexual violence.
Because combating the impunity of gender
violence is fundamental to peacekeeping processes,
States need to strengthen their judicial systems so that
such cases can be brought to trial. In that regard, it will
continue to be equally important to pursue the
ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court.
Women are decisive actors in the three pillars of
achieving lasting peace, namely, economic recovery,
social cohesion and political legitimacy. In that respect,
it is essential that emphasis be placed in all postconflict phases on strengthening the rule of law as well
as the economic and political empowerment of women
in order to guarantee their full insertion in the
community.
My country resolutely supports the work
currently being carried out by UN-Women and
encourages it to continue its decisive contribution to
the implementation of resolutions relating to peace and
security, as well as to follow-up with regard to the
indicators that the Secretary-General presented in
October 2010. Similarly, my country values the work
of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the Special Representative on Children
and Armed Conflict on aspects related to women, peace
and security, in particular with respect to the
prevention of sexual violence.
Peru believes that the high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) proposed for
2015 will be an opportunity to comprehensively review
the progress made by the United Nations system and by
Member States in the priority areas of prevention,
participation, protection, relief and recovery, as well as

11-57075

on the recommendations put forward by the SecretaryGeneral or by a working group established to
implement the resolution.
We have moved forward in recognizing the
importance of women’s participation in peace and
security. However, we still face many challenges. What
is most important is to join forces so that women and
girls are able to exercise their right to live without fear,
without violence and with respect and equality of
opportunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the NATO
Civilian Liaison Officer to the United Nations.
Ms. Lemos-Maniati: It is a great pleasure for me
to be here today and to represent NATO in this
important debate.
NATO’s approach towards the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is firmly anchored within the
framework of building and maintaining sustainable
peace and security. With more than 100,000 men and
women currently engaged in operations, from
Afghanistan to the Western Balkans, NATO has made
clear that the involvement of women in operations is
crucial if we want to establish relationships and trust
with civil society.
The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
which was celebrated last year, provided a catalyst for
further initiatives and an impetus for continued highlevel engagement. For NATO, that was highlighted at
the Lisbon Summit of November 2010, when the Allied
heads of State and Government renewed their political
commitment to resolution 1325 (2000). At the same
time, they endorsed both a comprehensive report on the
implementation of Alliance policy and a NATO action
plan on mainstreaming resolution 1325 (2000) into
NATO-led operations and missions. Both documents
have guided our work in 2011, setting out a number of
concrete goals, such as improving the gender balance
at the senior level in NATO-led operations and
missions and encouraging nations to include the gender
perspective in their national training initiatives, to be
achieved by clearly defined deadlines. In our efforts to
mainstream resolution 1325 (2000) in NATO-led
operations and missions, we have also added an initial
set of indicators, making further progress more easily
measurable.
On the ground, our efforts have led to the
creation and filling of gender-related positions in our

17

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

operations, from Afghanistan to the Western Balkans.
Since 2009, when the first military gender adviser was
deployed to the International Security Assistance Force
headquarters in Afghanistan, we have seen a significant
increase in the number of gender-related positions in
NATO-led operations and missions. Even more
important, the gender perspective is increasingly
becoming an integral part of all our operational
planning.
In the fields of education and training, gender
perspective modules have now been included in most
of NATO’s predeployment training efforts. That is an
area where we feel that we can benefit from the
experience of other international organizations. We are
therefore pleased to contribute to the United Nations
Development Programme project aimed at supporting
gender mainstreaming in security sector reform in the
Western Balkans. We hope that the programme, and
similar cooperation that we have already begun with
the United Nations, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
will continue and will deepen over the course of the
coming year.
We have also continued to support women’s
networks, especially in Afghanistan, which play a key
role in the development of governance and social and
economic development. We are also actively engaged
in training women as part of local forces.
As we look ahead, we know that we need to do
more. We will continue our efforts to mainstream
resolution 1325 (2000) in our operations, to develop
education and training in civilian and military
frameworks, to share experiences, lessons learned and
best practices, and to encourage nations to promote the
participation of women in their armed forces.
In so doing, we strive to continue our work of
making the principles of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions an integral part of the everyday
business of NATO.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union.
Eleven years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security, we now have
an important regulatory body of resolutions and

18

statements. More important, we have proof that women
are the best agents of peacebuilding when they have
the resources and the normative framework to do so.
Spain welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/598*) and fully supports its
recommendations, as well as the ambitious programme
of quantified objectives and the strategic results
framework annexed to it. It is fundamental that the
Security Council not only dedicates efforts to thematic
debates and continues to strengthen the regulatory
framework on women and peace and security, but also
that it mainstreams the issue in all its work and
decisions.
In addition, my delegation once again welcomes
the work of UN-Women and its Executive Director,
Michelle Bachelet, in that area. We hope that, by
continuing the fruitful cooperation already under way
with other departments, agencies and programmes of
the system, that entity has the central place that it
merits in addressing the issue. For that, it can count on
my country’s full support.
My country drew up an action plan on women,
peace and security in 2007, which it has since updated
twice. The effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions requires a
significant cooperation effort, with the participation of
six ministries, as well as constant and fluid contacts
with civil society organizations, involved throughout
the process, including the practical implementation of
concrete actions. An action programme on women and
peacebuilding, applicable to post-conflict situations in
a cross-cutting way, is also included in the master plan
for Spanish cooperation, in the context of the strategy
on gender and development.
Regarding specific recent actions, allow me to
highlight the first version of an international course on
a gender comprehensive approach to operations,
organized by the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation and of Defence of my country, in
cooperation with their counterpart departments of the
Government of the Netherlands, and held from 14 to
18 June in Madrid. The course focuses on implementing
the international community’s appeals, specifically
resolution 1960 (2010), and also the recommendations
of the NATO Lisbon Summit, to invest greater efforts
in the training of civil and military employees on
gender issues. Through practical exercises, it focuses
on the integration of the gender perspective in civilian

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

and military peacekeeping operations in various kinds
of conflicts. Professional academic, military and
civilian speakers of the United Nations, NATO and
European Union took part in the course.
In the same spirit of cooperation between the
Administration and civil society, we are already
working on new training activities that are largely
inspired by the recommendations of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General. Those activities will
be collected in the third revision of the Spanish action
plan, whose drafting is already under way.
The international community must continue to
strive in pursuit of peace and security, and should make
use of the capacities of women as agents of change.
This year, the Nobel Committee recognized the efforts
of women who fought, in different areas, to achieve
peace — proof of the added value of their work and of
the importance of continuing such an effort, for which
the cooperation of my Government can always be
counted on.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Let me join previous
speakers by first congratulating you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council,
and by expressing my appreciation to you for
convening this open debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for providing us with the report on women and
peace and security (S/2011/598*), as well as the other
speakers today for the important briefings on the issue
that we are debating.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was
hailed as a landmark and groundbreaking resolution.
For the first time, the importance of women’s full
participation in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding at all levels was recognized. Since
then, the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
its sister resolutions have paved the way for the
mainstreaming of the gender perspective in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and missions
worldwide. In a similar vein, the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, which also addresses women
and armed conflict, should continue to be
implemented. Those various international frameworks
on women are complementary and mutually reinforce
our efforts to protect the rights of women in conflict
situations.

11-57075

Our annual debate on women and peace and
security is built upon various premises, among them,
first, that women in conflict are often victims and
shoulder multiple consequences of conflict, and
secondly, that despite being vulnerable, in many
instances women in conflict have continued to
demonstrate their transformative role and their
potential for creating sustainable peace. Indonesia
shares the common view that through the promotion of
women’s role as agents of peace, their plight as victims
of conflict can be overcome. Embedded in that
common view is the paramount importance of conflict
prevention.
In this context, our efforts in waging peace
should nurture an environment that accommodates the
contribution of women to conflict prevention. That
would mean, among other things, enhancing women’s
participation in decision-making processes, building a
culture of peace that respects life, and promoting a way
of life that values non-violence and dialogue and is
characterized by cooperation and social responsibility.
In a peaceful atmosphere, women can fulfil their
role as transmitters of values, as economic resource
managers and as solidarity supporters and networkers.
If they have the space to build networks, women can
encourage social and political groups to take
preventive measures before conflicts break out. Given
their unique perspectives and insights on women in
conflict, the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
would benefit by the presence of more women in
formal institutions of conflict prevention and
resolution, including in preventive diplomacy and
mediation efforts.
Women’s potential as agents of change, skilfully
reshaping and rebuilding communities affected by
conflict, is an important resource to tap into. However,
it is not always the case that they can be readily
available for such a huge task. In post-conflict
situations, the deficit in experience, skills,
understanding and knowledge on women and peace
issues is often a hindrance to enlisting a greater
involvement of women. Overcoming the trauma they
have had to endure can also be a factor working against
women becoming active peacebuilding actors.
Taking those challenges into account, an
important aspect of realizing the aims of resolution
1325 (2000) is fostering capacity-building for grassroots movements and organizations established in

19

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

conflict and post-conflict times. Recognizing that postconflict capacity-building is not an overnight
endeavour, the scope and time frame for developing
women’s capacity should be long-term.
To conclude, let me reiterate that the
responsibility to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions on enhancing women’s participation in
peace processes, including the protection of women,
rests primarily with individual Governments. Through
this debate, we can once again reaffirm our readiness to
promote the participation of women in peace processes,
including within the framework of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000).
We hope and expect that the adoption of a set of
global indicators to track implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) (see S/2010/498, annex) at the conclusion
of the tenth anniversary debate last year (S/PV.6411),
will help the Council to re-energize and strategize its
efforts in an effective manner. We hope that that the set
of indicators can help to resolve the bottlenecks that
have contributed to the delays in implementation of the
activities that the indicators are designed to measure.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Mikec (Croatia): Let me begin by extending
our congratulations to you, Madam President, and to
your delegation on your presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October and by assuring you
of our full support, as the issue at hand is of vital
importance to the Republic of Croatia.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of the European Union. I would like
to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.
The adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1325 (2000) bears testimony to the progress
made during the past decade in the area of women and
peace and security. That landmark resolution has
brought much-needed attention to the question of
women’s empowerment, which represents a priority for
my country. While all the resolutions on women and
peace and security are equally important, resolution
1325 (2000) serves as an umbrella resolution in
addressing women’s empowerment, their task as
peacebuilders and their fragile position as victims of
war.

20

The Republic of Croatia welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of that resolution (S/2011/598*), the recommendations
contained therein and the presidential statement
adopted by the Council today (S/PRST/2011/20).
Furthermore, Croatia commends the roles of and work
done by both the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Wallström, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy.
We call upon the Security Council to intensify its
efforts in the fight against impunity and to provide
strong and effective leadership in strengthening the
rule of law, with the ultimate aim of eradicating this
abhorrent behaviour. The Council should include
sexual violence as a priority element in resolutions
mandating its sanctions committees, and they should
explicitly include sexual violence as a criterion for the
designation of political and military leaders for
targeted measures. Perpetrators of sexual violence,
including commanders who commission or condone
the use of sexual violence, should be held accountable.
Furthermore, we encourage strengthening the
coordination among United Nations agencies both at
Headquarters and in the field, especially in monitoring
and reporting on situations where parties to armed
conflict engage in rape and other sexual violence as
means of war.
Although women are widely recognized as
effective agents of peace, they still have little access to
decision-making positions and peace negotiations.
Women in the aftermath of conflict have little or no
protection or access to services, justice and economic
security, and those are the areas in which women’s
needs and gaps in response are most evident.
Furthermore, the inclusion of women and gender
expertise in peacebuilding activities is essential to
reconstituting political, legal, cultural and socioeconomic and social structures. Gender equality brings
new degrees of democratic inclusiveness to
peacebuilding, faster and more durable economic
growth, and human and social capital recovery.
Those opportunities, however, can be enhanced
significantly depending on how the international
community sets its priorities for recovery and uses its
strategies for peacebuilding. Those priorities should
consist of specific national and international policies
aimed at increasing women’s participation in conflict

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

prevention
and
resolution,
negotiations and peacebuilding.

mediation,

peace

and raising interest in women’s participation in issues
related to peace and security.

The integration of the resolution has to be
country-driven, and Member States need to take
responsibility for its success by ensuring that it is
integrated into national policies. We urge countries to
apply a broad gender-mainstreaming approach across
Government, for instance through a system-wide
approach that links development, humanitarian and
defence issues. All plans should include civil society
consultations, as well as monitoring and reporting
mechanisms.

Following the completion of the four-year period
the plan has been set up for, it will be revised in the
light of its performance. Specific measures in the plan
are suitable for implementation in coordination with
efforts by civil society and religious organizations
engaged in providing humanitarian aid and
development assistance.

I am very pleased to say that the Croatian
Government has recently adopted its national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and related resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1889 (2009). The basic objective is to support and
monitor their implementation at all levels. At the local
level, that can be done through the mitigation of the
effects of conflicts and crises and by mainstreaming
the gender awareness of our local population, while at
the national level it will be set as part of Government
programmes. Furthermore, Croatia will remain actively
involved in the work of international organizations
engaged in the areas covered by the resolutions in
question.
As a country with authentic experience in the
field of conflict prevention and resolution, as well as
mediation and peacebuilding, Croatia is actively
contributing to the realization of the objective of the
resolution during both times of conflict and times of
peace. As a way of contributing to international peace
and security, Croatia is increasingly taking part in
peacekeeping operations, thereby informing our
perception of the role of women in preserving peace as
special and unique. The lack of women’s empowerment
poses a major setback to the full achievement of human
rights and overall economic and political development
and progress.
Croatia’s policy in this regard is directed towards
the substantial deployment of women in peacekeeping
operations, in both the armed forces and police, as their
presence reinforces the importance of women’s
perspective and represents added value for all
initiatives aimed at achieving peace. Our national
action plan will contribute to the implementation of
specific tasks in a more consistent and coordinated
manner, setting up measurable appropriate indicators

11-57075

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): Allow me at the
outset to welcome the Nigerian presidency of the
Security Council this month and to express my
delegation’s appreciation for its having convened
today’s debate. We align ourselves with the statement
delivered by observer of the European Union.
Lithuania is firmly convinced that national,
regional and international activities related to peace
and security should take gender issues into account by
protecting women and promoting their participation as
beneficiaries, practitioners and decision-makers.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on
women and peace and security provide us with a useful
framework in this regard. We support the prompt and
full implementation of these resolutions.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is relevant to the
implementation of Lithuania’s foreign, security and
development cooperation policy objectives, as well as
our participation in international peacebuilding and
peacekeeping missions. Lithuania was one of
38 Member States that contributed to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598*).
The Lithuanian National Programme on Equal
Opportunities for Women and Men 2010-2014 raised,
for the first time, gender issues in the national defence
system and included measures for training gender
experts who will now prepare Lithuanian personnel in
this area for deployment to missions and operations. As
announced by Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaitė
during the General Assembly general debate in
September (see A/66/PV.16), Lithuania drew up its first
national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in 2011. We seek through the
national action plan to facilitate outreach to our society
concerning the aims of the resolution, to promote and

21

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

protect women’s rights, to encourage them to
participate in international military and civil operations
and missions, to involve more institutions and
non-governmental organizations, and to streamline
activities at all levels.
With respect to national action plans, we note
with interest the references in the Secretary-General’s
report to the practices in some countries of providing
for the production of shadow reports of civil society
organizations as part of their monitoring mechanisms.
Following the adoption of its national action plan,
Lithuania intends to apply for membership in the
Group of Friends of resolution 1325 (2000).
Last June, women leaders from all parts of the
world — Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Wallström among them — met in Vilnius at a
conference entitled “Women Enhancing Democracy:
Best Practices” under the Lithuanian presidency of the
Community of Democracies, and shared their
experiences and best practices in enhancing the role of
women. The Working Group on Gender Equality and
Women’s Rights, co-chaired by the United States of
America and Lithuania, discussed, among other
priority issues, women and peace and security. The
conference showed that, in many parts of the world, the
involvement of women is still low. Indeed, women
could and should play a bigger role in human rights
and security monitoring and establish early warning
systems to generate information about specific threats,
peace talks, donor conferences, elections and decisionmaking.
Lithuania attaches particular importance to
conflict prevention. We support the first General
Assembly resolution on strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes
(resolution 65/283), which, inter alia, advocates the
enhanced role of women in peace mediation. We
welcome the joint strategy on gender and mediation
launched by the Department of Political Affairs and
UN-Women, and look forward to its further
implementation.
Successive chairmanships of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), including
that of Lithuania, have sought to include gender issues
within the scope of OSCE activities related to peace
and security. Ministerial Council Decision 14/05 builds
in part on resolution 1325 (2000) and calls for
engaging women in conflict prevention, crisis

22

management and post-conflict rehabilitation. In
October, the OSCE held a major conference in
Sarajevo entitled “UNSCR 1325: Moving Beyond
Theory to Maximize Security in the OSCE”. This year,
the Lithuanian OSCE Chairman-in-Office appointed
his Special Representative on Gender Issues,
Ms. Wendy Patten, to coordinate implementation of the
2004 OSCE Action Plan for the Promotion of Gender
Equality.
The improvement of the status of women, in
particular in countries with identified patterns of
conflict-related sexual violence, starts with addressing
the very basic issues involved in enabling women to
live a more decent life. The experience of Lithuania
and other partner countries in Afghanistan, where
Lithuania is leading a provincial reconstruction team,
shows that women’s empowerment and full
participation at all levels of economic, political and
social life are key not only to peace and security but
also to poverty reduction, economic recovery and
sustainable development. To cite but two examples,
one project aims at consulting local medics and
patients on midwifery and other women’s healthrelated questions at the provincial hospital. Another
important development project for local women and
their organizations was dedicated to strengthening the
capacity of the provincial administration and local
non-governmental organizations to prepare and
implement their own projects.
Finally, Lithuania calls on the Security Council to
use its authority to ensure that all resolutions, including
those on mission mandates and their renewal, integrate
and advance the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Vanuatu.
Mr. Kalpokas (Vanuatu): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
States (Pacific SIDS) represented at the United
Nations: Fiji, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Tuvalu and my own country, Vanuatu.
I wish to thank Nigeria for having convened this
important debate. The Pacific SIDS are committed to
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
advancing our efforts, we are pleased to announce that
in December 2010, as part of the tenth anniversary
commemoration of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we established the Pacific Regional Working

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

Group on Women, Peace and Security. The Group is an
inclusive endeavour among diverse stakeholders in our
region.
In order to further advance the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in the Pacific region, it is
important that we focus our work on approaches that
reflect the reality of the situation on the ground in our
islands. We believe that the development of a Pacific
regional action plan would assist in this regard, and
would build on our efforts to integrate resolution 1325
(2000) into the wider regional peace and security
agenda. A Pacific regional action plan also has the
potential to channel a series of high-level regional
commitments into viable national action plans, which
is essential for enhancing security-sector governance
policies and programmes in our region.
The Pacific is also committed to international
efforts, and in this regard we welcome support for the
Pacific SIDS candidate from the Solomon Islands for
the Executive Board of UN-Women. We ask that the
United Nations and donor partners continue to provide
resources and support for our efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), particularly those aimed at
enhancing women’s participation in prevention and
broader peacebuilding. We asking the United Nations
to support pre- and post-deployment training of
peacekeepers in our region, both as police and military,
particularly to ensure the incorporation of training in
human rights compliance.
The Pacific SIDS wish to highlight the
importance of conflict prevention as an essential
element of resolution 1325 (2000). Unabated climate
change raises the risk of increasing violent conflict in
many parts of the world and its consequent impact on
women and girls, which is potentially beyond the
capacity of the international community to respond to
adequately. The adverse impacts of climate change
alter the distribution and quality of natural resources
such as fresh water, arable land, coastal territory and
marine resources. Such changes can increase the
competition
for
available
resources,
weaken
Government institutions and lead to internal and
international migration. Furthermore, such adverse
impacts can create obstacles that substantially interfere
with the ability of nations to maintain their territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence. All these
effects of climate change can create a severe risk of
increased violent conflict in many parts of the world,

11-57075

along with the ensuing impacts on women and girls
during and after conflict.
We welcome the recent statement by the
President of the Security Council on climate change
and the maintenance of international peace and security
(S/PRST/2011/15*). This was a landmark event, as it
was the first time that the Security Council, which has
primary responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
Security, explicitly acknowledged the link between
climate change and international peace and security. It
provides a solid foundation and, indeed, an imperative
for the Council to undertake further work on this
critical issue. As a first step, the Pacific SIDS seek the
appointment of a special representative on climate
security to identify and assess threats to international
peace and security resulting from the current and
projected adverse impacts of climate change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): First, Madam
President, allow me to thank you for having convened
this debate on a topic that my delegation is particularly
glad to see addressed. Armenia aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union delivered this
morning, and I would like to make some brief
observations in my national capacity.
We join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Michelle
Bachelet and the President of the Economic and Social
Council for their contributions. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s report on women and peace and
security (S/2011/598*), which includes guidance for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and for
the use of the set of indicators for monitoring progress
and implementing the framework, and we take note of
the recommendations contained in the report.
In regard to its resolution 1325 (2000), over the
past decade the Security Council has put in place a
normative framework on women’s participation in
peace processes, the protection and promotion of
women’s human rights, the mainstreaming of gender
equality, and perspectives in the context of armed
conflict, peacebuilding and reconstruction. As the
Secretary-General notes, many peace processes now
regularly include consultations with many women’s
peace groups. In many post-conflict countries, the
number of women in the Government has increased

23

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

dramatically and they have used their public decisionmaking roles to advance women’s rights.
Despite this progress, however, much still needs
to be addressed and accomplished, as the female voice
is not always heard. It is a matter of concern that
progress in addressing the many constraints on
women’s capacity to participate in sufficient numbers
is still slow. In this regard, the most important agenda
item is increasing the presence of women in decisionmaking processes. Women remain largely excluded,
especially from efforts to find workable solutions to
conflicts, and we should further promote their
participation. The inclusion of women in all stages of
the peace process guarantees a more lasting and
representative settlement. That being the case, we
should further promote their participation and
recognize the important contributions that women have
made to achieving transparent and accountable
Governments in many countries.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
express the importance of women’s political
participation in times of peace and conflict alike, and
at all stages of peaceful settlements. We have
experienced
this
first-hand
in
our
region.
Representatives of Armenian and Azerbaijani women’s
non-governmental organizations have discussed ways
of finding peaceful solutions to the Nagorno Karabakh
issue. These peace dialogues have also been oriented
towards implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
More meetings of both sides are expected to take place.
We believe that there are a number of ways to
increase women’s political participation through more
gender-sensitive electoral laws and processes and the
implementation of specific quotas and capacitybuilding programmes for female candidates, as well as
awareness-raising among political parties and the
general public. Meaningful policy changes can also be
achieved through such means as technical assistance,
as well as support for civil society and the media in
monitoring and evaluating national actions taken in
these areas. We will work closely with the United
Nations and other institutions and organizations
concerned to expand and implement the resolution
1325 (2000) agenda towards bettering the situation of
women around the world, including those affected by
armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste.

24

Mrs. Borges (Timor-Leste): Allow me first to
thank your delegation, Madam President, for having
organized this important open debate. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his participation
today. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General and
Executive Director of UN-Women, Michelle Bachelet,
and the President of the Economic and Social Council,
Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe, for their informative
briefings. I would also like to thank Ms. Orzala Ashraf
Nemat from the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for her contribution today. TimorLeste welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security (S/2011/598*).
Resolution 1325 (2000) represents a watershed
moment in the international community’s approach to
conflict and its resolution. It recognizes the
disproportionate impact that conflict has upon women
and children, the vital role women play in maintaining
and sustaining peace, as well as the need to engage
women across all sectors, starting from the very
beginning of the peace process. However, as noted in
the Secretary-General’s report, progress has been both
slow and uneven. More than 10 years have passed
since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, and efforts
to fully implement the resolution must be accelerated
in order to protect the most vulnerable groups.
Women’s participation in mediation and
negotiation is critical and is directly proportionate to
the level of rights and opportunities that women
experience during peacebuilding. Having women
mediators appointed to senior positions at the forefront
of international efforts in peacebuilding would send a
strong message and would also ensure that the needs of
vulnerable groups are not forgotten. Timor-Leste
supports the Secretary-General’s call that women be
appointed to senior mediatory positions.
Timor-Leste recognizes the vital role that women
played, both in our independence movement and in
their contribution to peace through our nation-building
efforts. We are committed to gender equality and the
empowerment of women. We are currently in the
process of drafting a national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000). Efforts are already under way to promote
that resolution and to raise awareness of gender-based
violence, human rights and peacebuilding through the
training of women’s groups, survivors of violence, men
and youth. Community mediators, 50 per cent of whom
are women, have been trained to assist in situations
involving local conflict. Involving women at the outset

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

has had an exponentially beneficial effect in TimorLeste and has laid the foundation for women’s
participation and inclusion, not only in Government,
but also across all sectors.
We are proud to note that women’s representation
in our Parliament is at 29 per cent, and we have set a
goal to reach 35 per cent representation by 2015. The
recently adopted electoral law requires that every third
candidate on party lists be a woman, thereby ensuring
that this target will be reached.
UN-Women, together with international partners,
has provided great support to our efforts to promote
gender equality and the empowerment of women. As a
member of the Executive Board of UN-Women, we are
steadfast in our support of the new entity and are
confident of the value of its work on the advancement
of women. That commitment is further reflected in our
three-year contribution to the core budget of
UN-Women.
According to the World Bank, women and girls
with disabilities are three times more likely to be
victims of gender-based violence. Periods of conflict
increase the number of those afflicted with long-term
physical, mental or sensory impairments, leaving a
larger group of women and children who are disabled
and often targeted by abuse and violence. In
mainstreaming gender into the area of peace and
security, the needs of those with disabilities should not
be forgotten. Moreover, in creating plans for postconflict service delivery, it is important to remember
that those with disabilities may require different or
specialized services, and to plan accordingly. In that
regard, it is important that women with disabilities are
factored accordingly into national action plans on
resolution 1325 (2000).
It is necessary to stress the importance of making
resources available to women’s organizations, which
can be utilized to shed light on the needs of women and
children during and after conflict, but also as a tool in
peacebuilding. The innovative cross-learning initiative
on resolution 1325 (2000) involving Ireland, Liberia
and Timor-Leste is an example of such a dialogue. It
was designed to draw upon the experiences of those
directly affected by conflict, thereby enabling them to
discuss the most critical issues facing women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict settings, as well as the
challenges that remain in post-conflict rebuilding.

11-57075

Finally, improving coordination and sequencing
will enable the United Nations system to address the
needs of all women, including those with disabilities,
in peace and security. We welcome the formation of the
High-level Steering Committee on Women and Peace
and Security , and look forward to its work. We are
also encouraged by the increase in the number of
Security Council reports addressing the issue of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations, along
with the mission mandate renewal resolutions on that
issue. We hope that they will act as an impetus for the
delivery of results on gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls.
Peace and security measures must be approached
with a long-term vision that encompasses prevention,
participation and protection. This year’s Nobel Peace
Prize winners, Liberian President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, Yemeni activist Tawakkul Karman and Liberian
activist Leymah Gbowee highlight the important role
that women play in the peace process. In that regard, I
would like to pay tribute to the four women peace
advocates who were recently presented with the
inaugural N-Peace Awards in Asia, including
Ms. Filomena Barros dos Reis of Timor-Leste, for their
contributions to peacebuilding in their communities at
the grass roots and national levels. Let us take
inspiration from those women and use their efforts as a
catalyst in our efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): It is an honour for me to
participate in this debate during your presidency,
Madam, which itself reflects the level of participation
that we hope will become increasingly accessible to
larger numbers of women. It pleases me even more,
given the important contribution that your country,
Nigeria, and other Member States have made towards
the creation and maintenance of an environment of
peace in Liberia. It is that enabling environment,
coupled with visionary leadership and strong
partnerships, which has allowed the Liberian
Government to pursue policies that provide
opportunities for the advancement and empowerment
of Liberian women.
Already one year has passed since we
commemorated the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) with many activities, including a similar

25

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

debate in this very Council (S/PV.6411); a plethora of
commitments by Member States to translate the major
tenets of that resolution into smart national action
plans; the adoption of initial indicators to measure
progress; and a request that the Secretary-General
develop a strategic framework to guide the United
Nations implementation of the resolution. It remains
our challenge to meet the expectations that have been
raised by those activities.
We commend the Secretary-General on his report
on women and peace and security (S/2011/598*),
which reflects a laudable effort to use the indicators
currently available in assessing progress. The report
provides some insights into good practices and
progress made by Member States, regional and
international organizations, as well as constraints in the
global effort to fully engage women in all national
processes, whether they concern peace and security or
political or socio-economic development. We broadly
support those recommendations.
Liberia continues to make progress in its efforts
to involve women at decision-making levels in all
areas of national governance. At critical junctures in
Liberia’s history, its women have demonstrated the
ability to lead. Liberia holds the distinct honour of
being the birthplace and home of the first woman and
the first African to be appointed President of the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session in 1970.
In recent history, during a lull in the protracted
conflict, Liberia had a female interim President, in the
person of Mrs. Ruth Perry, who steered the work of a
transitional Government from 1996 to 1997. Then there
were the unsung heroes — the countless number of
women who bravely shouldered the responsibility of
caring for their families, even as they participated in
discussions on peace and security, while living in the
internally displaced persons and refugee camps across
West Africa and further afield.
The year 2003 marked another milestone, when a
group of Liberian women, led by Leymah Gbowee,
appeared, uninvited, at the door of a negotiation room
in Accra and vowed not to move or be moved until a
peace accord was signed. Their resolve and
determination were expressed in a simple song with a
persistent refrain: “We want peace, no more war”. A
small group of mobilized and determined women
morphed into a national movement that in turn
translated into a groundswell of support for a female

26

presidential candidate and culminated in the election of
Mrs. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf as President, in 2005.
Today, women’s community peace huts in
counties around the country are venues for conflict
mediation and resolution. They also serve as safe
havens for women escaping domestic violence and as
counselling centres for survivors of sexual and genderbased violence. In the peace huts, women address child
support issues and work with local police to identify
suspects who have committed crimes against women,
so as to ensure their arrest and interrogation. Women
also monitor the early warning signs of conflict and
lead peaceful demonstrations on issues that affect their
well-being.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
discussions have revealed many examples of women’s
effective contribution to conflict prevention, peace
processes and peacebuilding in the various regions of
the world. Women bear the consequences of conflict
and are thus well placed to contribute to solutions.
Having reached this realization, our common challenge
is to find creative means to institutionalize this role at
the national and international levels. Women must be
capacitated and strategically positioned to play their
rightful role.
Liberia is moving deliberately and purposefully
towards the fulfilment of its commitments to women’s
advancement. There has been a gradual increase in
women’s presence in leadership and decision-making
positions at the central and local Government levels.
Gender-responsive
policies,
strategies
and
programmes, some of which are mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report, are being integrated into all
sectors of national action. In 2009, Liberia became one
of the first countries to have completed its national
action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). This progress has been made possible through
the consistent and much-appreciated support of
development partners. All the same, inadequate
resources remain a challenge and hindrance to robust
implementation.
We are encouraged by the recognition that has
been accorded internationally to the modest
achievements made by Liberia in its efforts to
meaningfully involve women in national governance
and to build and utilize their productive capacities,
including for the consolidation of peace. Mindful that
food security has a conflict preventive dimension, I

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

cannot fail to mention that the Hunger Project’s
prestigious 2011 Africa Prize for Leadership was
awarded a few days ago to the Liberian Minister of
Agriculture, Ms. Florence Chenoweth, for her
dedication to improving the livelihoods and food
security of women farmers in Liberia.
Of course, all recognitions have been crowned by
the joint award of the Nobel Peace Prize to three
women, two of them Liberians — President Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf and Leymah Gbowee — each for her
contribution to securing peace in Liberia, strengthening
the position and enhancing the influence of women in
Liberia. As Liberians, this recognition fills us with
pride, even if we realize that it is intended to have
impact far beyond Liberia. The message to the global
community, in the words of the Nobel Committee, is to
“realize the great potential for democracy and peace
that women can represent”.
We are proud and inspired by these accolades, but
we realize that there is still a long way to go. The
incidence of rape of girls and women is still
unacceptable high, and women constitute only 14 per
cent of the Liberian legislature. We are humbled when
we consider the vastness of the challenges that still lie
ahead; the gender inequities that still exist; and the
high walls that we still have to scale before female
mediators and peace negotiators become normal
features of the international peace architecture. We
believe that the systematic use of quotas at the national
and international levels could help to accelerate
progress towards this objective. Affirmative action
programmes are also required to give the necessary
impetus to our effort to place women centrally in
conflict prevention, mediation and peace processes.
Liberia pledges to make more concerted efforts to
comply with reporting requirements so as to contribute
meaningfully to future reports of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security. The presence of
UN-Women in Liberia provides the needed support to
national efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000)
and reduce gender inequities. We therefore look
forward to continued partnership with UN-Women
towards the enhancement of women’s empowerment,
peacebuilding and sustainable development. It is our
hope that, in the not too distant future, the capacities of
women will be so fully integrated into the global peace
architecture that the focus of debates on conflict
prevention and mediation will not be on women’s role
and participation but simply on the subject matter.

11-57075

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I would like to
join previous speakers in thanking you, Madam
President, for having convened this very important
meeting, as well as all those who contributed to its
preparation.
We are pleased to note that resolution 1325
(2000) has continued to open new perspectives of
awareness about women’s role in peace negotiations,
humanitarian planning, peacekeeping operations, postconflict peacebuilding and governance. Even so, there
is a wide gap between aspirations and the reality on the
ground. The report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2011/598*) provides a
strategic road map for the United Nations, together
with national, regional and international stakeholders.
We must continue to ensure that women play key
roles in peacekeeping operations and political
missions; we must not only look at gender as a
thematic issue, but ensure that women hold key and
responsible positions at every level. We endorse the
recommendations of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations that a larger proportion of women be
deployed in the military and police contingents of
peacekeeping operations, and recruited into the armed
forces and police services of Member States, with
predeployment training for military and police on
gender issues. It is through these actions that we can
achieve the target of women constituting 20 per cent of
peacekeeping operations by 2014, from the highest
decision-making level to field operations.
In addition, there must be dedicated budgets,
targets, timelines and indicators aligned to national
peacebuilding plans, overall national defence and
security strategies or poverty reduction programmes.
Focus in the post-conflict recovery phase must ensure
that women’s needs and rights are consistently
addressed.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that at least 15 per cent of United
Nations funds for peacebuilding be dedicated to
projects that address the specific needs of women and
girls, advance gender equality and empower women.
Adequate financing is vital to ensuring resources for
gender training and support for non-governmental
organizations and local groups that focus on issues of
food security, nutrition, health and HIV/AIDS,

27

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

reproductive health, education, and the rehabilitation
and reintegration of women affected by war.
The prevention of the violation of women and
girls’ human rights, including sexual violence, must
enjoy the highest priority. It is high time that we bring
war criminals to justice, end impunity for their
atrocities, and invest in immediate service and
assistance mechanisms for women and girl war crime
victims. Our focus must also be on including women in
peace processes as mediators, members of negotiating
parties, and signatories to peace agreements.
Kazakhstan welcomes the drafting of a
comprehensive set of indicators aimed at tracking
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which can
serve as benchmarks for standards to design and set in
place a methodical monitoring system allowing
countries to review their own structures and
mechanisms and resource allocations. We must also
condemn rape as a tactic of terror and war.
The flagship agency on gender — UN-Women —
has begun to prove its leadership in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) through United Nations
system-wide coherence. It has been able to pulled
together a set of key universal and regional human
rights instruments. The focus on women and peace and
security can be further strengthened through
collaboration with humanitarian, human rights and aidto-development agencies, and the defence forces of
concerned United Nations Member States, as well as
with all categories of women, including activists, war
victims, refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants.
To conclude, we must go forward to strengthen
resolution 1325 (2000), structured on the three main
pillars of participation, protection and prevention, and
is a most powerful tool for women’s organizing,
mobilization and action.
The President: I give the
representative of the Netherlands.

floor

to

the

Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I thank you first of
all, Madam, for having organized this important debate
and for giving Member States the opportunity to
participate in it. My delegation would like to make a
few remarks in addition to the European Union
statement, with which we align ourselves, and others
underlining the importance of women’s participation in
mediation and conflict prevention.

28

Resolution
1325
(2000)
is
considered
internationally to be a milestone for women’s roles in
peace and security. As United States Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton said, it is an imperative to human
security, and its full implementation is our common
responsibility.
On 4 December 2007, the Netherlands adopted its
first national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Dutch national action plan
relies on a broad support base, and is unique in its kind
as it was signed jointly by Dutch Government and civil
society. The plan has led to many joint activities
benefiting from the complementarity between
Government bodies and civil society. A further element
of the Dutch national action plan is that we strongly
believe that the ownership of these activities should be
with the national stakeholders — the Government and
civil society — of the fragile States for which they are
developed.
A good example of such a joint achievement, in
our view, is the security sector development
programme in Burundi. Based on research done by the
Dutch non-governmental organization Oxfam Novib, a
gender perspective in the security sector was developed
by the Burundian Ministries of Defence and Public
Security, together with the Dutch Ministries of Defence
and Foreign Affairs. This led to specific empowerment
programmes for female military personnel and to a
high number of female applicants for the Burundi
police force.
Another example is the number of Afghan women
in Government and Parliament. The Netherlands
Government, together with other Governments, the
Afghan Women’s Network and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) — now
UN-Women — organized meetings and lobbies that
resulted in more female candidates being nominated
for political positions.
In past years, important initiatives and strategies
have been developed, and many examples of joint
achievements, such as the ones I mentioned in Burundi
and Afghanistan, are at hand. The Netherlands is one of
a group of countries that work hard and make real
progress. These are important accomplishments, but far
more needs to be done. To quote our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Uri Rosenthal:
“Women represent 50 per cent of human
capital, and it is in every country’s own interest —

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

and especially in the so-called fragile States — to
make sure that women are actively involved in
society, the economy and political decisionmaking. They must be part of the power
structures; that is what empowerment is about”.
Only if we manage to include women can we be
more assured that peace in those societies will be
sustainable, and, by doing so, global stability will be
promoted as well.
At this very moment, the Dutch ministries and
civil society are developing the second resolution 1325
(2000) national action plan for the period 2012-2015,
to be launched in December.
While the first action plan focused on the
physical and legal security of women and men, this
second national action plan is fully dedicated to the
enhancement of female leadership and the political
participation of women in conflict-affected societies.
Peace and security are linked to the playing of active,
powerful roles by women. The power of women to
positively influence situations of crisis was shown
beautifully by the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize winners
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, Leymah Gbowee and Tawakkul
Karman. In his words of congratulation, the Dutch
Minister for Foreign Affairs said:
“The fact that these three women have been
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their struggle
for freedom, peace and stability in the world is an
excellent example of the fact that women are not
solely victims, but current and future leaders.”
Accordingly, it is not surprising that the
Netherlands continues to emphasize that the local men,
and especially women, living the daily reality of a
conflict are the key stakeholders in any intervention.
Individual local women and men, women’s
organizations and women’s movements are the real
drivers of durable change. Concretely, this means that
the second resolution 1325 (2000) national action plan
emanates from a demand-driven approach. This plan is
about the women, be it at the community or national
level, who have the courage to step up and become
leaders and to play their part in conflict mediation,
resolution and reconstruction. Thus our national action
plan is created to support the needs of those strong,
knowledgeable women and their movements. We
believe they know best what to do in their situation and
in the context of their culture.

11-57075

We are on the eve of a new decade of promoting
women, peace and security. Together we are
responsible for implementing our joint commitments
now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Pintado (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First
and foremost, Madam President, I should like to thank
you for having convened this important open debate. I
should like also to thank the Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director of the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), the President of the Economic and
Social Council, and the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for
their important briefings.
Through the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, the
United Nations has been able to develop, integrate and
fine-tune the tools available to it to address a gender
perspective in a multidimensional manner, by
recognizing the importance of women’s active
participation in the various stages of conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in peacekeeping,
reconstruction and peacebuilding.
We welcome in particular the establishment of
UN-Women, the agency that lies at the heart of the
gender architecture of the Organization, as it
coordinates all efforts undertaken in this field.
We welcome also the inclusion of specific
indicators in the reports of the Secretary-General, as is
the case in the report before us today (S/2011/598*), as
well as the seven-point action plan. Unfortunately,
however, as a result of the unequal implementation of
resolutions dealing with the gender architecture, there
exist significant gaps. One of the clearest examples of
this is the persistence of sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
My delegation is concerned about the
identification of patterns of sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict situations in many States and regions.
Sexual violence as a tactic of war stokes crises, fuels
the continuation of armed conflict, promotes the
displacement of people, limits subsistence activities
and reduces opportunities for development. In order to
avert that phenomenon, it is pivotal that peacekeeping
mission personnel as well as mediation and electoral

29

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

assistance teams have sufficient specialized expertise
in the field of gender and sexual violence and also have
the capacity to act in a timely manner so as to initiate
the relevant investigations.
There can be no lasting peace unless we
guarantee access to justice as well as accountability
and support the fight against impunity. In that regard, I
wish to recall that the International Criminal Court
could exercise its jurisdiction with regard to such
crimes.
We are also concerned about the low level of
participation by women in peace negotiations. The
exclusion of women and the lack of experts in gender
matters in negotiations perpetuate inequality. As is
indicated in the current report of the Secretary-General,
issues related to women tend to be addressed at the
later stages of conflict prevention and mediation. The
Nobel Peace Prize that was awarded to outstanding
women in this field this year undoubtedly sends a
positive message, but it is nonetheless insufficient.
The presence of additional female peacekeepers
and female staff in peacebuilding operations, at both
the military police and civilian levels, would have a
clear positive effect. It is therefore necessary to
increase the number of women who hold high-ranking
posts in such operations. We welcome the decision of
the Peacebuilding Fund to allocate $5 million to the
gender promotion initiative; we hope that this will lead
to tangible results in the short term.
We believe that the provisions of these Security
Council resolutions are relevant at both the
international and national levels. In Mexico, following
an approach to prevent violence, the institutions that
are responsible for monitoring security, safety and law
enforcement receive ongoing training in the field of
gender affairs. As a result, more women have become
involved in the administration of justice, with the
notable example of the appointment of the AttorneyGeneral, Marisela Morales — the first Mexican woman
to hold this important post. In turn, the national
defence agency has trained almost 80,000 personnel in
the field of gender equity, and this year will see the
graduation of the first female air force pilot. In the
diplomatic sphere, a high number of female
representatives have had a bearing my country’s
foreign policy, starting with Ms. Patricia Espinosa
Cantellano, Minister for Foreign Affairs.

30

The recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General are highly useful in identifying
existing shortcomings in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and in ensuring the
harmonization and coordination of United Nations
efforts in that area.
Mexico will continue to support the protection,
empowerment and participation of women in decisionmaking processes, as we are fully convinced that
women are key stakeholders in strengthening the three
pillars of lasting peace, namely, economic recovery;
social cohesion and political legitimacy. The
commitment of States Members of the United Nations
and of civil society is essential in order to continue to
strengthen the central role played by women in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faqiri (Afghanistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s debate, which offers
us all an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to
protecting and ensuring women’s rights and their
momentous role in peace and security. I also take the
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2011/598*) and his strong words of support.
And I thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, for her work and for her statement.
The history of war and violence has left a
disconcerting impact on my country. Violence still
takes its toll on every Afghan’s life. I hope that the
anguish facing every Afghan family will one day come
to an end. Women continue to bear the bulk of the
burden of conflict in Afghanistan, while their right to
secure, healthy and prosperous lives is still in peril.
We meet today to recognize the crucial role of
women in the peaceful resolution of conflicts, the
tangible fruits of which have already been seen in
Afghanistan in the decisive presence of women at the
Consultative Peace Jirga in 2010 and in the continuing
efforts to ensure women’s participation in leadership
positions within and outside of the Afghan
Government. The debate is particularly appropriate as
Afghanistan is entering the second phase of transition
to Afghan leadership and ownership and increased
responsibility for security and economic development.

11-57075

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

With regard to development, we have begun to
implement our 10-year national action plan for the
women of Afghanistan based upon the priorities of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy. As part of
the action plan, we have established gender units in
14 of the 25 Government ministries. However, given
the 10-year timeline, accelerated efforts are necessary
to ensure the full implementation of that very
comprehensive action plan, which incorporates vital
goals that include achieving a 30 per cent rate of
representation of women in governmental positions by
the end of 2013 and their 35 per cent participation rate
among university students by the end of 2012.
We have also made strides in ensuring the rule of
law, most recently the establishment of a national
commission on the elimination of violence against
women, following the enactment of the law in that
regard in December 2010. Those steps have been vital
in enhancing Afghan women’s access to legal redress
and have also sent a strong message that the
Afghanistan Government is committed to the rights of
women and to ensuring that there is no impunity for
those who violate them.
Ensuring the rights of women is only half of the
battle; we also need to see the full participation of
women, as resolution 1325 (2000) reminds us that they
have a vital role to play in peace and security. The
representation of women in governance and their
political participation has steadily increased. We have
succeeded in holding two presidential and two
parliamentary elections, in which women actively
participated as candidates, elections staff, poll monitors
and electorates.
Women comprise 25 per cent of the Parliament,
thus ranking Afghanistan thirtieth among the countries
of the world with the highest rate of women
representatives in Parliament. The Afghanistan
National Parliament has also established a resource
centre for women parliamentarians to enhance their
capacity to effectively include women’s voices and
perspectives
in
national
development
and
reconstruction plans.
When reviewing these facts and figures, let us not
lose sight of the great personal risk that these women
undertake in order to participate in the governance of
their country and in their future. I wish to take this
opportunity to honour the women who continue take

11-57075

risks in order to assume an active role in the future
direction, peace and security of our country.
Our international partners have assisted the
Afghan Government in our endeavours. UN-Women
has administered a multi-donor trust fund for the
elimination of violence against women that provided
grants for national organizations to combat violence
against women. I am very pleased to report that, in
collaboration with UN-Women, Afghanistan has
submitted its first country report on the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. The continued collaboration of our
Government, international partners and both Afghan
and international civil society groups will be vital to
ensure the full realization of women’s rights in a strong
and stable Afghanistan.
Building a stable and secure environment that
enables women to live free of intimidation and
violence and promotes their participation and
leadership in efforts to maintain peace and security is
one of the core objectives of the Afghan Government.
We are also focusing on women political actors at
national, subnational and local levels, as well as on
capacity-building and advocacy strategies to enable
them to obtain critical roles in high-level decisionmaking processes, policy and law-making positions in
key Government institutions and to assist them in
carrying out their significant political and social
responsibilities.
In conclusion, with the support of our partners
and the international community, we will continue to
work towards the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), while recognizing that our goal of
sustainable peace and security in Afghanistan will not
be achieved without the full participation of the entire
Afghan nation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): The Fiji delegation wishes
to convey its salutations to you personally, Madam, and
to your Government on the occasion of your
presidency of the Council, and to express our gratitude
for the convening of this important debate. We also
thank
the
Secretary-General
for
his
most
comprehensive report (S/2011/598*) and his valuable
recommendations.

31

S/PV.6642 (Resumption 1)

Fiji associates itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the Permanent Representative of
Vanuatu on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States.

principles of the resolution, with clear policy
guidelines on its application to our unique national and
regional
characteristics,
will
accelerate
the
implementation process in the Pacific.

We are encouraged by the initiatives currently
being undertaken by the Secretary-General and
UN-Women on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We acknowledge that progress has been made
in all four thematic areas of the United Nations systemwide action plan. We believe, however, that much work
remains to be done; not only in relation to the United
Nations strategic framework, but, importantly, in
national implementation of the resolution.

Fiji’s commitment to the resolution is
exemplified in our policies that, among other things,
strongly encourage the recruitment of women in our
security forces and their deployment with equal
opportunities to peacekeeping missions. We support the
global effort to increase the participation of women in
United Nations police peacekeeping roles to 20 per
cent by 2014. We encourage the provision of pre- and
post-deployment training of our peacekeepers and
welcome further assistance and expertise in that regard.
Furthermore, we support the participation and
representation of women at all levels of decisionmaking.

We need to take a holistic response to effectively
make progress in the implementation of the resolution.
We depend upon the guidance of the Security Council
and the advice of the Secretary-General, UN-Women,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
relevant United Nations departments and agencies. We
need the input of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the assistance of civil society
and regional organizations. In addition, we need to
build local capacities by learning from the experiences
and good practices of other countries on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We welcome the initiatives of the Security
Council and the work carried out by the SecretaryGeneral in establishing the set of indicators for
tracking the implementation of the resolution and to
provide guidance for all Member States in their efforts
to achieve its desired goals. Such universal indicators
should be complemented by national implementation
frameworks and policies to ensure that the various
thematic areas of the resolution are addressed. It is for
that reason that Fiji supports the development of a
regional framework for the Pacific small island
developing States as an important step towards the full
implementation of the resolution in the Pacific. We
believe that a framework that incorporates the

In our consultations and interactions with civil
society and the public, we acknowledge the work of
FemLINK Pacific, a Fiji-based non-governmental
organization that deals specifically with resolution
1325 (2000). The Fijian Government promotes the
enhancement of efforts to collaborate with the
expertise and experience of women’s groups, with a
view to enhancing the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) at the national level.
We welcome the pronouncement by the
Secretary-General in his report that the most
significant institutional development with regard to
women, peace and security has been the creation of
UN-Women, with the purpose of leveraging the entire
United Nations system to ensure the accelerated
implementation of all relevant resolutions on the issue.
In conclusion, we look forward to working with
UN-Women in achieving the goals of resolution 1325
(2000).
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6:15 p.m.

32

11-57075
