United Nations

S/PV.9299

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9299

th meeting
Thursday, 30 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nyusi/Ms. Dlhovo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Bicalho Cozendey
Mr. Liu Yuxi
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Al Nahyan
Mr. Kariuki
Ms. Zeya

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
The impact of development policies in the implementation of the Silencing the
Guns initiative
Letter dated 24 February 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/148/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-09091 (E)
*2309091*

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/148/Rev.1, which contains the text
of a letter dated 24 February 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa

I now give the floor to Ms. Duarte.

The impact of development policies in the
implementation of the Silencing the Guns
initiative

Ms. Duarte: I would like to thank the Mozambiquan
presidency for holding this open debate on the impact
of development policies on the implementation of the
Silencing the Guns initiative and for inviting me to
brief the Security Council on this topic.

Letter dated 24 February 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/148/Rev.1)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Ministers and other high-level representatives.
Their presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Austria, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Czechia, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, Germany, Greece,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, the Republic of Korea,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Cristina
Duarte, Special Adviser on Africa to the United Nations
Secretary-General; His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Ibn Chambas, African Union High Representative
for the Silencing the Guns Initiative; and Mr. Mirko
Manzoni, Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Mozambique.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; and
Mr. António Vitorino, Director General of the
International Organization for Migration, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/29

begin

30/03/2023

its

The African Union Master Roadmap of practical
steps to silence the guns in Africa, also known as
the Lusaka Roadmap, identified five areas of action
where African member States, with the support of the
international community, needed to advance in order
to silence the guns in Africa. Out of those five areas,
four — economic, social, environmental and legal
aspects— refer to issues that are comprised in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in the
African Union Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. The
structure of the Lusaka Master Roadmap underscores
the relevance that development policies and the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the African
Union Agenda 2063 have for achieving peace and
security in the continent. Unfortunately, that African
perspective has not been sufficiently incorporated in
global discussions on peace and security in the continent.
For too long, global discussions have considered that
the linkages between peace, security and development
are constrained due to the fact that wars create
emergency situations, divert funds that should be used
for development and destroy infrastructure. Those facts
are accurate, but they present an incomplete picture of
the interrelation between peace and development.
As African policymakers acknowledged when
designing the Lusaka Roadmap, development
policies play a substantial role in supporting conflict
prevention and resolution. Furthermore, the absence of
development policies, or the existence of policies and
programmes that do not deliver inclusive development,
can act as a root cause of conflicts. In other words,
as the Secretary-General has affirmed, “the flames
of conflict are fuelled by inequality, deprivation and
underfunded systems” (S/PV.9011, p.4). On the other
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

hand, inclusive, transparent, equitable and effective
development policies can be the tool with the most
impact for conflict prevention.
When I briefed the Council last year on capacity
building for sustaining peace (see S/PV.9106), I referred
to the need to differentiate between external and internal
factors of conflict. External factors refer to issues that,
to a certain extent, are outside the control of a single
State, such as external competition for natural resources,
meaning geopolitical interests, and international
terrorism. Internal factors are related to the interaction
between the State and its citizens, most notably when
it comes to exclusion from public services. In order
to put an end to conflict, both external and internal
factors need to be addressed. In that regard, I note
how development policies are better poised to address
internal factors, as inclusion can be delivered only
through sustainable development.

S/PV.9299

highlights that, when African countries achieved
independence, they inherited governance structures
that were not designed to run successful independent
States, and consequently not prepared to deliver the
independence vision.
From an economic perspective, as everybody
knows, colonial Administrations did not focus on
promoting economic development, but rather on
resource extraction and tax collection. From the point
of view of the rule of law, their objective was not to
uphold the rights of the individuals, but to exercise
authority. Even from the point of view of the land, the
objective was not to ensure the presence of the State
across the territory, but to control strategic sites, either
for their location or their economic value. In addition,
African States also inherited ruler-drawn borders that
had been established not to organize a population, but
to distribute the natural wealth of a continent.

However, the traditional response to peace and
security challenges in Africa has not been to address
the internal and external root causes of conflicts,
but just their symptoms. In that regard, the only
effective solution to conflicts in Africa is sustainable
development, because only development will create the
capacities that will allow African countries to tackle
both the internal and external causes of conflict. That
is very clear not only in the Lusaka Masterplan but also
in the African Union 2063 Agenda, which reflects our
vision for a peaceful, united and prosperous continent.

As a result of those historical factors, from
a governance perspective, African countries still
face today three “geographies” that condition the
relationship between a country’s Government, their
territory and their people.

Acknowledging that development policies impact
peace and security implies identifying what are the
development-related causes that lie behind a conflict in
order to enable the affected country to adopt the mediumand long-term measures that will create a viable and
sustainable pathway to peace. Last year when I briefed
the Council, I presented one of those causes, namely,
the actual or perceived exclusion in the provision of
public services. Today, in line with the concept note for
this debate (see S/2023/148/Rev.1), I would like to refer
to the political history of the continent.

That takes us to the second geography, which
reflects the pre-existing socio-cultural groups. The
overlaps between the first and the second geography
have led to a situation in which African countries have
within their administrative borders two or more historic
socio-cultural groups and situations in which one
historic community is spread throughout two or more
countries. For example, in my region of West Africa,
there is one group — the Fulani — that is present in
every country between the Gambia and Cameroon. That
overlap has two main consequences on governance.

While most of the internal and external factors
may have apparent current direct causes, their roots
go back in history. Colonialism has often been blamed
for the economic exploitation of the African continent,
but its impact on the current governance shortcomings
has seldom been discussed. The 2022 report of the
Secretary-General on the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa (S/2022/959)

First,
colonial
Administrations
established
centralized structures, which were afterwards inherited
by the independent States. Those structures were not
prepared to manage a diverse population or to promote
inclusion. As a result, many African countries have
faced intercommunal conflicts that cannot be resolved
from a governance perspective unless those structures
are properly reformed. Decentralization and devolution

The first geography is the administrative territory
of a country, which is determined by its borders. As
the concept note for this debate points out, in Africa
those borders were the artificial result of negotiations
among colonial Powers that did not take into account
the reality of the continent.

23-090913/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

are key policy instruments that need to be part of the
conflict resolution toolkit. They enable the recognition
of local realities within a State and empower
historic communities by providing them with assets.
Furthermore, they can help increase the efficiency of
public services by bringing their management closer
to the beneficiaries. Traditional leadership structures
can also be effective tools for supporting the inclusion
of historic communities and can therefore add value to
African governance structures.
The second consequence of the overlap between
the first and the second geographies is the existence
of a socioeconomic reality that transcends the
boundaries of individual countries. From a peace and
security perspective, transboundary movements are
often perceived as a risk, and a reaction to that can be
attempts to control borders by closing them, despite
the fact that most of the time such measures are not
effective. A historical reality that goes beyond borders
cannot be contained. Furthermore, attempts to limit
the transboundary reality of Africa’s historical groups
undermine their potential as a source of growth and
resilience and increase mistrust of State institutions.
Africa’s integration process is the only response to that
challenge that can produce more growth, development
and peace. Instead of responding to potential
transboundary threats by closing borders, we need to
accelerate integration through the Continental Free
Trade Area, the regional economic communities and the
various instruments in the African Union architecture.
The third geography represents the actual
presence of the State. As the concept note points out,
public investment and institutions in Africa have
been concentrated in a few urban centres, leaving
vast expanses of territory without a State presence.
That too is the result of internal and external factors.
One external factor is the prevalence in international
financial and development policies since the 1990s
of a market-based approach to public services that
has sought to shrink the size of public institutions,
further weakening State structures that were already
inherently limited. At the same time, from an internal
perspective, African countries have not focused enough
on building solid country systems. As a result, today
State institutions are absent in many remote, rural and
marginalized areas of the continent. That absence of the
State, from the perspective of the provision of services,
is one of the main factors undermining the legitimacy
of State institutions, breaking the bonds of trust with
4/29

30/03/2023

the population that are crucial to nation-building and
creating fertile ground for terrorism and the emergence
of non-State actors.
If we want to reduce the threat presented by the
possibility of non-State actors taking over the Sahel
and the Horn of Africa, military solutions will have
to be complemented by active development policies
that contribute to ensuring the effective provision
of public services across the territory. As long as
development policies continue to be perceived as
something to be taken into account only after peace
efforts have been undertaken, we cannot achieve
durable peace. Conversely, if development aspects are
factored in during the peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding processes, I am confident that we
will be able to come here to the Security Council and
congratulate African countries on their success in
putting an end to conflict, just as we are here today to
congratulate Mozambique.
Mozambique’s peace process is an example of the
smart and effective implementation of development
policies in support of a peace and security objective.
The dual approach of the Maputo Accord for Peace and
National Reconciliation, combining demilitarization
and reintegration with decentralization and devolution,
has responded to the need to understand the root causes
of the conflict and to identify the development solutions
needed to ensure the success of the process.
The recent decision by the Government of Mozambique to include eligible demobilized disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration beneficiaries in the
country’s pension system is another example of a smart
policy, both from a peace and a development perspective.
From the point of view of peace and security, it is yet
another step in fighting exclusion and promoting reconciliation through development and social policies. From
a macroeconomic perspective, it is an effective way to
promote income distribution, which is indispensable
to achieving socioeconomic resilience. And resilience
is necessary not only to deliver peace but to advance
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and prevent a
scenario in which African countries are pushed off track.
Economic growth without income distribution will lead
only to greater inequalities, exclusion and conflict. I would
therefore like to commend you, Mr. President, for that
courageous decision, which I am confident will strengthen
your country’s peace and reconciliation process.
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Mozambique’s peace and reconciliation process
demonstrates that development policies, when applied
in conjunction with peacemaking efforts, contribute to
ending hostilities and lay solid foundations for durable
peace and sustainability. That effective combination
of peace and development tools will enable African
countries to silence the guns in the continent and achieve
durable peace.
The President: I thank Ms. Duarte for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: It is an honour to address the Security
Council today. I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the kind invitation to address the Council, and to take
this opportunity to commend you and your Government
for convening this important open debate on the impact
of development policies in the implementation of the
Silencing the Guns initiative of the African Union (AU).
Speaking of which, I would also like to join Special
Adviser Cristina Duarte in commending you, Sir, as
well as your Government and the people of Mozambique,
for providing an example of a successful peace process,
which I believe can be a model for lesson-sharing on
our continent.
When the AU Heads of State and Government
adopted the Silencing the Guns initiative, they were
motivated by a desire to bequeath to future generations of
Africa a continent free of war and conflict. The objective
was to work for an Africa at peace with itself and with
the rest of the world. The Security Council, consistent
with the AU-United Nations strategic partnership, rallied
behind that initiative by adopting resolution 2457 (2019).
The topic of today’s debate is timely. It comes at a
moment when Africa is faced with multiple challenges
that are putting the attainment of the noble objectives
of the Silencing the Guns initiative at risk, even by the
new deadline of 2030. The causes of those challenges are
historical, constitutional, institutional, economic, social
and cultural. They also relate to the impact of climate
change. Africa’s vulnerability to global economic shocks
and the weak implementation of the protocols and
decisions taken at the national, subregional, continental
and international levels with regard to peace and security
and development on the African continent are also
contributory factors.
Regrettably, we are also witnessing a widening gap
between richer and poorer nations at the international level,
as well as a widening gap at the national level between

S/PV.9299

the elite and the marginalized and poor communities and
populations. It is estimated that the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, for instance, has wiped out most
of the gains made in Africa by increasing the number of
persons living in extreme poverty. The United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa’s Economic Report
on Africa 2021 observed that the COVID-19 pandemic
pushed 55 million Africans into poverty in 2020 and
reversed more than two decades of progress in poverty
reduction on the continent. Equally alarming is the fact
that 15 African countries are reportedly at risk of debt
distress. In fact, the total African debt that was forgiven
under the multilateral debt relief initiative two decades
ago was in the region of $300 billion. Today Africa is
once again in debt, to the tune of more than $600 billion.
Going forward, we could — and should — foster
recovery and transformation in Africa in order to reduce
inequalities and vulnerabilities, thereby getting us closer
to silencing the guns. I would like to highlight a number
of issues in that regard.
First, Africa must embark on people-centred
recovery and transformation. It must give prominence
to investment in human capital development and
utilization, including through investment in education
and science; a focus on employability; investment in
technology and innovation; and investment in health;
harnessing the demographic dividend by investing, inter
alia, in the growth of decent employment opportunities;
leveraging the African diaspora; mainstreaming
informal sectors into formal sectors; investing in
gender equality and youth empowerment; and investing
in the development of morality, integrity, discipline,
self-esteem and self-confidence.
Second, for that transformation to be attained
and sustained, there is a need to secure abundant
financial resources. In that respect, the mobilization
of domestic resources should be prioritized, with a
particular emphasis on fighting against illicit financial
flows, which deprive the continent of approximately
$90 billion annually.
Third, digital technologies offer us a chance to
unlock new pathways for rapid and inclusive economic
growth, as well as innovation, job creation and access
to services. Africa has several successful and dynamic
headline ecosystems. The mobile money revolution is a
well-known example, as are the cultural industries, in
particular those of music and film-making.

23-090915/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

Fourth, the development of agricultural parks is
aimed at making Africa food secure, and ultimately
a net food exporter. It is untenable that a continent
with 60 per cent of the world’s remaining arable
lands, as well as many rivers and freshwater bodies,
should be dependent for its grains on external sources.
The agricultural parks will also promote, through
specialization, regional and continental value chains
in agriculture.
Fifth, sustainable industrialization is another key
focus area. In that regard, collaboration with partners
will involve capacity-building for rural cooperatives,
agricultural processing, capacity-building for the
production of intermediate goods from Africa’s
vast array of natural resources, capacity-building to
mainstream research and development in order to
boost innovation, and the development of regional and
continental value chains.
Sixth, the African Continental Free Trade Area
market has a bright future. We have a young population
with a growing middle class, whose demand for
industrial goods is 1.5 times higher than the global
average. We must create a “Made in Africa” standard,
which once operational will promote competitiveness
among qualifying companies and contribute to the
removal of technical barriers to trade. The process of
deglobalization is under way; since the 1970s, Africa
has experienced a progressive decline in its share of
global trade, from 6 per cent to its current share of
2.7 per cent. Having adopted the African Continental
Free Trade Area, which is a source of foreign exchange
and technology transfers, inter alia, the African Union
is still committed to international trade. The African
Continental Free Trade Area plans to move Africa
through a paradigm shift that takes it away from being
a producer and exporter of raw materials to being an
exporter of manufactured and agriculturally processed
goods and services, such as tourism and labour. To
achieve that paradigm shift, there is an urgent need for
investment in national and cross-border infrastructure
to facilitate the free movement of persons, goods
and services.
Seventh, although Africa contributes the least to
global warming, it is committed to playing its part in
the green transition, albeit at a variable speed. New
estimates by the African Development Bank show that
Africa will need between $1.18 billion and $1.45 billion
annually to implement its commitments under the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and its nationally
6/29

30/03/2023

determined contributions. In that regard, climate
financing, carbon credit trading and other mechanisms
should be made a reality through simplified, flexible
and quick disbursement methods in order to release the
required funds to meet Africa’s climate financing gap.
As I conclude, allow me to reiterate what the
United Nations and the AU, as well as Special Adviser
Duarte, have repeatedly underscored, namely, the nexus
between peace and security, development, governance
and respect for human rights. That is the mantra of
both the Sustainable Development Goals and the AU’s
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. In that regard, the
discussion today is intrinsically linked with that of
the high-level debate held by the Council on 28 March
on counter-terrorism (see S/PV.9296). The scourge
of international terrorism, conflict and instability
in Africa, which is driven by internal and external
factors, negatively impacts the prospects for sustained
development and addressing the pressing needs of
the people. The recent unconstitutional changes of
Government and the re-emergence of coup d’états must
also be addressed. The AU and its regional economic
communities continue to adopt measures to strengthen
conflict prevention and mediation, ensure good
governance, strengthen democratic institutions and
enhance the role of women and empower young people
at the subregional, national and community levels.
Silencing the guns will require ownership by
subregional bodies, national Governments and, above
all, by the African peoples and active civil society.
The support of Africa’s partners and friends is also
required. The United Nations, through this body, has
already expressed its solidarity on silencing the guns.
The support of multilateral and bilateral partners will
also go a long way to helping to silence the guns by 2030
and helping us realize a peaceful, secure, democratic,
participative, inclusive and prosperous Africa — the
Africa we want — by 2063.
The President: I thank Mr. Chambas for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Manzoni.
Mr. Manzoni: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on
efforts to advance the Silencing the Guns agenda. I
am honoured to be able to speak to the Council today
in my capacity as Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Mozambique, a position I have held for
nearly four years, during which I have accompanied the
entire implementation of the Maputo Accord for Peace
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

and National Reconciliation between the Government
of Mozambique and the Resistência Nacional
Moçambicana (RENAMO).
My involvement with the process began in 2016,
as Switzerland’s Ambassador to Mozambique, when
I formed part of a small mediation team, with whose
members I travelled many times into the bush to talk
with both parties, building trust and relationships that
continues to this day. The Maputo Accord’s mediation,
signing and implementation have generated hope and
inspiration. I see four fundamental reasons for the
Accord’s success — establishing national ownership
from the outset, building trust, remaining flexible
and ensuring a human-centred process throughout. I
would like to focus on those elements in order to share
how progress can be made and reflect on what we can
learn when considering the prevention and peaceful
resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding efforts. I want
to underline that there have also been many challenges
to overcome jointly with the principals involved, but
that is the reason why it has been possible.
I want to begin with national ownership. In
any context, local and national actors have the best
understanding of the nuances of a conflict, and should
therefore lead and own their own peace processes.
National ownership can act as a catalyst for progress,
encouraging greater buy-in from stakeholders and
producing more relevant results. The role of international
actors is to provide support. From the beginning the
Government of Mozambique and RENAMO retained
both ownership and initiative in the establishment of
the national peace architecture, and both parties gained
trust from their equal commitment and respect for each
other. Having gone through previous failed attempts
to arrive at peace, this time Mozambique put national
efforts at its core, and that is working. Of course, for
national actors to take on that ownership, political will
must be present. In the Mozambican context, both sides
have consistently shown up and taken courageous leaps
of faith to prioritize peace for their people. While the
core mediation team played an important facilitative
role, the Government has championed national solutions
to national problems by listening and creating a culture
of dialogue between the Government and RENAMO.
And for a process to be truly national, it must
embrace all of the population. As we heard on 7 March
from numerous Member States in this Chamber, during
Mozambique’s signature event on how to advance the
women and peace and security agenda (see S/PV.9276),

S/PV.9299

excluding women from peace processes dooms those
processes to failure. National ownership means
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women. In Mozambique, the peace process has
mainstreamed women’s participation in the negotiation
and implementation structures. It has been guided by
the relevant national and international frameworks on
women and peace and security, including resolution
1325 (2000) and Mozambique’s own national action plan.
We are fully convinced that another reason for
Mozambique’s successful peace process has been
the fostering of trust between the parties. One early
indication of that was the fact that just a month after
talks resumed between the two leaders, President
Nyusi and the then leader of RENAMO, Afonso
Dhlakama, a ceasefire was announced. Trust between
the parties was further fostered by the implementation
of additional partial agreements while the negotiations
were ongoing. Notably, the constitutional agreement
on decentralization and the memorandum of
understanding on military affairs were both signed
before the peace agreement. That progressive approach
to implementation using confidence-building measures
helped to increase trust and gave each party a sense of
purpose and achievement. I commend the mutual trust
achieved between the parties and how that has been
reflected in the exemplary commitment shown by the
national implementing structures to working together
to realize all the aspects of the agreement.
The third reason behind the success of Mozambique’s
peace process is its flexibility. The process has taken a
forward-thinking and adaptive approach with targeted
investments to embed peace. Any hurdles faced along
the way were addressed with direct and open dialogue
between the parties and with agile decision-making and
action. For example, many activities ground to a halt
in the global pandemic. However, within one month,
President Nyusi and the leader of RENAMO met and
held extensive consultations, ultimately facilitating
the safe resumption of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) activities in June 2020. The
coronavirus disease pandemic could have derailed
Mozambique’s journey to peace if the necessary
flexibility had not been present.
We strongly believe that adopting a flexible and
agile approach to timelines and activities was also
essential to ensuring that the process continued to
reflect the evolving needs of the parties. And flexibility
on the part of donors and the international community

23-090917/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

has also been indispensable. Peace processes are political
processes. In any political process there are many moving
parts, and space must be allowed for setbacks, altered
timelines and changing directions.
It is important to frequently remind ourselves that
peace processes are for people. Maintaining a humancentred approach throughout is not only the right thing
to do, but it also guarantees the best chances of success.
People were placed at the heart of the DDR process
in Mozambique by sensitizing DDR beneficiaries at
all stages, ensuring gender-sensitive disarmament
and demobilization and prioritizing conflict-sensitive
reintegration opportunities. That has had a direct
impact on the advancement of the process, because
those involved have felt listened to and that their needs
have been prioritized. By involving everyone, we give
peace a better chance of success. And putting people
first pays off in peace dividends. As key elements of
the peace initiative, the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process has seen more than 4,800
DDR beneficiaries settle in communities of their choice
to begin their reintegration journey, with community
members welcoming those women and men home.
Progress in inclusive local development has been
crucial to embedding peace in communities. For that,
DDR programmes must also take a longer-term view,
rather than be seen as a technical and time-limited
process. The Mozambican process tackles longstanding issues such as pensions for the demobilized and
introduces innovative strategies to spur the involvement
of a broad range of actors, including the private sector, so
as to embed the long-term sustainability of peace.
I would like to take this opportunity to applaud the
courage and wisdom of the Government in pursuing a
pragmatic solution to pensions. The recent promulgation
of a decree extending pensions to the demobilized is
historic, solving not only outstanding issues from the
past but also investing in the sustainability of the current
peace process and setting an example of reconciliation
for the rest of the world. Including demobilized
combatants in the national pensions system is crucial
for the sustainability of the peace process. It is also an
important step for national reconciliation, providing the
DDR beneficiaries with a sense of dignity and recognition
for their service following their demobilization.
Additionally, the reconciliation process has taken a longterm comprehensive approach and seeks to integrate
peace education into the fabric of Mozambican society.
Every individual has a role to play in consolidating and
sustaining peace.
8/29

30/03/2023

An approach combining national ownership, trust,
flexibility and a human-centred perspective has created
a commitment to continuity, patience and followthrough, resulting in sustained implementation from the
parties, implementers, DDR beneficiaries, Mozambican
society and the international community at large. I
believe this has been possible in Mozambique’s unique
case because the same people who were involved in the
negotiations are the ones involved in implementation.
This provides continuity in the process and builds
on years of hard work, strengthening trust between
the parties by encouraging and facilitating discreet
dialogue. Silencing the guns and embracing dialogue
is becoming the Mozambican way of doing things, and
this is essential for lasting peace.
Almost four years into its implementation, the
Maputo Peace and Reconciliation Accord is setting
down ever deeper roots. The peace process demonstrates
the commitment of the country’s leaders to dialogue as
the only sustainable path to peace. In the Cabo Delgado
province, Mozambique is also applying a model of
building peace and security through dynamic regional
and local solutions, seeking to make use of inter-African
interventions to resolve challenges on the continent. By
tapping into the enormous potential offered by regional
organizations and partners, Mozambique has built a
framework for concerted action, where coordination
among actors involved in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding has been essential. Not only do these
actors know the conflict dynamics well, but they
are often also directly affected as threats become
increasingly transnational.
In conclusion, let me stress that the success of a
peace process should not be measured by the difficulties
it encounters; rather, it should be judged on the basis of
how those involved choose to overcome such difficulties.
While there is no such thing as a one-size-fits-all
approach to building peace, I think collectively we
have identified some basic building blocks that will be
relevant and applicable to other contexts.
I strongly commend the President of Mozambique,
Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, and the former and current
leaders of Resistência Nacional Moçambicana, Afonso
Dhlakama and Ossufo Momade, for believing in
peace and for listening to the voices of millions of
Mozambicans who have wanted peace for so long. I
remain deeply grateful for the continuous support I
receive from both parties, from the Secretary-General
and the international community. Such support has
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9299

been critical. I look forward to continued partnership
to support Mozambicans in their endeavour to build a
better future and a lasting peace.

in other latitudes, inside and outside the continent.
During my statement, I will therefore repeat the words
“silencing”, “dialogue” and “peace”.

The President: I thank Mr. Manzoni for his briefing.

Mozambicans respect the importance of silencing
the guns because they have experienced moments when
the noise of guns sowed sorrow among many families at
one time. Our own independence in 1975 was possible
only after a 10-year period of armed struggle. The
silencing of guns resulted from the negotiations that
culminated in the signing of the Lusaka agreements
between the Mozambique Liberation Front (FRELIMO)
and the Portuguese colonial State in 1974 after the
fascist colonial rule had not accepted dialogue from
the outset.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Republic of Mozambique.
(spoke in Portuguese; English interpretation provided
by the delegation)
I salute all those present for honouring us with
their presence for one more debate on promoting peace
and security in Africa within the framework of the
Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative.
We, the Africans, want peace on our continent.
We are aware that to have a continent in peace, it is
necessary that African leaders believe that a continent
with silenced guns is possible. The leaders of our
nations have an added responsibility because they have
the obligation to mobilize all sensitivities and secure
the requisite means and resources at their disposal to
fast-track the silencing of the guns once and for all.
What is required is for all of us to work together so
that this millennial dream is transformed into a reality
through concrete actions. A peaceful African continent
with steady growth is possible. For this goal to
materialize, we need to resolve the causes of the feelings
of injustice, social inequality and exclusion that have
fuelled conflicts during the continent’s development
process. We need to stop heeding the agendas of those
who seek to take advantage of our vulnerability, divide
us and easily implement programmes for plundering
our resources and wealth.
According to an African diplomat, Kofi Annan,
there is no peace without development, no development
without peace, and no peace and development without
human rights. It is this triad — peace, development
and human rights — that guides the African Union’s
Silencing the Guns by 2030 agenda. It is a challenging
target that we have set for ourselves as Africans in
our quest to reverse at an early date the scenario of
prevalent flashpoints in armed conflicts that delay the
consolidation of politically stable nations and bring
economic prosperity to our continent.
I would therefore like to share with the Council
Mozambique’s experience on this important theme,
which we believe can serve as one of the references
to be considered in the resolution of armed conflicts

A year after the declaration of independence,
in 1976, Mozambique sustained a devastating war of
aggression, waged by the racist regimes of Rhodesia
and apartheid, which lasted 16 years. At that time,
as neighbours, the peoples of South Africa and
Mozambique were experiencing times of accusations
and armed attacks. While isolated, they prevented the
harmonious coexistence and development of the highly
interdependent economies.
The fragile coexistence that the two countries
experienced was interrupted through dialogue, and hope
filled the hearts of the two sisterly peoples following
the long-awaited agreement known as the Nkomati
Agreement, signed by President Samora Moisés Machel
and the Prime Minister of South Africa, Peter Botha.
Once again, dialogue was the solution.
Domestically, the armed conflict remained
incessant. Even at that time, the silencing of the guns
in the conflict among Mozambicans, which lasted
16 years and claimed more than 1 million lives, was
possible only through a commitment to dialogue, which
culminated in the Rome General Peace Agreement
for Mozambique between the Government and the
Resistência Nacional Moçambicana (RENAMO) in
1992. It was only in that way that peace once again
enlightened the Mozambican people.
Because the two parties signatories to the Rome
Peace Agreement remained not fully happy with the
implementation process of the respective agreement,
the country once again experienced incidents of armed
conflict, which was quietly increasing in the central
region to the extent that it affected the movement of
persons and goods, hampering investment and the
normal flow of economic activities.

23-090919/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

Since I assumed the presidency of the Republic of
Mozambique on 15 January 2015, we have made the issue
of peacekeeping and national reconciliation the main
priority for governance. The practice was described
by Ambassador Mirko Manzoni. In that regard, I will
focus on only some areas by reporting specifically what
we have done. We made a commitment to persisting as
long as one brother continued to take up arms to kill
another brother, whatever the pretext may be.
That is how I began a direct dialogue with the leader
of RENAMO, the late Afonso Dhlakama — may he rest
in peace — which resulted in the consensus that led us
to the Peace and National Reconciliation Agreement in
August 2019, also known as the Maputo Accord.
Our engagement in the dialogue process with
RENAMO to put an end to political and military tension
allowed us to see that there were key aspects of past
agreements that should be addressed going forward
with regard to decentralization, on the one hand, and
military aspects, on the other. Even though there was
the Rome Peace Agreement, tensions prevailed.
During the meetings that I held with the leader of
RENAMO, the first issue that I raised was for him to
tell me one problem that we should address, and I was
also to come up with one, so that we did not waste time
discussing details. He chose decentralization, and I
chose military affairs. Why did I do that? Because there
should be no political party with a seat in Parliament
with arms and guns. That is how we started talking.
Through a political agreement, we submitted a
bill to the National Assembly for the amendment of
the national Constitution in 2018. We adopted a new
decentralization model, whereby the governors of the
country’s 10 provinces are now democratically elected.
That happened for the first time in 2019. Why was
that? Because RENAMO was saying that it had won
the elections in some provinces, while the other party,
the ruling party, was victorious in other provinces. But,
overall, it was FRELIMO that took all. The agreement
by which one was the winner of the province was
therefore that one governed just that province. Such
decentralization therefore resolved the problem raised
by RENAMO.
The second matter of the Maputo Accord was the
military component, which entailed disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. That has a direct
relationship with silencing the guns. That was my
problem. Let us disarm RENAMO. Let us demobilize,
10/29

30/03/2023

and let us reintegrate. In that regard, I requested one
small thing. I wanted the RENAMO military to have
some leadership command and leadership positions in
the Mozambique Defence Force. I accepted that, but we
could not have a 50:50 share because not all those in
the armed forces are from parties. Those people were
appointed to leadership positions in the Defence Force.
That agreement enabled that 15 of the 16 RENAMO bases
were closed, and one remains. We will close that one.
That is why we have embarked on the pension process.
Mozambique is proud to have led an agenda for
silencing the guns in which the silent arm that we use
is dialogue. I said that yesterday (see S/PV.9296). It may
not be a perfect model. We may face challenges, but,
where there is trust in dialogue, we can succeed.
Nevertheless, we understand that the silencing of
guns requires a long-term vision for the development of
the country, which entails promoting social justice in a
sustainable and inclusive way, thereby ensuring the wellbeing of all the people. For that reason, in the context
of our Mozambican-led peace process, we need to take
into account the fact that that can take a long time.
That was said here, and we support that. We have now
adopted a decree on the payment of pensions, which will
happen immediately.
However, it is important to note that the ongoing
peace process and the implementation of the 2019 Peace
and National Reconciliation Agreement in Mozambique
are unique because the process is based on an innovative
approach. It encourages tolerance and emphasizes the
importance of national ownership. In the process, there
were cases in which we brought in mediators, who
remained for a long time without dialogue flowing. We
therefore had to say that we should stop that and talk
directly. As was said, I used my telephone to talk to
Mr. Dhlakama because he was living in his hideout in
the bush. At the same time, I personally went to the bush
during the armed conflict. I just disembarked. I walked,
and I reached out. Fortunately, it was a historic meeting
with the commandant because, first, why should we
fight? If we could meet, that meant we could talk and
resolve our problems.
Another important element is the fact that the
interlocutors in the dialogue — me and the leader of
RENAMO — had opted for direct supervision. When
something happens, we therefore should ask directly
about what happened and what did not. That process
is being continued with the new leader of RENAMO,
Mr. Ossufo Momade.
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

As was said earlier, most formal and informal
understandings were implemented before the signing of
the Maputo Accord. Yesterday, when we met with the
Peacebuilding Commission, I told members of a time
when we wanted to spend Christmas without war. I
merely picked up my phone and asked, “Why don’t you
stop killing people so that they can spend the Christmas
and New Year celebrations together?” And that was
made possible. There was no formal agreement; we
only spoke by phone and neither of us knew where we
were. But trust had been built in our meetings. Such
trust is also built by talking not only about war — we
talked about our children and his previous time in
Mozambique. I believe that, when people stop being
selfish and look towards finding a solution for the
benefit of the majority of people, anything is possible.
Another critical but successful approach was to try
to be discreet about the main issues being discussed
by the parties involved in the dialogue until consensus
was reached, otherwise that would create problems.
However, people needed to know — women needed to
know, as they are the leaders of many families and the
source of information for so many people. But deciding
on making such information public had to be done with
a certain degree of unanimity. We could not just say
what we wanted to say. We therefore had to agree on
what to say, based on the various sensitivities we had
to consider. Failing to communicate with women and
young people and failing to involve them can be fatal,
as they are the beneficiaries of peace. Peace requires
the inclusion and participation of young people, as they
make up the majority.
In addition to the experience that we wanted to
share with the Council, we also wanted to talk about
the fact that Mozambique is currently experiencing
difficult times, owing to the negative impact of climate
change. But that is a discussion for another time, as
it is also a cause of unrest. As we are discussing the
Silencing the Guns initiative, I would like to focus
on the destruction and deaths resulting from terrorist
acts. With regard to the last topic related to terrorism
that I want to talk about, silencing the guns cannot be
achieved as long as violent extremism prevails on our
continent and throughout the world. On the ground in
Cabo Delgado, combat operations continue, with the
direct engagement of our Mozambique Defence Armed
Forces and security forces, supported by the Rwandan
Defence Forces, the Southern African Development
Community’s Standby Force mission in Mozambique,

S/PV.9299

as well as indirectly through the support of many
countries and organizations represented here today,
such as the African Union, the United Nations, the
European Union and a number of individual countries,
some of which prefer not to be thanked or mentioned,
as they feel that they are only fulfilling their duty. We
continue to persevere and seek complementary ways to
accelerate the process of silencing the guns, the use of
which is driven by terrorism and violent extremism.
Such complementary solutions are based on
enriching minds and ensuring social stability through
the creation of opportunities for the development of
human capital. In that regard, the United Nations
Development Programme has provided an example
on the ground. And it is especially important for
young people by promoting training programmes for
self-employment, generating incomes and economic
incentives, which will go a long way in terms of
silencing the guns. It also entails the establishment of
innovative programmes to ensure that communities
in general are involved in, and benefit from, ongoing
projects in their regions, including the advantages
afforded by the peace process. We intend to promote
and consolidate a culture of peace whereby no one is left
behind and differences are resolved through dialogue,
including diplomatic dialogue. We need to embark on
the diplomacy of peace, which is extremely important,
not the force of weapons. Every country has had an
experience in which guns failed to resolve issues. What
resolved issues was mutual understanding.
I would like to conclude by underscoring that the
Republic of Mozambique understands that the nexus
linking international development, security, and
harmony between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 justifies the need
for a permanent convergence within the multilateral
approach. If we can achieve the objectives of the
Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative, we will
contribute to the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 16, which aims to,
“Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development, provide access to justice
for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels”.
I thank everyone for their attention, although we
have repeated much that has already been said. We
believe that other speakers will add even more to our
already lengthy discussion.

23-0909111/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

(spoke in English)
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bicalho Cozendey (Brazil): We are very
pleased to speak before the Security Council at one
of the last meetings presided over by the Mozambican
presidency this month. I would like to pay due
tribute to the outstanding work of Ambassador Pedro
Comissário Afonso and his team. I would also like to
thank the briefers — Ms. Duarte, Mr. Ibn Chambas and
Mr. Manzoni — for the information and assessments
they provided.
When
the
Council
previously
convened
(see S/PV.9106) to discuss the Silencing the Guns
initiative a little more than two years ago, the
atmosphere was cautiously optimistic. Although
challenges remained, important peace agreements had
been reached in South Sudan and Ethiopia. The situation
in the Horn of Africa was improving, and important
electoral processes had just been concluded. Our
outlook today is a little more sombre. The coronavirus
disease pandemic and the conflict in Europe have
disrupted trade flows and raised the price of grains
and other essential commodities, thereby increasing
food insecurity and lowering living standards. The
situation in the Sahel continues to demand attention,
with ruptures of constitutional order and the advance of
militant groups towards the coastal countries in West
Africa. In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the re-emergence of the illegal armed
group the Mouvement du 23 mars has contributed to
the deterioration of the already dramatic security and
humanitarian situation in the region. It must be pointed
out, however, that there are positive signs of renewed
determination on the part of African Governments
and societies to bring lasting peace and security to
the continent.
First of all, I have in mind the continued
commitment of the African Union to the Silencing
the Guns initiative, which was just confirmed by
the establishment of the monitoring and evaluation
mechanism and the appointment of Mr. Ibn Chambas
as High Representative for the Silencing the Guns
Initiative. The effort that the countries in the Great
Lakes region and Central Africa have devoted to the
diplomatic endeavours aimed at tackling the conflict
12/29

30/03/2023

in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is
another encouraging sign.
African countries have not only shown the
resolve needed to promote political and diplomatic
solutions to conflicts on the continent but have also
joined forces to provide appropriate responses on the
ground when needed. The Multinational Joint Task
Force that is tackling terrorism in the Lake Chad basin
and the Joint Task Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel are important examples of African solutions to
African problems. The regional force deployed by the
East African Community in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo can be another tool for bringing
stability to that region. Adequate assistance from the
international community is indispensable to the success
of those efforts. That support should be provided on
the basis of strict compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law and in full respect
for the principle of non-interference in the affairs of
sovereign States.
The silencing the guns pledge is but one element
of that ambitious vision for the future of Africa,
expressed in the Solemn Declaration adopted in 2013
during the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of
Pan-Africanism. Brazil is proud to have participated in
that process at the highest level and to have witnessed
such an inspiring demonstration of African solidarity.
That vision, which was further outlined in the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, was one of a prosperous
Africa, based on inclusive growth and sustainable
development in a peaceful and secure Africa. Indeed,
a prosperous, integrated and united Africa, based on
good governance, democracy, social inclusion and
respect for human rights, justice and the rule of law, is
a necessary precondition for a conflict-free continent.
That is the essence of what we are debating today.
Security and development are indeed closely interlinked
and mutually reinforcing.
Official development assistance, whether multilateral
or bilateral, humanitarian or development-driven, is
important, but it is essentially a temporary solution. What
developing countries, especially those in Africa, need is
a global economic, financial and trade architecture that
allows them to fulfil their potential. In that context, I would
like to point to the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as
a uniquely placed enabler for mobilizing international
attention and supporting nationally defined peacebuilding
priorities, in terms both of financing and expertise. At the
same time, technical cooperation, notably South-South
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

cooperation, plays a key role in capacity-building. The
PBC’s accumulated experience in promoting national
ownership, inclusivity and institution-building also
provides useful guidelines for societies seeking prosperity
and security as their way forward.
Brazil has been actively contributing to African
security and development, whether through SouthSouth technical cooperation projects, participation in
peacekeeping operations or engagement in the fight
against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, among other
initiatives. As a developing nation, attached to Africa
by close historical and cultural ties, Brazil stands
ready to assist the continent in fulfilling its vision of
a prosperous future when guns can no longer be heard.
Ms. Zeya (United States of America): At the outset,
I would like to thank President Nyusi for presiding over
today’s important discussion and to congratulate him
on Mozambique’s successful and ongoing Security
Council presidency. I would also like to thank all our
speakers for their informative briefings.
As our briefers shared today, we need a departure
from status quo solutions if we are to silence the guns on
the African continent. Left unchecked, deadly conflicts
will divide African societies; corruption will impede
economic progress; mismanagement will squander
natural resources; food insecurity will heighten the
risk of famine and malnutrition; inequity will erode
social and economic gains and repression will stifle
the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Those challenges are especially pressing for
communities in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, and
they require a comprehensive approach. That is why the
United States’ strategy regarding sub-Saharan Africa
calls for us to leverage all our diplomatic, development
and defence capabilities, strengthen our trade and
commercial ties, focus on digital ecosystems and
rebalance towards urban hubs in order to realize a new
vision for how the African people can shape the future
of Africa and the world.
As Vice-President Harris made clear while visiting
Ghana this week, the United States is committed to
investing in African ingenuity and creativity to spur
robust economic growth and opportunities in Africa
and beyond. To that end, this week the Vice-President
announced more than $1 billion in economic
empowerment initiatives for women in Africa.
However, economic development alone is not the
master key to unlocking peace and stability. As we have

S/PV.9299

heard today, societies prosper most when they combine
robust democracy with development. President Biden
has repeatedly stated that we are at an inflection point
when it comes to the future of democracy, which has
faced severe setbacks in many parts of Africa, with
seven undemocratic transitions of power occurring
in the past two years in West and Central Africa. At
the same time, however, developments in recent years
in Nigeria, Kenya, Zambia, Malawi and the Gambia
have shown that democracy can still triumph via the
ballot box.
The events of 2022 put into stark relief what we
already know, which is that democratic governance,
grounded in the rule of law, accountability and respect
for human rights, remains the best tool we have for
unleashing human potential, maintaining international
peace and security, fostering prosperity and upholding
human dignity. The United States is committed to the
full achievement of all the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), and I am particularly heartened to see
the discussion centred around SDG 16 — peace, justice
and strong institutions.
As the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
recognizes, sustainable development, which balances
economic, social and environmental concerns, must
be advanced alongside the other equal and interlinked
pillars of the Charter of the United Nations, including
peace and security, human rights and the rule of law.
Those democratic principles, along with those in the
African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the Silencing the
Guns Roadmap, provide an affirmative vision for
sustainable peace, development and security in Africa.
We also recognize the vital role that United Nations
arms embargoes play in promoting the Silencing the
Guns agenda and limiting the flow of weapons into
conflict zones.
As our national security strategy articulates,
democratic governance consistently outperforms
authoritarianism in protecting human dignity, leads
to more prosperous and resilient societies, creates
stronger and more reliable economic and security
partners and encourages peace and stability. That is
why today we are proud to be co-hosting the second
Summit for Democracy with the leaders of Costa Rica,
the Netherlands, the Republic of Korea and Zambia.
That diverse group of co-hosts underscores a global
signal of demand for accountable, transparent and
rights-respecting governance and commitment to
collective action.

23-0909113/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

However, collective action at the global level will
not work without empowerment at the local level. I
have observed that time and time again in my travels,
including during my visits last year to Mozambique
and earlier this month to the Gambia, Mauritania and
Senegal. From Southern to West Africa, local leaders
and civil-society representatives have emphasized to
me how imperative it is that they have the ability to
set their own agendas, develop solutions and receive
resources and capacity-building support in order to
anchor peace and security at home. In line with SDG 16,
we support inclusive, participatory and representative
decision-making at all levels.
Members of civil society, including religious
and traditional leaders and actors, are essential
partners in advancing more open, secure, free and
prosperous societies. As active members of their
communities, civil society actors have insights on
key opportunities to promote peace and stability and
represent the strongest bulwark from destabilizing
forces, and we must support their strength and resilience.
Ultimately, we believe that the best strategy for saving
lives, building lasting stability and disrupting the cycle
of violence is to prevent conflicts before they happen.
Through our new 10-year United States Strategy to
Prevent Conflict and Promote Stability, we are actively
working with partners to ensure that diverse perspectives
are included in the decision-making around peace and
security, and that local voices and locally led solutions
grounded in mutual trust and accountability are at the
forefront of building inclusive resilience. The strategy
aims to shore up long-term civilian security, particularly
in Mozambique and coastal West African States that
share growing extremist threats on their borders.
I applaud President Nyusi for his leadership of
efforts to counter vulnerabilities to terrorism, bolster
recovery from its impacts and address the root causes
of instability in northern Mozambique. We are proud to
support Mozambique’s plans to promote reconciliation,
inclusive and sustainable development, and resilience in
historically marginalized and conflict-affected areas,
as well as civil society and private sector initiatives to
foster pathways for inclusive economic growth in order
to increase employment among young Mozambicans.
I am pleased to share that last week, on 24 March, we
transmitted to the United States Congress our 10-year
plan to implement the United States Strategy to Prevent
Conflict and Promote Stability. We are launching the
next phase of that groundbreaking initiative in order to
14/29

30/03/2023

reboot our approach to conflict prevention and help a
select set of partner countries progress towards a more
peaceful and resilient future. Each plan tailors our shared
approach to the unique challenges and opportunities
of the local and regional context. We will continue to
emphasize and elevate local voices and solutions to
prevent conflict and promote stability. We understand
that the context in each country inevitably changes, and
those plans will adapt and evolve as necessary.
As President Biden has noted, instability
anywhere in our interconnected world can have
global repercussions. The United States is committed
to strengthening global resiliency and democratic
renewal and to promoting open, peaceful, inclusive and
self-reliant nations that become strong economic and
security partners that are capable of addressing shared
challenges. We look forward to working together to
realize those shared goals.
Mr. Al Nahyan (United Arab Emirates): I would like
to take this opportunity to commend Mozambique for
its successful Security Council presidency. We welcome
the opportunity to exchange views on preventing and
resolving conflicts in Africa. Mozambique’s historical
journey to peace and progress is an inspiration to us
all. I also want to thank the briefers for their insightful
statements today.
In previous years, the Council has discussed the
Silencing the Guns agenda several times, and there is
clearly a need to take stock of where the agenda is today.
The idea that turmoil in one region of the world will not
spread to another is an illusion. Not only is it in our
collective interest to ensure the success of the initiative,
but it is also our moral imperative to enable peace under
international law in any way that we can. The pursuit of
peace is not restricted to African Governments alone.
Meetings such as this one are an opportunity to learn
from one another. I would therefore like to make the
following three points.
First, we should fully leverage the continent’s toolkit
of conflict resolution and peacebuilding practices. Over
the past two decades, the African Union and subregional
organizations have crafted conflict-resolution toolkits
that centre African views. The recent diplomatic
initiative led by the African Union in Ethiopia is one
such commendable story. So too is the deployment of
the Panel of the Wise and FemWise-Africa. The role of
the international community in that endeavour cannot
be understated. And although each conflict is unique,
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

the Council has the responsibility to encourage African
mediation efforts and leverage them whenever possible.
The Council can advance that in very concrete ways
by engaging more systematically with regional and
subregional mediators, as envisaged under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, and by giving
peace efforts the time and space required for them to
bear fruit.
Secondly, silencing the guns is about more than
conflict resolution. It demands a focus on the root
causes, a determination to combat extreme ideologies
and the continued consolidation of development gains.
The Sustainable Development Goals and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063 are guiding frameworks. They set
out goals that seek to inform and complement national
priorities. Ultimately, they enable Governments and
individuals to lay the foundation for more prosperous
and peaceful societies that include women and girls.
We know that when women participate actively in the
economy, they are more resilient to violence and other
threats. Deepening partnerships between regional
organizations and local women leaders can promote
their roles in conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Beyond local and national efforts, the international
community can lend its support in a number of ways,
including by ensuring that development programmes
mitigate those economic and climate vulnerabilities
and by promoting grass-roots peacebuilding initiatives.
Thirdly and finally, we must stay ahead of the
emerging and increasingly complex threats. The
rise of extremism and the misuse of technological
progress are distinct threats, and when combined
they magnify the challenges to peace and security.
Complex threats demand equally complex responses,
which necessitate levels of investment that are often far
beyond the available means. Anticipatory, coordinated
action among States — supported by the international
community — is key. Let me give an example: foreign
direct investment to African countries reached a record
of $83 billion in 2021; yet, that accounts for only 5.2 per
cent of global foreign direct investment. We cannot
expect peace if we do not invest in it. Sustainable
development and peacebuilding go hand in hand.
Supporting those efforts is much more cost-effective
than paying the price of instability and conflict.
Silencing the Guns continues to be one of the best,
most comprehensive representations of African visions
on building and sustaining peace. It demonstrates
that local and regional perspectives and practices

S/PV.9299

are paramount for effective conflict prevention and
resolution. And it is the duty of the international
community to support African countries, communities
and citizens on their path to peace and prosperity.
Mr. Liu Yuxi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mozambique for convening today’s
important open debate, as well as you, President
Filipe Nyusi, for presiding over it in person. I also
thank Ms. Cristina Duarte, Special Adviser on Africa
to the United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Mirko
Manzoni, Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Mozambique, and Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, African
Union High Representative for the Silencing the Guns
Initiative, for their briefings.
Africa is a continent on the rise. It is a fertile
land of hope, brimming with vigour and vitality.
African countries and peoples are actively exploring
development paths suited to their national conditions,
effectively responding to multiple political, economic
and social challenges, safeguarding regional peace
and promoting sustainable development. The African
continent is an important force in the world today.
Without peace and development in Africa, there can be
no stability and prosperity in the world.
Against that new backdrop, the Security Council
must give serious thought to how to strengthen
international coordination to better help Africa cope
with its challenges, how to forge synergies between
development policies to address the root causes of
conflict and how to bolster United Nations cooperation
with Africa to provide enhanced support to the latter.
First, it is important to support Africa’s leading role
in its own peace and security affairs. Africans know
Africa the best, and African countries are the core
force in ensuring their own peace and security. The
international community should adhere to the principle
of seeking African solutions to African problems and
provide assistance on the basis of respect and trust,
rather than interfering in other countries’ internal
affairs or even acting on their behalf in the name of
human rights.
For those countries in post-conflict situations,
we must support their own choice of development
paths and governance models that suit their own
national conditions. There is no room for blind
criticism and finding fault at every turn, let alone
for exploiting the opportunity to engage in so-called
democratic transformations.

23-0909115/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, it is important to support African
countries in their security capacity-building endeavours.
Enhancing Africa’s own security capacity is the only
way to address both the symptoms and root causes of
conflicts in Africa. We need to help African countries
build professional, efficient and robust security sectors in
order to tackle genuine security threats such as terrorism,
extremism and intercommunal conflicts.
In August, China facilitated the adoption of a
presidential statement by the Council (S/PRST/2022/6)
calling for support for security capacity-building in
African countries in a comprehensive and targeted
manner with tailor-made measures in line with the actual
needs of African countries. That presidential statement
provides important political guidance for security
cooperation with Africa.
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa
must respect the views of the host countries and support
their efforts to strengthen security sector development
and reform.
The arms embargoes imposed by the Council on
the Sudan, South Sudan and others have hindered those
countries in their development of a security capacity and
should therefore be adjusted or lifted in a timely manner.
Thirdly, it is important to support Africa in achieving
sustainable development. Development and security are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing. President Xi
Jinping has proposed the Global Development Initiative,
emphasizing the need to prioritize development
cooperation in global macro policy coordination, address
prominent issues and challenges in national governance
through development and to forge a global community of
development with a shared future.
When working with Africa, the international
community must strengthen cooperation in line with
initiatives such as the African Union (AU) Agenda 2063
and the Silencing the Guns initiative. It must support
Africa in advancing infrastructure development,
accelerating industrialization, responding to pandemics,
eliminating poverty, boosting employment and
promoting the swift implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The underlying
cause of Africa’s development issue is the unfair
international economic order. Developed countries must
therefore shoulder their due responsibilities, honour
their development aid commitments and pay back the
historical debt owed to Africa.
16/29

30/03/2023

Fourthly, it is important to support Africa’s efforts
to seek strength through unity. Last year marked the
twentieth anniversary of the launching of the African
Union. Over the past two decades, the AU has held high
the banner of strength through unity, solidarity and
cooperation. It has been committed to speaking with one
voice in international affairs, exploring a development
path suitable for Africa and effectively maintaining
peace and security, development and stability on
the continent. AU-led peacekeeping operations are a
useful practice in seeking African solutions to African
problems and should receive flexible, predictable and
sustainable financial support.
China firmly supports Africa’s in-depth
participation in the Group of 20, and the group of
Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, known
as BRICS, as well as other mechanisms. China is a
staunch advocate for Africa playing a greater role in
global governance and international affairs.
China has stood alongside Africa through thick and
thin. China will always consider Africa a high priority in
its diplomatic relations and prioritize peace and security
in Africa in its work at the Council. China and Africa
have worked together to launch a partnership initiative
for Africa’s development, to promote the concept of
peaceful development in the Horn of Africa and to
implement nine Chinese-African cooperation projects
and build a high-level China-Africa community with
a shared future. We are ready to work together with
the international community to realize the vision of a
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security, help Africa to silence the guns, protect that
source of hope for the world and build a community
with a shared future for humankind.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to congratulate Mozambique for taking the initiative
to convene this important debate on the impact of
development policies on the implementation of the
African Union’s Silencing the Guns initiative. The
remarkable experience of Mozambique, shared by His
Excellency President Filipe Nyusi, and the briefings
we heard this morning from Special Adviser Cristina
Duarte, African Union High Representative Mohamed
Ibn Chambas and Personal Envoy Mirko Manzoni
were particularly enlightening with regard to the
magnitude of the commitments to be undertaken and
the responsibilities to be assumed.
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

When the African Union launched its Silencing
the Guns initiative in 2013, the picture of crises and
conflicts on the continent was stark: the Sahel was in
turmoil; Somalia, the Sudan and South Sudan in the
Horn of Africa were enveloped in major crises; and the
Great Lakes region was suffering chronic instability.
Ten years after the launch of that initiative, which is
rooted in the African Peace and Security Architecture,
it is clear that the African Union is playing a more
crucial role than ever in preventing and resolving crises
on the continent and is bold in its ability to provide
African perspectives on peace and security.
The African Union has been at the heart of peace
agreements in the Sudan, in the search for a solution
to the crisis in Ethiopia and in State restoration in
Somalia. It continues to support the reconciliation
process in Libya and is making a major contribution to
concrete solutions in the Sahel. However, despite that
progress, conflicts and crises persist in Africa and are
affecting the daily lives of African populations. Violent
extremism, terrorism, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the intrusion of armed groups
pose a real threat to peace and security in Africa.
Most of those crises are partly driven by poverty,
inequality and social exclusion and fuelled by the
exploitation of natural resources. The rise in conflicts,
and their links to socioeconomic crises, therefore makes
it essential to reflect in depth on the nexus between
security and development, which are two sides of the
same coin, or rather two pillars of conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Indeed, development plays a crucial role in our
efforts to promote peace in Africa. The implementation
of the Silencing the Guns initiative and the actions to
be taken must therefore be aligned with that reality.
The substantial cost of the absence of development on
the cycle of violence and the resurgence of conflict
is evident. Poverty and a lack of prospects for young
people are risk factors for conflict and the resurgence of
conflict. Consequently, young people fall prey to armed
and terrorist groups, whose activities are a huge factor
in the proliferation of guns. It is therefore essential to
closely align the work of addressing security issues
together with efforts to enact development policies
in order to reinforce the conditions conducive to the
implementation of the Silencing the Guns initiative.
States that are fragile or in post-conflict situations
and therefore very often unable to fulfil their governance
responsibilities are the most exposed to conflict. In

S/PV.9299

order to increase the effectiveness of our actions in
support of peace and strengthen the resilience of such
countries, we must systematically combine the many
crisis prevention and resolution initiatives with the
implementation of quick-impact development projects
and ensure that the international financial institutions
are involved and the private sector is mobilized. In
the Horn of Africa and the Sahel, the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund should support
reconstruction, infrastructure restoration projects and
the restoration of basic services. Failing to support
countries that are already weakened, especially by
terrorism, amounts to ignoring the threat posed to
international peace and security. We continue to believe
that the risk of escalating conflicts can be reduced
by developing reliable development projects and
contributing to prevention and peacebuilding efforts
through appropriate economic investment.
We cannot address the impact of development
policies on the implementation of the Silencing the
Guns initiative without highlighting the constraints
that undermine development in Africa and therefore
tend to fuel crises. Illicit financial flows are a major
obstacle to Africa’s development, as they drain
hard currency holdings and domestic resources and
exacerbate poverty and inequality. The annual losses
of just over $88 billion due to illicit financial flows
alone have a significant impact on States’ development.
Fighting that scourge is an imperative that can help to
curb conflicts and silence the weapons. The adoption
of the Yaoundé Declaration, encouraging States to
cooperate on taxation and illicit financial flows, shows
the interest that African countries have in those issues.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of establishing development policies that are in line with
the specific needs of African States and their peoples
especially. That is the only way that development can
have an effective impact on the implementation of the
Silencing the Guns initiative. It is a human-centred
approach that gives people the tools they need to
increase their resilience.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the personal participation of
President Nyusi in today’s meeting and thank the
briefers for their statements. We are grateful to the
Mozambican presidency for the choice of today’s topic.
We have often stressed the importance of considering
the influence of the whole range of socioeconomic
issues on peace and security. We agree with the views

23-0909117/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

presented in the concept note (see S/2023/148/Rev.1)
that the reasons for many of the current conflicts in
Africa lie in the continent’s past of colonialism, slavery
and the pillaging of natural resources. Unfortunately
the decolonization of the 1960s did not necessarily lead
to full-fledged economic and political sovereignty for
the newly independent States. Direct oppression was
replaced by subtler forms of neocolonialism, which even
today help to perpetuate economic underdevelopment,
poverty and political instability in African countries.
Many African States have laboured under various
unilateral restrictions and sanctions for decades. Those
problems can be catalysts for the emergence of new
conflicts or the exacerbation of old ones.
If we are to establish lasting peace, we have to
understand the underlying causes of conflicts, each of
which has its own origins and specific features. There
must be a comprehensive approach to resolving them
that must go beyond the political process to include
development efforts. The ultimate goal of those efforts
is to enable States to ensure the welfare and security of
their citizens through their own efforts. However, we
take a cautious approach to directly linking the goals
of sustaining peace, peacebuilding and peacekeeping to
sustainable development and the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Of course
there is a connection, but it is not always direct. It is
important to stress that peace alone cannot guarantee
development, nor development peace. Furthermore,
we are concerned about the growing popularity of
tying security to elements that belong in the area of
development, such as climate, access to water resources
and so forth. That diverts attention and resources from
the actual task of promoting development as such
and diminishes the importance of that agenda in the
United Nations system.
Many African countries, whether they have been
through conflict or not, need support through technology
transfers and expertise, industrial and agricultural
development, the rebuilding of infrastructure, job
creation and the strengthening of health and social
protection systems. Development efforts should
promote social cohesion and ensure an equitable
distribution of the benefits of economic growth. We
believe that providing material and technical assistance
to African States is a moral obligation of developed
countries, many of which owe much of their prosperity
to resources taken from the continent. At the same
time, developed countries still have not fulfilled the
18/29

30/03/2023

commitment they made half a century ago to increasing
official development assistance to 0.7 per cent of their
gross domestic product. In 2021 that figure was only
0.33 per cent. In other words, we are talking about
a shortfall of at least $200 billion in non-repayable
assistance to developing countries annually.
At the same time, we want to emphasize that
international support should be provided exclusively
with the consent of the host Government, in accordance
with its priorities and with respect for its sovereignty.
It is unacceptable for donors to make the provision of
assistance conditional on the fulfilment of political
demands or to link it to the human rights situation or
other arbitrary factors. We believe that it is the political
resolution of conflicts, the stabilization of the security
situation and the transition to sustainable development
that provide the basis for improving the human rights
situation and building democratic institutions in a
given country, not the other way around.
Needless to say, the primary responsibility both for
preventing conflicts and overcoming their consequences
belongs to African States themselves. The continent
has come a long way in recent decades in terms of
building a regional peace and security architecture. In
today’s very difficult conditions and against a global
backdrop of political and economic upheaval, African
countries have become increasingly assertive in finding
regional solutions to their problems and are trying to
pursue independent and sovereign foreign and domestic
policies. We welcome the growing role of the African
Union and subregional organizations in preventing
conflicts and mediating disputes. The African Union
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020, which has been extended
until 2030, is a vital initiative. Against that backdrop,
we consider it reasonable for African States to raise
the issue of the provision of material and financial
assistance by the United Nations in their efforts to
maintain international peace and security.
It is well known that the Soviet Union provided
significant support to the nations of Africa in their
struggle against colonialism, racism and apartheid,
as it helped them obtain and protect their sovereignty
and consistently supported them in establishing
their statehood, strengthening their capacity for
self-defence, creating the basis for their national
economies and training experts. Thanks to Soviet
assistance, entire sectors of the economy and vitally
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

important infrastructure facilities were created, which
has generated stability and peaceful development for
many countries.
Russia continues to offer support in ensuring
peace and security in Africa with a view to helping
the States of the region develop their own capacities
to contain crises. One of the areas in which we are
cooperating is the creation of effective armed forces
and law enforcement, including to combat the terrorist
threat. In the academies of the Ministry of Defence
and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Russia, military
personnel from dozens of African States are being
hosted. We attached priority attention to the issue of
transferring technology and expertise without any
preconditions, as well as to development of industry
and critical infrastructure on the continent.
Russia is taking part in projects in the area of
industrialization, digitalization and agriculture. We
continue to provide assistance in the area of electricity
generation, which for the moment only covers a quarter
of the continent’s needs. Today we are providing new
environmentally clean technologies, first and foremost
nuclear energy. Russia is also stepping up its efforts
in providing State fellowships for free education to
African students in medicine, teaching advanced
technology, transport and other civilian specialties. We
are also developing partnerships in such vital areas as
health care and biological and epidemiological security.
Russia is also providing assistance to African
countries through various United Nations agencies
such as the World Food Programme, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations. Our country is
also contributing to easing the debt burden in Africa.
To date, in the framework of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative, over $20 billion worth of the
principal balance of the debt has been forgiven.
The future development of our cooperation
will be discussed during the second Russia-Africa
summit, which will take place from 26 to 29 July in
Saint Petersburg. Its watchwords are consistent with
the theme of today’s event: “for peace, security and
development”. Our joint efforts on the flagship initiative
of the African Union to end all armed conflicts on the
continent by 2030 is included in the draft plan of action
on cooperation between the Russian Federation and

S/PV.9299

the African Union for the period 2023–2025, whose
adoption is expected in the course of the summit. We
expect that its outcome will make a contribution to
overall normalization on the African continent.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s open debate. I am also
grateful for the briefers’ briefings.
Development policies in the implementation of the
Silencing the Guns campaign are extremely important,
and we commend Mozambique for holding an open
debate on this matter. With this in mind, I would like
to highlight three points that Japan considers essential
for today’s topic.
First, addressing the root causes of conflict and
terrorism is indispensable for regional stability. The
vulnerability of State and local institutions is one of
the fundamental causes of conflicts and terrorism.
Preventing the creation of an environment where young
people are attracted to extremism is necessary. Based
on this recognition, Japan promotes institution-building
and the strengthening of governance, including
legislative, administrative and judicial systems.
Consolidation of democracy and good governance
under the rule of law is crucial for peace and stability,
which enables sustainable development in Africa. In
this regard, broad, inclusive and democratic public
participation including by women and youth in national
and local governance, is essential.
Secondly, approaches at the subregional, national,
local and community level are needed, as is the
human security approach. We cannot overemphasize
the important role played by the African Union (AU)
and other African subregional groups. In this regard,
we wish to emphasize the need to strengthen the selfreliance and resilience of communities, as that is one of
the best ways to address root causes.
Collaboration between communities and central
and local governments based on mutual trust is also
required. Based on this idea, Japan, together with the
United Nations Development Programme, Tunisia and
other international partners, held a conference last July
in Tunis to share good examples of the communityoriented policing model among security-sector officials
from 17 African countries. We also underscore the need
to protect forcibly displaced people, including refugees
and internally displaced persons, through supporting
local communities to find durable solutions.

23-0909119/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

That leads to my third point: the critical importance
of African ownership in conjunction with international
partnerships. As our Prime Minister Kishida stated last
year on the occasion of the eighth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development, Japan aspires
to be a partner growing together with Africa. It will
help realize the resilient Africa that Africa itself seeks
to become.
In this regard, realizing economic development and
addressing inequality are critically important. We are
proud to be consistent partners of Africa, working on
tailored, sustainable and transparent quality cooperation
based on the ownership of each country and region.
This cooperation covers extensive areas, such as health,
education, agriculture, capacity-building, climate
change, physical and institutional infrastructure and so
forth. We also support Africa’s own conflict-prevention
and peacekeeping efforts. We assist through capacitybuilding for peacekeeping personnel in close cooperation
with the United Nations. Japan has also been supporting
the AU Peace Fund, with the aim of training human
resources in the AU, Regional Economic Communities
and some African countries.
Furthermore, consultations between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council are
important to address common security challenges. We
also value the work by the Peacebuilding Commission
with its unique advising, bridging and convening role
on peacebuilding.
To conclude, these three points — addressing root
causes, approaches at subregional, national, local, and
community levels, and African ownership in conjunction
with international partnerships — are the basis of Japan’s
policy toward peace and stability in Africa. Stability
is a prerequisite if Africa is to unleash the potential
of its people, and it is essential for realizing African
development. We are fully committed to partnering
with Africa to achieve this goal so that the guns can be
silenced at last.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): Thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s important discussion, and I thank the
Special Adviser on Africa to the Secretary-General, the
African Union High Representative for the Silencing the
Guns Initiative, and the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Mozambique for their insightful briefings.
Malta fully recognizes the intrinsic value that
socioeconomic considerations have in promoting longterm social cohesion, peace and stability. It is essential
20/29

30/03/2023

to periodically reiterate this message in the Security
Council Chamber, where we are daily confronted with
the struggle for solutions towards the root causes of
conflict and violence.
Malta reaffirms that development, peace and
security and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. There can be no sustainable development
without peace and no peace without sustainable
development. A holistic political process underpinned
by respect for the rule of law, democratic principles and
good governance is made possible when all stakeholders
are included.
Today I will focus on three key messages that
can assist in the realization of the Silencing the Guns
agenda: first, on the focus on children’s education and
literacy as pillars to end discrimination, radicalization,
violence and conflict; secondly, on the critical support
for the youth, peace and security agenda and its
inextricable link to the Silencing the Guns agenda; and
thirdly, on the centrality of gender equality for ensuring
inclusive participation, equitable development and
political governance, as underpinned by the women,
peace and security agenda.
First, the preamble to the United Nations Declaration
of the Rights of the Child says: “[M]ankind owes to the
child the best it has to give.” We should put that objective
at the core of our priorities at the Council and ensure
a conducive environment for our children’s aspirations
to flourish. When schools are targeted during armed
conflict, children’s right to education is violated. Malta
remains deeply committed to protecting and promoting
education and literacy for all children. That should be
our cornerstone for building more resilient, inclusive
and sustainable societies.
Secondly, Africa is a young continent. As actors
of change, the contributions of young women and
men to decision-making and peace processes must be
supported. Hearing impassioned pleas by an 18-yearold from Cameroon at a meeting last month during our
presidency to remove barriers to youth participation
drives us to do more for our young people (seer S/PV.
S/PV.9258). Ensuring that disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes are both age-responsive
and gender-responsive, with comprehensive physical
and psychosocial support, can provide young people
with meaningful alternatives to violence. Malta supports
the essential work of the Peacebuilding Commission in
also advancing the youth, peace and security agenda.
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Thirdly, gender equality and women’s empowerment
are central to sustainable peace, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations. Religious and traditional
leaders in Africa continue to play important roles in
promoting women’s leadership in their communities.
By sensitizing them, they are preventing sexual and
gender-based violence, combating impunity for those
crimes and supporting victims.
Development policies must be designed to promote a
grass-roots-based approach to addressing the root causes
of conflict. It is clear that climate, conflict and conflictinduced food insecurity have left a number of African
countries more vulnerable and less resilient to meeting
the current and future shocks. That, in turn, drives their
overall humanitarian needs and stifles progress, most
notably their overarching objectives with respect to
the Sustainable Development Goals. When sustainable
investments are facilitated, entire communities can
be uplifted from the scourge of financial poverty and
rejoined into decision-making processes.
The Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is one such example.
Our national contributions to the PBF over the years stem
from our conviction that peacebuilding is an integral part
of our multilateral project. We strongly believe that, if
we all contribute, we can, and will, achieve significant
results. We also highlight the extensive support that the
European Union provides through the Global Gateway
initiative, with at least €150 billion to be invested in sectors
such as transport education, health and energy by 2027.
Early-warning systems, as well as mediation,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction
and rehabilitation, are critical tools for achieving longlasting results in many settings. We commend the work
of the African Union in that regard.
In conclusion, the achievement of the Silencing the
Guns initiative requires the commitment and cooperation
of all stakeholders in Africa, with the support of the
international community. When Governments, regional
organizations, international partners, civil society and
the private sector work together, we are one step closer
to a peaceful and prosperous Africa for all.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the speakers for their
valuable briefings this morning.
This is a key debate for the Security Council and
the United Nations system as a whole, leading us to
the premise that the current challenges to peace can be

S/PV.9299

overcome only through international cooperation and
revitalized multilateralism, focused on investing in people
as the main factor in conflict prevention and resolution.
For that reason, which is not an insignificant one,
Ecuador welcomes the convening of this meeting,
which complements the high-level debate held two days
ago on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional bodies in countering terrorism
and preventing violent extremism (see S/PV.9296).
Ecuador commends the African Union’s resolve
in its goal of silencing the guns in Africa and the
development of its Master Roadmap, which sets out
practical steps to rid the continent of conflict and create
favourable conditions for its growth, development
and integration. The international community should
support that objective, under the principle of national
ownership and in the context of the African Union’s
Agenda 2063, as discussed at the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the African Union, held in
Ethiopia on 18 and 19 February.
A comprehensive and action-oriented approach
enables peacebuilding. We are witnessing tremendous
efforts by African countries in conflict situations
to overcome conflict, transcend the impacts of a
tragic history and move towards a shared vision of a
peaceful and prosperous future. In that context, we
welcome the fact that peace agreements and electoral
processes have been concluded, allowing efforts to be
directed towards identifying priorities and building
the necessary institutions to achieve development and
sustainable peace.
In order to achieve those ambitious efforts,
issues such as trafficking in small arms and light
weapons must be tackled. In that area, the support
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
in the context of its Global Firearms Programme,
the Economic Community of West African States
and other subregional organizations is key. Equally
important is the role of peacekeeping operations and
other Council-mandated entities in combating the illicit
transfer and destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons, in the context of
resolution 2220 (2015).
Inequality,
exclusion
and
marginalization
exacerbate humanitarian crises, and human rights
violations and abuses undermine the social fabric,
fuelling cycles of violence. Organized crime plays a

23-0909121/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

destabilizing role that transcends borders. We therefore
believe that the fight against that scourge must include
specific efforts in border areas.
Disinformation — a breeding ground for
recruitment into terrorism and violent extremism, with
transnational links that benefit from illegal trafficking in
arms, explosives, drugs and natural resources — must
be combated by utilizing strategic communications
that reach the sectors and areas most susceptible to
recruitment into such scourges.
Today we must also remember the distinct impact
of armed violence and trafficking in firearms on women
and girls. We encourage greater efforts to combat sexual
and gender-based violence. We also reaffirm the role of
women in political participation and crisis and conflict
prevention and their essential role in reaching lasting
peace agreements.
Likewise, young people are key to efforts towards
adaptability, inclusion and the promotion of national
identity, rendering the youth, peace and security agenda
an appropriate tool for supporting the building of
social cohesion.
State presence and capacity-building must bring
about a sense of belonging. Respect, promoting diversity
and fostering ethnic and religious tolerance should be
nurtured in the classroom. In addition to being a tool for
development, education is a conduit for the citizenship
and national pride necessary for peace.
Finally, I would like to highlight the fact that,
through his testimony at a meeting of the Peacebuilding
Commission yesterday morning, President Nyusi
provided us with a model example of the peacebuilding
process in Mozambique, which should be an incentive
for countries in conflict or post-conflict situations to
approach that advisory body and benefit from its catalytic
potential to foster collaborative work within the United
Nations system and leverage the support of regional and
international financial institutions.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this timely debate. As we have
heard today, President Nyusi’s personal leadership in
delivering the Maputo Accord for Peace and National
Reconciliation offers many valuable lessons for silencing
the guns across the African continent. I am grateful to all
our briefers for their presentations.
The human and financial costs of conflict are
unsustainable. Done well, development is the best form
of prevention. Durable peace, security and development
22/29

30/03/2023

can be secured only through integrated solutions that
bring together the breadth of United Nations and African
Union (AU) development expertise. That also means
ensuring that countries can access adequate development
financing for taking action. And as President Nyusi said
earlier, development and security should be underpinned
by respect for human rights and their defence. I would
like to make three additional points.
First, the United Kingdom is committed to long-term,
mutually beneficial partnerships with African countries
to promote economic development. In that context, the
Prime Minister will host the United Kingdom-African
Investment Summit in London in April 2024. The
Summit will promote two-way trade and investment
with African countries to create jobs and growth. Its aim
is to support initiatives to encourage intra-African trade
and women’s economic empowerment. We know that
economic growth and stability contribute to longer-term
peace and security.
Secondly, the United Kingdom strongly supports
increased collaboration within the United Nations on
development and peace and security. In addition to the
work of the Security Council on peace and security,
that means complementary and mutually reinforcing
peacebuilding and development responses. The
discussion yesterday in the Peacebuilding Commission
on Mozambique’s recent journey was a good example
of that. The root causes of conflict and violence have to
be addressed based on holistic analysis and the use of
integrated solutions.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom continues to encourage
enhanced partnerships among the United Nations,
the African Union, the African Development Bank,
the World Bank and other regional partners. We work
closely with the African Union on shared priorities
such as strengthening health systems and mitigating
the effects of climate change. The United Kingdom is
proud to support the AU Network of African Women
in Conflict Prevention and Mediation, which is an
important continental tool for helping to prevent and
manage conflict.
Lastly, the United Kingdom will remain a
committed partner for advancing development, peace
and security across the African continent, including
through support for the implementation of the Silencing
the Guns initiative.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I must begin by thanking
Mozambique for organizing this important debate. It
is well understood and widely appreciated that without
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

peace, efforts at sustainable development are impeded.
What is less appreciated is the impact of development
policies on peace, and that in turn has translated into
inadequate support for efforts to ensure that development
policies do not detract from peace but rather have
a positive impact on it. We therefore welcome the
insightful briefings by Special Adviser Cristina Duarte,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, African Union High
Representative for the Silencing the Guns Initiative, and
Mr. Mirko Manzoni, Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Mozambique. We believe that the briefers’
rich contributions to the debate will help the Council
better unite its views and identify further ways by which
its intersecting actions with other organs and bodies
can support Africa’s ambition to pacify the continent by
2030, in line with our commitment to silencing the guns.

S/PV.9299

the Silencing the Guns initiative and its 2030 Master
Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in
Africa, as well as noting the continuing relevance of
resolution 2457 (2019).
While we acknowledge the moderate gains that have
been made since the establishment of the initiative 10
years ago, we note that challenges to its implementation
remain. It is against that backdrop that Ghana would
like to focus on three issues that we believe could
support the efforts to silence the guns in Africa beyond
the more traditional areas of the Master Roadmap’s
work, which we fully support.

The Africa we know is a continent of promise,
a promise that unfortunately has been shackled by
the reality of competing international interests, wellintended but harmful global policies, disjointed actions
and diminished national capacities. It is such influences
that along with others have held back Africa’s prospects
for mobilizing its endowed natural resources, bulging
youth population, large market size of 1.3 billion people
and combined economy of $3.5 trillion in order to mute
the sounds of the guns and enable Africa’s children to
become fully educated, its prosperity to be developed
and shared by its people and its peace and stability to
be guaranteed by its Governments. The fact is that the
capacity of African States is a necessary factor for
peace. And historical and current policies that have
undermined the continent cannot be glossed over if we
are to be true to ourselves.

First, in silencing the guns, it will be important
to expand development policies that support the
continent’s efforts to address the root causes of
conflict, including the economic and social inequalities
that have destabilized several countries. That includes
supporting States in honouring their social contract
with their citizens, as required, through the rebuilding
of national institutions, the enhancement of State
presence throughout their national territories and
the provision of basic social services to all segments
of the population, especially the underprivileged
and poor, who can least afford privatized basic
services. That is also a policy goal that is necessary
to insulate vulnerable populations from the infectious
radicalization of extremist and terrorist groups. And we
believe that the United Nations development system,
as well as the international financial institutions, can
play an important role in supporting the efforts of
African countries.

Africa has carried over into the present the
consequences of unfavourable global adjustments
in the monetary and financial arenas, as well as in
trade and other dimensions. It cannot be justly said
that a region where 33 of its 54 member countries are
classified as least developed has benefited equitably
from participating in the international system, even
if we granted that all the factors for such a state of
affairs were national. Monetary policies in major
markets today are disproportionately affecting smaller
economies through rising interest rates, depreciating
currencies, an elevated cost of living and a reduced
fiscal capacity to absorb shocks. Such consequences
exacerbate fragilities and reduce State capacity.
Mindful of Africa’s complex and challenging political,
security and socioeconomic situation, we welcome the
African Union’s extension of the implementation of

Secondly, Africa is a young continent whose youth
dividends can be effectively realized only if its children
and young people are properly educated and mobilized
into beneficial innovation and value creation. Such a
people-centred transformational agenda is a costly
venture that most Governments consider too great
a political risk to take within their short electoral
cycles. We therefore urge for enhanced and sustained
international support for the generational development
that the power of education brings. We welcome the
commitments made by leaders in September 2022 to
transforming education for the world’s children, a
significant proportion of whom live in Africa. In our
view, an educated and decently employed youthful
population places the continent on the trajectory of
peace, away from divisiveness, strife and conflict.

23-0909123/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

Thirdly, Africa’s prosperity is fundamental to its
peace. It is for that reason that the continent, through
its African Union Agenda 2063: The Africa We
Want, established the African Continental Free Trade
Area to improve economic integration and unlock
development potential for the people of the continent.
The continent’s development agenda should therefore
form the framework around which international
support is given and cooperation carried out with the
continent. That is necessary to avoid disjointed actions
and enable the continent’s own strength to be mobilized
for its development.
I would like to reaffirm Ghana’s commitment to
all continental, regional, national and local actions
that support efforts to silence the guns, including
good governance, investment in preventive measures
and the harnessing of the complementarities between
development and security in building a resilient and
continental community for durable peace.
We particularly underscore the crucial role of
traditional and religious leaders in reinforcing peace
in Africa and believe that the moral values and native
wisdom they uphold has earned them reverence and a
place in many African countries for a positive impact
on the political, security and development landscape.
In Ghana for instance, the National House of Chiefs,
the National Peace Council, the Council of State
and the Christian Council of Ghana, all of whose
membership include traditional and religious leaders,
have made positive contributions to our national peace
and stability. Through their efforts, the peace pact
signed by all the presidential candidates since the 2012
national elections has deepened social cohesion and
helped amplify the importance of peaceful and legal
processes in addressing electoral grievances.
We also believe that the diversity of African
societies must be embraced and leveraged for
development through inclusive and balanced social,
cultural, ethnic and religious representation in national
life. Africa’s stability can be assured, and its women
and young people not left behind, if we embrace the fact
that, although we may be different, we all can belong.
Finally, Ghana believes that development policies
can have a positive impact on the implementation of
silencing the guns in Africa. However, we must move
beyond the business-as-usual approach by strengthening
cooperation at the national, regional and international
levels, as well as by demonstrating stronger political
24/29

30/03/2023

will, including in the implementation of existing
commitments, such as the United Nations/African
Union Joint Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
congratulates Mozambique on convening today’s
debate. We commend the path taken by the country
in the area of peace and national reconciliation. I
thank Ms. Duarte, Mr. Chambas and Mr. Manzoni for
their briefings.
Africa faces considerable challenges today, such as
the pressure of climate change, persistent terrorism and
economic, health and geopolitical shocks. There is also
a challenge posed to governance and the strengthening
of State institutions. Lastly, the root causes of conflicts
must be addressed. Such challenges are not only faced
by Africa; they are challenges that are common to all.
In that regard, the only effective responses are global
responses that are coordinated and based on solidarity.
First and foremost, solutions must be promoted by the
African Union itself and be aimed at preventing and
resolving conflicts.
France welcomes the operationalization of the
African Peace Fund and supports the increase in
African peacekeeping operations, as the African
Union has the capacity to provide robust responses to
the continent’s security challenges. France is ready
to resume discussions at the Security Council to
ensure sustainable and predictable funding for those
operations, including through assessed contributions.
Nonetheless, the challenges go well beyond security
threats. We must establish partnerships, as equals,
with African countries to better respond together to
long-term challenges, in particular to environmental
and development challenges. France and Gabon did
just that at the beginning of March by organizing the
One Forest Summit to combat climate disruptions and
preserve biodiversity.
In the area of health, to combat the coronavirus
disease pandemic, France opted to support African
scientific excellence by supporting the production
of vaccines on the continent. To finance sustainable
infrastructure, one year ago, the European Union
launched the Global Gateway strategy. Half of the
€300 billion mobilized through the strategy will be
allocated to Africa, and more than one third of the
projects will be implemented in sub-Saharan Africa.
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

The summit that France will organize on
22 and 23 June in Paris will strengthen the
international financial infrastructure, enabling it to
combat inequalities and finance the climate transition.
Solutions must be designed with all actors involved in
the continent’s transformation — young people, civil
society, entrepreneurs, researchers, athletes and the
cultural sphere. Women and young people must be at the
heart of those solutions. African women spearheaded
the women and peace and security agenda after the
Windhoek Declaration in 2000. We must draw on the
exceptional potential of the African continent and its
civil society to develop solutions together.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Mozambique for
convening today’s important open debate. I also thank
the briefers for their insightful remarks. We see value
in re-engaging the Security Council on this important
issue. We welcome the guiding spirit of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want Master
Roadmap. In that regard, regional efforts are important.
The challenges Africa faces are enormous. They have a
direct impact on the people of the continent and the rest
of the world. Allow me to underline three points.
First, we believe that African leaders must make it a
priority to properly address the illicit flow of weapons,
their transfer, diversion, theft and the mismanagement,
and the misuse of small arms and light weapons, their
stockpiles and ammunition. For that to succeed, it
is essential for all African partners to join the Arms
Trade Treaty and ratify it as soon as possible. We
encourage additional efforts at all levels related to the
implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
Secondly, we echo the Secretary-General’s report
on the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/2022/959), which clearly
identifies the lack of governance institutions as a
serious obstacle to the ability of African States to
deliver sustainable development outcomes, putting
at risk peace and security. As we have seen, the lack
of governance leads to the empowerment of terrorists
and armed groups, thereby generating more violence
and instability. It is fundamental for States to increase
their presence, including over the cross-border routes
of illicit trafficking. We strongly encourage a whole-ofsociety approach, creating a multi-stakeholder network,
establishing the rule of law and building trust in
institutions in marginalized and conflict-affected areas.

S/PV.9299

We support United Nations recommendations to engage
meaningfully with traditional and religious leaders,
civil society, humanitarian workers, women and young
representatives. They can provide avenues for the
peaceful resolution of disputes and nation-building
efforts. Outreach to families — especially to young
people through sustainable education and development
programmes — is particularly important. States should
invest more in building and promoting a culture of
peace and respect for cultural differences in order to
counter intolerance and forms of violent extremism.
We find the decision of the African Union to proclaim
September of each year as Africa Amnesty Month,
to encourage civilians to voluntarily surrender illicit
weapons in their possession, to be very wise.
Thirdly, corruption and illegal activities continue
to worsen the trust in governmental institutions in
Africa. We encourage African partners to address that
problem with accountability, to accelerate their efforts
in strengthening governance and anti-corruption
mechanisms and to cut any links that enable non-State
actors and their sponsors to access weapons and
State assets.
Finally, we believe that close cooperation between
the African Union and its member States and the United
Nations, as well as with other regional and subregional
organizations and partners, would further enhance
good governance, sustainable peace and development.
Also, streamlining the agendas of the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Economic and Social Council is necessary in
promoting and building a durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank His Excellency the President of Mozambique for
having convened our meeting today, which gives us the
opportunity to discuss the links between peacebuilding
and development in Africa. I also thank the briefers for
their informative presentations.
Switzerland fully supports the efforts aimed at
achieving sustainable peace in Africa, a key element of
the African Union’s Agenda 2063. The African Union
aspires to put an end to armed conflicts. To achieve
that, the root causes must be addressed, and poverty
in all its forms must be eradicated. As we have just
heard, unfortunately, weapons still speak too loudly,
both in Africa and in other parts of the world. The illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their

23-0909125/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

ammunition continues to sow violence, threaten peace,
tear apart the social fabric and impede development. In
view of the need for action in that regard, Switzerland
would like to highlight four points.
First, while the supply of weapons must be reduced,
the factors that drive demand must also be addressed.
The focus must be on preventing violence by considering
the full range of political, economic and social factors
in conflicts. The cycle of violence can be broken only
if the cycle of impunity is also broken. It is therefore
essential for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law to be investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice. Integrating armed violence
reduction and accountability more systematically into
peacebuilding and development efforts is therefore
critical to achieving sustainable results.
Secondly, it is important to strengthen the
capacities of local governments to deliver equitable
and sustainable public services, especially in
peripheral regions and conflict areas. That builds
confidence within the population and helps to restore
the presence of the State. Sustainable Development
Goal 16 calls for the creation of peaceful and inclusive
societies and effective, accountable and transparent
public institutions. In that connection, Switzerland is
supporting a project to improve education planning in
the Niger, particularly in emergency situations.
Thirdly,
humanitarian,
peacebuilding
and
development efforts must take into account the links
between climate change and conflict. Many African
States are familiar with the impact of droughts
and floods. Food insecurity and mass population
displacement can exacerbate conflicts and increase the
risk of recruitment by armed groups. There is an urgent
need for affected States to reduce their vulnerability to
climate shocks in order to enhance peace and security.
Fourthly, dialogue is fundamental for defusing
tensions before they erupt into conflict and for resolving
existing conflicts. Such dialogue should systematically
include women, young people and, depending on the
context, other actors, such as traditional and religious
leaders. In line with its tradition of mediation and good
offices, Switzerland promotes dialogue platforms,
including at the regional level. For example, we
support the Nairobi process to advance peace in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
United Nations regional offices for West Africa and
the Sahel and for Central Africa also play a key role,
26/29

30/03/2023

in particular by promoting the creation of spaces for
dialogue in collaboration with the African Union and
subregional organizations.
The Silencing the Guns initiative provides African
solutions to African challenges. It enables the African
Union and its regional mechanisms to strengthen their
capacity to manage conflicts and crisis situations,
including through cross-border cooperation. The
guns will not be silenced as long as they seem more
accessible than a job or vocational training. I therefore
want to address all actors, here and on the ground,
who are working for sustainable peace in Africa. Our
peace efforts must go hand in hand with efforts to build
confidence, strengthen rule of law institutions, promote
social cohesion, uphold human rights and international
humanitarian law and create economic opportunities,
especially for young people.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign and Caribbean Community Affairs of Trinidad
and Tobago.
Mr. Browne (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago would like to thank the Republic of Mozambique
for organizing today’s important Security Council
open debate. We are also grateful to the briefers for the
information and assessments they have provided on the
Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative.
I would like to convey through you, Madam
President, that is an honour to address this open debate
under the leadership of the President of Mozambique.
I recall my recent productive interactions with him,
held in my capacity as the President of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African, Caribbean
and Pacific States, during the forty-second African,
Caribbean and Pacific States-European Union Joint
Parliamentary Assembly, held in Mozambique in
October and November last year. Those exchanges
reaffirmed the enduring relationship between the
Caribbean and Africa.
Today we meet again in what has been referred
to as the most important room in the world. I wish
to place on record in the Chamber that Trinidad and
Tobago applauds the Silencing the Guns in Africa
initiative through, inter alia, the strengthening of arms
control and disarmament frameworks. That common
effort is a symbol of the commitment and unity of the
African region around the goal of building a conflictfree continent, an essential basis for its prosperity
and development. Trinidad and Tobago supports
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

that initiative, which is in line with the Agenda 2063
of the African Union and with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The necessity of curbing the illicit transfer and
misuse of small arms and light weapons and ammunition
is a foreign policy priority for the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago and a key strategic objective of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM). Council members
may be aware that the Prime Minister of Trinidad
and Tobago has the lead responsibility for matters
related to crime and security in the quasi-Cabinet of
the Conference of Heads of State and Government of
the Caribbean Community. That is a responsibility
we take seriously, in both its internal and its external
dimensions. Regrettably, Africa, as well as the
Caribbean and Latin America, are regions that pay the
greatest human cost of the uncontrolled proliferation of
illicit firearms, despite the fact that we are not major
manufacturers of those weapons.
Consequently, the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago has undertaken a number of measures at the
regional and hemispheric levels to strengthen the
framework to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. In fact, Trinidad
and Tobago, together with some other CARICOM
States, has backed a legal challenge brought by Mexico
against private-sector gun manufacturers in the United
States, in an effort to hold them accountable for their
role in facilitating the free flow of illicit arms and
ammunition throughout the region. Such weapons are
the weapons of choice in the commission of the most
serious crimes, including murder, at shocking rates.
Although we have crafted regional solutions
to tackle the myriad problems related to crime and
security, we are all cognizant of the need for enhanced
cooperation at the multilateral level. That is why
Trinidad and Tobago subscribes fully to the object
and purpose of the Arms Trade Treaty. We recall with
satisfaction and appreciation that Africa was an ardent
partner in that endeavour together with CARICOM. We
also stress the need to fully implement other existing
international instruments in that area, including the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and the Firearms Protocol.
It is our belief that women’s perspectives should be
equally represented at all levels in peace and security
processes, as should the hopes and aspirations of young

S/PV.9299

people, who are ultimately the inheritors of the future.
It was as a manifestation of that view that Trinidad and
Tobago initiated its resolution on women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control, which the Assembly
has adopted annually since 2010.
I would like to conclude by urging the international
community to act decisively to silence the guns in
Africa, and to silence them in other regions of the
world as well. We must make a difference on the
ground. Words alone will not prevent the devastating
and irreparable harm caused by weapons in the hands
of misguided individuals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Keul (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important open debate today.
Peace and security in Africa is the theme for
today’s meeting. Jointly, we are striving for nothing
less than the vision of a conflict-free Africa. Together
with its African partners, Germany is ready and willing
to tackle the causes of conflict, violence and fragility in
Africa through an integrated approach. We need to link
crisis prevention, stabilization, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding with sustainable development efforts
under strong African leadership.
To that end, inclusive and transparent development
policies, the strengthening of State institutions, the
rule of law and democracy and the participation of
women are crucial. In order to support this African-led
endeavour, Germany’s Federal Ministry for Economic
Cooperation and Development presented a new strategy
for Africa in January this year. The strategy has been
developed in close consultation with Africa, and in
particular with representatives from the political
arena, the private sector, civil society, academia and
young people. Based on that strategy, our development
cooperation will focus primarily on a just social and
environmental transformation, as well as gender
equality and job creation for Africa’s young people.
There are many challenges. The illicit transfer,
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons pose a serious threat to peace and security.
The effective control of such weapons is essential to
preventing future conflicts, proliferation, terrorism
and organized crime. Silencing the guns is our joint
responsibility. The threats and the challenges posed

23-0909127/29

S/PV.9299

Peace and security in Africa

30/03/2023

by the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
are transnational. Our answer must be transnational
as well.

Mr. André (Portugal): I am grateful to Mozambique
for convening this timely debate and to all of today’s
briefers for their valuable insights.

Germany welcomes and supports regional
approaches such as the plan of action of the Economic
Community of West African States. We have been
supporting national and regional capacity-building
efforts in Africa and worldwide. Those measures
are aimed at combating terrorist financing and
illicit financial flows, as well as improving border
management and national law-enforcement capabilities.
In 2022 alone we devoted more than €10 million to
projects such as the Africa Amnesty Month project,
on the surrender and collection of illegally owned
weapons. As Chair of the Open-ended Working Group
on conventional ammunition, we are committed to
improving the effective control and management
of ammunition.

Let me start by thanking President Nyusi for his wise
leadership in the peace process and by commending the
Mozambican Government and the Resistência Nacional
Moçambicana (RENAMO) for achieving a critical
milestone in their peace process after reaching an
agreement on the payment of pensions to demobilized
RENAMO ex-combatants. The Government decree
announced last week will hopefully lead to the full
disarmament and demobilization process and the
complete implementation of the Maputo Accord of 2019.
As that major step is taken towards the consolidation of
peace, we also commend the role played by the United
Nations, in particular by the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Mozambique.

A strong peace and security architecture in Africa
is also key to fighting the misuse of small arms and
light weapons, as well as to supporting African
efforts to solve the underlying root causes in this area.
Germany assists African Union (AU) institutions and
regional economic communities in implementing
the instruments of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, to which we have contributed more than
€30 million since its creation. Our joint objective is to
prevent crises, manage conflicts and build sustainable
peace. As the largest contributor to the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, we also support the call for the
sustainable and predictable financing of AU-led peace
missions. We very much welcome the fact that the AU
found a common position on the issue at its recent
summit in Addis Ababa.
Let me conclude by joining the AU’s call to ensure
adequate and sustainable funding for United Nations
peacebuilding, including through the introduction of
assessed contributions. We are close to a compromise
and call on all United Nations Member States to join the
proposal developed by the Group of African States and
the European Union. In a globalized world, our security
and prosperity are inextricably linked. Germany stands
ready to join our African partners to work together
for peace and security and sustainable development in
order to make peace a reality for all African people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
28/29

This is an important moment to hear about Africa’s
priorities. Global events with local impact and local
events with global impacts both underscore the need to
invest in partnerships to address Africa’s development
challenges. Africa faces a significant number of
challenges in different areas, ranging from social and
economic hindrances to security and development, and
they need to be addressed through national and regional
ownership and through international cooperation. It is
crucial to mobilize all available instruments and to
further coordinate efforts — both in the bilateral and
the multilateral realms — to address peace and security
challenges on the continent. A multifaceted approach
is required to respond to the root causes of conflicts,
and concerted forms of cooperation are needed to
tackle transnational threats, such as terrorism, religious
extremism, piracy and other forms of organized crime
and illicit trafficking. Purely military solutions will not
be sufficient. Work must be done to achieve sustainable
and inclusive development and in the short term to
ensure humanitarian aid for those in need. Leaving no
one behind cannot be just a motto. During the cruellest
months of the recent pandemic, one sentence was
repeated several times in this Chamber: We are only
as strong as the weakest of us. That is a truth that we
should also have in mind when we talk about peace
and development.
We have been strong advocates of a deeper and
broader relationship with Africa, always respecting
African development agendas and priorities. Our longstanding approach has always been to engage with
Africa, not to develop policies on Africa. We recently
23-09091

30/03/2023

Peace and security in Africa

approved the Portuguese Development Cooperation
Strategy, an important component of Portugal’s
external policy. Through that strategy, we will pay
special attention to countries in fragile situations.
Improving results in those contexts requires coherent
policies that link the various areas, namely, external
action, diplomacy, defence and development. And it
also requires integrated responses, in particular by
means of the humanitarian-development-peace nexus.
In that regard, Portugal supports a strategy with the
following three mutually reinforcing axes.
First, support should be provided for Africa’s
economic integration through the African Continental
Free Trade Area, regional economic organizations and
the development of regional and local value chains.
Secondly, support should be provided for efforts
aimed at stabilization and regional crisis prevention
and management, on the basis of the principle of
African ownership, integrating security with economic
development and humanitarian cooperation.
Thirdly, support should be provided for the development of strategic corridors and infrastructure — roads,
railways, ports and energy and digital infrastructure — in order to connect African countries with each
other and connect Africa with the rest of the world,
namely, through the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. That
is why Portugal has been active in bridging cooperation
efforts between Africa and Europe. In Mozambique, for
example, we deployed a military mission to reinforce
the training of the Mozambican special forces to act in
Cabo Delgado.

S/PV.9299

Portugal has also contributed financially to
multilateral projects, notably through United Nations
agencies, aimed at strengthening national counterterrorism capacities. We also support projects to
assist displaced persons in Cabo Delgado, including
through financial contributions and partnerships with
non-governmental organizations. That multilayered
combined approach is further complemented with
strong investment in human capacity-building,
namely, by providing professional training in oil and
gas to young persons from Cabo Delgado. Portugal
has also contributed operationally to improving the
technical military capabilities of partner countries of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries.
Maritime security is particularly relevant. And that is
another issue for which the promotion of development
on land is crucial to ensure security at sea.
In conclusion, it is worth recalling that development
is not and cannot be portrayed as a precondition for the
realization of human rights. Development is itself a
right. Development policies can help address security
challenges by investing in critical infrastructure, such
as roads, water and sanitation facilities and energy
systems, which can in turn improve access to basic
services, create jobs and promote economic growth,
thereby fostering the well-being of African nations and
African peoples and consequently contributing to the
noble objective of silencing the guns.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence of members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

23-0909129/29
