S/PV.7918

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7918

th meeting
Thursday, 6 April 2017, 4.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley/Ms. Sison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Peacekeeping operations review
Letter dated 4 April 2017 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2017/287)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09294 (E)
*1709294*

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Peacekeeping operations review
Letter dated 4 April 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/287)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/287, which contains a letter dated
4 April 2017 from my delegation addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: United Nations peacekeeping
is an investment in global peace, security and
prosperity. Around the world, Blue Helmets are the
concrete expression of the determination of the Charter
of the United Nations “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”. The achievements of peace
operations are a source of great pride to us all. When they
fail, it causes us pain and drives us to improve. United
Nations peacekeepers have contributed to a legacy of
stability from El Salvador to Namibia, from East Timor
to Côte d’Ivoire and from Mozambique to Cambodia.
Fifty-four missions have completed their mandates and
closed; two more will do so in the coming months. That
is our objective for every peacekeeping mission — to
do the job entrusted to it; to save lives; to prevent mass
atrocities; to set the stage for stability and sustainable
peace; and to close. And, from start to finish, to be costeffective. Today’s peacekeeping budget is less than half
of 1 per cent of global military spending.
At the start of my first day in office, I laid a wreath
to honour the more than 3,500 fallen peacekeepers
who have given their lives for the ideals of the United
Nations Charter. We owe them a great debt for their
dedication and courage. The safety of peacekeepers
will remain our priority.
2/26

06/04/2017

(spoke in French)
United Nations peacekeeping operations are very
diverse and are conducted in extremely complex
environments. It is our shared responsibility to enable
them to adapt to our changing world. As the HighLevel Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations clearly stated, our ambitions do not match
our capabilities, and our goals are not commensurate
with the resources available for them. That is why
peacekeeping operations often seem to be at a
standstill and unable to keep up with the magnitude of
their task. In many cases Blue Helmets are deployed
in places where peace itself is at stake. At times they
have to face hostility and a lack of cooperation from
host Governments. At times their security is seriously
threatened by terrorism, proliferating arms and the
growth of transnational crime. We also see a disconnect
between political processes and some of our major
operations, which can seem to be at an impasse with no
real prospect of progress.
Those are the challenges we must face together.
In the Secretariat, we must be more effective, more
efficient and more accountable for our actions.
We are counting on the General Assembly to give
us strong political support and to relax the rules and
regulations in order to facilitate our work. We rely
on troop- and police-contributing countries to deploy
dedicated and well-trained personnel. We rely on
countries that are near conflict zones and on regional
organizations to respect their obligations with regard
to peace operations. We rely on the full support of host
countries. Above all, we rely on the Council to show
unity and to adopt clear and achievable mandates.
The United Nations derives its legitimacy from the
trust placed in it by the peoples of the world. However,
that trust has been shaken by the appalling cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse that have tarnished the
image of the Organization as a whole, as well as that of
some of our peacekeeping missions. I have presented
my plan to combat this scourge and I am determined to
implement it, with the support of members.
(spoke in English)
We need a comprehensive strategy that supports
the diverse range of our missions and takes account of
the entire peace continuum, from prevention, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

term development. This strategy must be based on two
overriding principles.
First, there is no one-size-fits-all peace operation.
While some missions have straightforward mandates
that focus on separating warring parties or monitoring
ceasefires in a relatively stable environment, others
have more robust mandates, such as to protect civilians
and deal with multiple armed groups. The protection
of civilians will continue to be a key priority for
peacekeeping. We are supporting the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which is backed by a Security
Council mandate. In Mali, while United Nations
peacekeepers are not and should not be directly engaged
in fighting terrorism, they coordinate with counterterrorist forces. The Council recently expressed its
support for the regional initiative by Member States in
the Lake Chad basin to develop a multinational joint
task force to combat Boko Haram.
Finally, our political missions are supporting peace
and reconciliation in Afghanistan and Iraq, together
with development agencies and others. All these
operations play a vital role in building and sustaining
peace. But our political strategies, management systems
and administration are not set up to support them
effectively. We must plan for diversity across time and
geography, creating flexibility without additional costs.
Secondly, the success of every mission depends on
an active political process, with the commitment of all
stakeholders, particularly Governments. The Council
has a vital role to play in securing this commitment
and cooperation. I will personally support this goal in
any way possible. I have spoken before to the Council
about the urgency and necessity of a surge in diplomacy
for peace.
We have already made important recent reforms
to peacekeeping. I thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous for his
important role, and count on the continued leadership of
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix. We have
increased the number of troop- and police-contributing
countries and improved the generation of forces so
that they can be deployed more quickly. Modern
technologies are improving situational awareness and
analysis. We have decentralized key functions, and
we are strengthening performance management and
accountability. These reforms have reduced the cost
per capita of uniformed peacekeepers by 18 per cent
since 2008, and decreased the number of civilian staff
significantly. But much remains to be done.

S/PV.7918

In the short term, we must end operations that have
achieved their goals and reform those that no longer meet
needs on the ground. Our missions in Cote d’Ivoire and
Liberia will soon close, and we must consider reforms
and exit strategies for other long-standing missions. In
Haiti, we are ready to transform our mission so that
it will focus on political support, institution-building
and development. In Darfur, the changing situation
on the ground may call for a significant reduction of
forces. Each mission must be considered in its unique
political context. In that spirit, I commend the Council’s
unanimous decision last week to renew the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In the longer-term, I see nine areas for reform.
First, I have established a team to examine how
to improve our peace and security architecture, which
will report to me by June.
Second, we need greater efficiency and accountability.
Too many of the rules and regulations of the Secretariat
seem designed to prevent rather than facilitate our
work. I am committed to changing this, and I hope
Member States will support me, including in the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly.
Third, peacekeeping operations need clear, realistic
and up-to-date mandates from the Council, with
well-identified priorities, adequate sequencing and
flexibility to evolve over time.
Fourth, women must play a far more active role in
peace operations, as troops, police and civilian staff.
This is not only because gender parity is essential for
its own sake, but because the involvement of women is
proven to increase the chances of sustained peace, and
to reduce incidences of sexual abuse and exploitation.
Fifth, we need better and more coordinated
planning, control and leadership of our operations
and strategy. The creation of an executive committee
and closer cooperation between the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations are aimed precisely at addressing that.
I also plan further decentralization to empower my
Special Representatives.
Sixth, we must increase the use of modern
technology. This will help us to become more flexible
and mobile. I encourage the trilateral arrangements
through which countries with the capacity to do so are
providing training and equipment to peace operations.

17-092943/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

But, alongside these arrangements, I count on these
countries to step up their troop contributions.
Seventh, we need to communicate and to increase
awareness that United Nations peacekeeping operations
are a necessity for global peace, security and prosperity,
and that they are achieving results.
Eighth, we need to deepen ties with our regional
and subregional partners. At the African Union summit
earlier this year, I committed to strengthening our
partnership on political issues and peace operations,
with stronger mutual support and continued capacitybuilding. United Nations peace operations will continue
to need the vital partnership of the European Union. As
the security of Europe is directly affected by situations
in which peacekeeping missions are deployed, it is
likely that there will be further opportunities for
cooperation. It is equally important to develop our
relationships with subregional organizations including
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
others. I call on the Council to consider supporting the
initiative proposed by the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Ninth and finally, these partnerships must be based
on solid, predictable funding. I hope the Council will
consider supporting missions that are backed by a
Council resolution, either with assessed contributions or
by promoting other predictable financing mechanisms.
Peace operations are at a crossroads. Our task is to
keep them relevant with clear and achievable mandates,
and the right strategies and support. Success depends
on our collective efforts. The Council can count on
my full commitment, but I also count on the unity and
support of the Council. I count on it to fulfil its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security in this changing world.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I wish to thank the United States, which is presiding
over the Council for the month of April, for having
taken the initiative to organize this important meeting
on the review of peacekeeping operations, a subject of
great importance to my country.
The Council has entrusted us with the chairmanship
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
More importantly, Senegal has been involved in
peacekeeping operations since it became independent
4/26

06/04/2017

in 1960, when it deployed a military contingent
in the Congo. Today, the Senegalese security and
defence forces are deployed in eight United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Given their importance, I
will enumerate them. There is the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire — which is now
concluded — and the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau. Overall 3,638 people,
including 97 women, are deployed.
Senegalese army officers hold the following
posts: Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, Deputy Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, Deputy Force
Commander of the police component of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
Chief of Staff of the Office of Military Affairs in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations here at the
Secretariat in New York. That places my country fifth
among troop- and police-contributing countries and
first among police-contributing countries.
My country is not committed to United Nations
peace operations alone. Senegal currently fields a
company size combat force, a level two rural hospital in
Guinea-Bissau and a unit of 250-strong in the Gambia,
under the auspices of the Economic Community of
West African States.
I mention those details to highlight the importance
of today’s meeting to us. United Nations peacekeeping
operations continue to face political, security,
strategic, operational and financial challenges in
ensuring effective peacekeeping in an ever-changing
environment. Such missions are often called upon to
protect civilian populations in very complex situations,
with limited, and, at times, inadequate resources and
operational capacity. They are increasingly deployed
in complex environments that are hostile and pose a
threat to their own security, not to mention, at times,
17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

misunderstandings that emerge during coordination
efforts with host countries and local partners.
In addition, it must be acknowledged that there
is now a genuine need to adapt peace operations to
each area’s unique challenges because each operation
involves risk. We discussed the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) earlier today (see S/PV.7917).
Despite the signature of a peace agreement between the
Government and the main armed groups, MINUSMA
operates in a difficult environment, characterized by
attacks that target United Nations personnel and civilian
populations and infrastructure. Despite the adoption
of a revised strategic concept, in line with resolution
2285 (2016), several needs remain unmet and it is
still difficult for MINUSMA to marshal the resources
necessary, in particular independent logistical support
and important materials.
It is therefore important to provide United Nations
missions with the capacity and resources necessary to
enable them to effectively discharge their mandates, in
particular with regard to the protection of civilians. It
would be even better to ensure that their mandates are
feasible and appropriate to the situation on the ground.
That is why my country convened a high-level debate
here in the Council in November 2016 (see S/PV.7802),
during its presidency of the Security Council. The aim
of that meeting was to put greater emphasis on the
assymetric threats that peace operations face. When
designing mandates, we need in-depth analysis that
is as objective and as comprehensive as possible. That
entails conducting an earnest and clear assessment of
human resource, financial and logistical requirements
prior to the deployment of missions.
When clear, realistic and feasible mandates exist,
with the political support required, peace operations
are some of the Organization’s most flexible and
appropriate tools for meeting the challenges in
maintaining international peace and security. Today,
however, peace operations encounter major difficulties
and restrictions that prevent them from fully carrying
out their mandates, such as conflict or the hostility
they face in many areas. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, MONUSCO and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan are but a few
examples that illustrate the importance of the political
dimension in allowing peace operations to effectively
carry out their mandates.

S/PV.7918

In a country such as South Sudan, in which a viable
political process is emerging, there is a vast and urgent
need for protection. A political, interdependent effort is
therefore imperative to enable missions to successfully
discharge their duties, in particular with regard to the
protection of civilians. Similarly, above and beyond
receiving the consent of host States, we must also seek
to secure their cooperation because it is the best way to
overcome some of the challenges. In addition, missions
must make every effort to establish and maintain trust
with host States and populations.
The issue of accepting risk when peacekeepers are
deployed in conflict situations in which civilians are the
targets of direct attacks must be analysed objectively
to prevent the credibility of missions from being
undermined by their lack of action in such circumstances.
In addition, a viable political strategy must underpin
the work of United Nations missions. Reviews must be
conducted, such as those commissioned by the United
Nations in 2015 on peace operations, peacebuilding and
the women and peace and security agenda. There is no
doubt that peace operations, as political tools, could
assist in advancing the fundamental goals of conflict
prevention, mediation, the protection of civilians and
peacekeeping. Without a political settlement that leads
to the presence of a legitimate Government in a State
willing and able to ensure the safety of its population,
essential duties, such as the protection of those
populations, cannot be properly guaranteed.
It is also true that Blue Helmets could assist in
establishing and supporting a political process to
protect civilians by helping national stakeholders
to fulfil their obligations. The Blue Helmets
cannot replace them, however. Because its primary
responsibility is the maintenance of international peace
ans security, the Security Council has a central role
to play in making peace operations more suitable for
their respective environments and contexts. An early
political commitment from the Security Council prior
to deployment and for the duration of missions is vital.
In our view, it would be wise to underscore the
importance of inclusive national reconciliation that is
tied to the twin process of security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and social reintegration
in order to draw up a new social contract that is
informed by the trust of civilian populations and the
professionalism of security and defence forces. Such
efforts are geared towards preventing the resurgence of
conflict. Together with the African Union, the Security

17-092945/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Council must continue discussions on predictable
and lasting funding of African Union peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016),
adopted in November 2016 during the Senegal’s
presidency of the Council. Senegal reiterates that it has
been committed since 1960 to maintaining international
peace and security.
In conclusion, I would say that we must continue
the much needed process of reforming peacekeeping
operations. I would even say that we must accelerate the
process, in order to make it more suitable for meeting
present and future needs and challenges. In that regard,
the recommendations put forward by eminent persons
in the various reports, as well as those adopted by
the General Assembly, contain ambitious measures
in key areas, such as the modernization of troop
equipment, the training of personnel and increased
financial support for peace operations. The effective
implementation of such recommendations would
enable peacekeeping operations to enter a new phase
in successfully carrying out their missions, thanks to
ongoing dialogue, including on mandate design and
continuity, among the various stakeholders, such as the
troop-contributing countries, the Security Council, the
Secretariat and host countries.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the United States for taking the initiative to convene
today’s meeting. I wish in particular to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence here today and for
his statement and the concepts set forth in it. We have
taken note of the nine points that formed the basis of
his briefing.
Almost two years since the publication of the
report of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, better known as the HIPPO report (see
S/2015/446), Uruguay believes that the report’s
recommendations are still valid and that the Member
States must continue to work towards implementing
them. In that regard, many of the questions raised in the
presidency’s concept note (see S/2017/287, annex) are
found in the HIPPO report and its recommendations.
As a State Member of the United Nations, an
elected member of the Security Council and a troopand police-contributing country, Uruguay supports the
peacekeeping operations review process with a view to
making it more efficient and effective, and to ensure
that they can truly fulfil the purposes for which they
were designed.
6/26

06/04/2017

In our view, peacekeeping operations are the
shared responsibility of three actors: the Security
Council, States or parties to peacekeeping operations,
and countries contributing troops and police personnel.
Each of these actors has its role to play; each has a
responsibility to shoulder. The Security Council must
assume its multiple responsibilities to ensure that
peacekeeping operations are efficient. Therefore, as
mentioned in the HIPPO report, political solutions
must always underpin the design and deployment of
peacekeeping operations, and political momentum
must be maintained. We must always bear in mind that
lasting peace is not achieved by nor is it maintained
through military and technical interventions, but rather
thanks to political solutions.
Accordingly, the political strategies underpinning
peacekeeping operations must have the support of a
united Security Council. Experience has shown and
continues to show that when there is a lack of unity in
the Council and the lack of a clear role in the support
of the peace process, the success of a peacekeeping
operation can be seriously compromised. Such was the
case — let us be sincere here — with the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. Furthermore,
and notwithstanding the unity in the Security Council,
the primacy of politics is the responsibility of national
institutions and their political stakeholders. The United
Nations and regional organizations can only back
and facilitate the peace process, but not much can be
achieved if national stakeholders do not show a genuine
commitment to a peaceful solution to the conflict.
Another critical responsibility of the Security
Council is to ensure that peacekeeping operations are
more flexible, have clear, priority-based mandates, and
are capable of adjusting to changing realities on the
ground. Over the past few months, we have seen efforts
undertaken to that end, for example, the development of
the mandates for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where tasks have been established based on
clearly defined priorities. However, much remains to
be done.
In addition, once a peacekeeping operation has been
deployed with a valid mandate, the Security Council
is duty-bound to require and obtain from host States
full respect for and compliance with the terms agreed
upon in the relevant status of forces agreement. These
17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

documents are the guarantees that protect the personnel
that a country voluntarily contributes to peacekeeping
operations. Therefore, any violation of these agreements
is simply unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. Such
actions seriously affect the performance of missions and
prevent them from faithfully discharging their assigned
tasks. I would mention here limitations on the freedom
of movement, restrictions on access to certain areas,
bureaucratic obstacles with respect to the delivery of
visas or the shipping of containers with United Nations
equipment, refusal to allow the deployment of new
forces, or expulsion of peacekeeping personnel, all of
which impede the full functionality of a mission.
Troop- and police-contributing countries must also
shoulder their share of the burden, as they are the ones
acting on the ground and they have to implement an
operation’s mandate. It is essential that the deployed
peacekeeping personnel is properly trained, skilled
and equipped to carry out all of the tasks set forth in
the mandate. Therefore, national restrictions — known
as caveats — whether they are declared or, worse,
undeclared, the absence of effective command and
control, the refusal to obey orders, the failure to respond
to attacks against civilians and inadequate equipment
cannot be tolerated because they have an adverse effect
on the shared responsibility for effectively discharging
the mandates.

S/PV.7918

work in the reform process of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful for the convening of today’s
meeting and thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for sharing his assessment of the situation with respect
to United Nations peacekeeping with us.
Peacekeeping is a key instrument in the arsenal
of United Nations measures designed to support
international peace and security, resolve conflicts
and provide support for State-building at the initial
post-crisis stage. The increasingly complex character
of problems that are spawned by modern crises, the
growth in the number and the geographical scope
of conflict situations, the rapid political changes,
the presence of specific factors that lead to conflict,
including terrorism, crime, drug trafficking and other
transboundary challenges and threats — all of these
point to the need for a transformation of United Nations
peacekeeping and raise the issue of the need to enhance
its effectiveness.

However, in these difficult conditions, what has
not changed is the essence of peacekeeping, namely,
that there is no alternative to conflict resolution. It
is precisely this priority that the Secretary-General
established, and the High-Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations reached the same conclusion
Unfortunately, we have seen this type of situation previously. It is not by chance that during today’s
in several peacekeeping operations, and not only at meeting the organizers of the debate suggested that
the level of the contingents and the police forces, but we focus on the need to enhance the effectiveness of
also in the leadership of the missions and their chain​​ peacekeeping with an emphasis on the political aspects
of command, especially in high-pressure environments of the peacekeeping missions’ actions in the field.
where civilians need protection. On this point, I wish
We have to agree that the mandates of some
to stress the contribution of the Kigali Principles missions have been slow to adapt to new realities on
on the Protection of Civilians, which Uruguay has the ground. There is no doubt that there are questions
joined, with the understanding that they recognize the about the effectiveness of the work of the Secretariat on
importance the protection of civilians has at present in planning the life cycle of missions or the cooperation
preserving the physical and moral integrity of people of missions with the authorities of the host country. It
in conflict situations, particularly the most vulnerable is important to streamline the process of developing
populations. My delegation understands that the Kigali an exit strategy and ensuring a smooth transition to
Principles can greatly contribute to the reform process the post-conflict rebuilding stage, which would make
because they are geared towards improving efficiency it possible not only to optimize expenditures but also
in the protection of civilians, through training, the enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
behaviour of peacekeeping personnel on the ground and their impact.
and the important element of accountability, especially
Furthermore, we believe that it is unacceptable
when they do not rise to occasion of the circumstances.
to use the practice of having the Secretariat provide
In conclusion, allow me to assure the Council requests with estimates for separate components of
of Uruguay’s commitment to continuing to peacekeeping operations without sufficient justification
17-092947/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

for them. Recently, we have also seen the broad
artificial expansion of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations through the addition of non-core tasks. We
have often spoken about the harm of this practice, which
significantly reduces the effectiveness of missions.
Let us look at the example of the broadly interpreted
tasks of protecting civilians, monitoring human
rights, including gender issues, and preventing sexual
violence. Those functions are often entrusted to the
civilian staff of missions. Deploying and maintaining
such personnel is rather expensive. For example, with
regard to the Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, almost nearly every one of its components
has an expert on outreach to society. There are
approximately 30 such experts. Is that really necessary
or economically justified?
We are convinced that we should not burden
peacekeeping operations with difficultly achieved
tasks of a socially humanitarian character. Such factors
are not a threat to international peace and security, and
come under the purview of other specialized United
Nations bodies. It is important to have a carefully
balanced approach to dealing with human rights issues
in peacekeeping. We do not question the importance
of promoting and protecting human rights, but we
believe that delegating to United Nations peacekeeping
operations human rights functions that fall outside of
their field of expertise reduces the effectiveness of
achieving their primary goal, which is separating and
reconciling the conflicting sides and ultimately saving
lives.
It is the successful resolution of a conflict that
is the key precondition to improving human rights
situations and developing democratic institutions in a
specific country, rather than the converse. Excessive
attention given to human rights issues often leads to a
distorted understanding of the causes of crises and of
new challenges and threats, as well as the erroneous
interpretation of peacekeeping mission mandates, the
lack of their effectiveness and, on occasion, the resultant
hostility from host and troop-contributing countries.
There has been an increasing number of proposals to
give peacekeeping missions multi-component mandates,
including peacebuilding tasks, above all promoting
security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and support for the restoration of lawenforcement bodies and the rule of law in general. We
believe that such tasks should be specifically targeted
8/26

06/04/2017

to the specific causes of conflicts, thereby ensuring
that conflicts do not reignite. Peacekeeping personnel
cannot be used as a substitute for national authorities or
embedded into domestic political situations.
We believe that reducing financing for certain
peacekeeping operations should go hand-in-hand
with modifying their mandates, in particular with
regard to reducing their parallel non-core tasks that
only dilute peacekeeping efforts to address the root
causes of conflict. Unquestionably, no matter how the
transformation of peacekeeping unfolds, the critical
guidelines will be the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the basic principles of United
Nations peacekeeping — the consent of the host
country, impartiality and the non-use of force except
for self-defence or in order to implement the mandate
of the Security Council. Lately, those lements are
unfortunately increasingly being considered by some
countries almost as an obstacle to implementing
missions’ mandates. We have heard ideas expressed
about the need for their flexible interpretation
depending on conditions on the ground. We reiterate,
once again, that that is unacceptable. We believe
that it is precisely those elements that guarantee the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. Every new or
emerging area of peacekeeping should strictly adhere
to those principles.
We also believe that it is important to warn
about attempts to artificially politicize the activity of
peacekeepers. We are seriously concerned about the
attempts to flexibly interpret the norms of international
humanitarian law, in particular as pertaining to the
protection of civilians in conditions of armed conflict.
Under no circumstances should Blue Helmets become
party to a conflict or join those parties. That is precisely
what would happen if the Security Council adopted
certain proposals made by Member States entertaining
the possible use of force by peacekeepers against
host States.
Any action allegedly guided by the need to protect
the civilian population is unacceptable if it is actually
intended to achieve narrow express geopolitical aims,
especially if such an action is against the legitimate
authorities of sovereign States. As has been illustrated
by past experience, that leads to more civilian victims.
We do not support the view that has often been
expressed that the protection of civilians is the goal in
itself of peacekeeping operations in general. I would
like to recall once again that the need to protect civilians
17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

is a consequence of conflict and not the cause of a
conflict. Effectively ensuring the security of civilians
can be achieved only by dealing with the root causes
of conflict. Supporting and protecting civilians can be
only a temporary measure so as to provide time to find
a political and diplomatic solution.
Moreover, we are concerned about certain questions
in the concept paper (S/2017/287, annex) with regard
to the possibility of missions carrying out their work
without the strategic consent of the host country. We
believe that that is inappropriate as it runs contrary to
one of the basic inviolable principles of peacekeeping,
which cannot be revised. At the same time, the success
of United Nations peacekeeping operations depends
directly on building constructive and mutually
respectful relations with the host country and other
national actors. That kind of cooperation must not be
imposed or artificial. It must be based on the natural
wish of the host country to cooperate, and that is a
direct consequence of strengthening trust in the work
of the mission and its components.
We should not forget that Governments bear the
main responsibility for ensuring the security of their
people, including security against terrorist attacks.
They also bear the main responsibility for establishing
the political process, ensuring development and dealing
with the root causes of conflict. The international
community should provide support to local and regional
efforts, but it should provide substitutes for them.
It is difficult not to agree that the current
challenges and threats that have changed the character
of conflicts require a corresponding adaptability from
the Organization. Competent and thorough political and
mediation efforts should be a priority in peacekeeping
activities. The history of conflicts in various regions
of the world has shown that such efforts help address
the root causes of conflicts rather than merely treat
their symptoms. Otherwise, crises will resurface after
a brief pause. United Nations peacekeeping missions
and the Blue Helmets should be deployed in places in
which they can effectively help while remaining neutral
actors and, at the same time, not undertaking functions
that fall outside their field of expertise. In order to
enhance the effectiveness of peacekeepers in fulfilling
their mandates, we should not consider various generic
initiatives but, rather, set realistic and clear goals for
Blue Helmets and focus on the specific causes and the
core problems that are related to every conflict.

S/PV.7918

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I warmly welcome
the Secretary-General’s briefing. I agree with his
nine-point plan for reform and with every other word
that he said.
I would like to pay tribute to the brave men and
women serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. For many people around the world, they
are all that stands between stability and chaos. More
than 3,500 peacekeepers have lost their lives holding
that line, including nine this year. We are humbled by
their sacrifice.
We have a duty to those peacekeepers, all those
risking their lives today and all the people whom they
protect, to ask tough, fundamental questions about
peacekeeping deployments. Peacekeeping is one of the
best things that the Organization has ever established.
Peacekeeping is the jewel in the United Nations crown.
Peacekeeping is the United Nations unique selling
point. Peacekeeping is also a good investment. In
human terms, United Nations peacekeeping saves lives.
In terms of peace, it significantly increases the survival
rate of peace agreements. We should continue to invest
in that crucial tool that answers the call to help when no
one else comes. But as with all investments, we should
examine the market.
First, we must think long and hard before deploying
missions and about whether peacekeeping is the right
tool at the right moment. Horizon scanning and early
warning give us an opportunity to use other tools.
Preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention, mediation
and early action to prevent conflicts and mass human
rights abuses remain vital, but those must be begun
long before peacekeepers may be required. Too often
that moment is missed. When a peacekeeping mission
is required, we must ask if that mission has a clear
objective and a clear exit strategy. Does it have the right
mandate? Will the host Government cooperate? There
are at least two ways in which a Government might
not cooperate — by opposing the very deployment of
a mission or by hindering the mission’s ability to fulfill
every part of its mandate once it has been deployed.
History has given us enough tragedies to
support the deployment of peacekeepers when host
Governments are unwilling or unable to protect their
own people— with or without the Government’s
consent. If the host Government does not cooperate, the
Council has a crucial role to play. We must ensure that
States shoulder their primary responsibility to prevent

17-092949/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

conflict, minimize suffering and ensure that cycles of
conflict are not repeated. Where there are spoilers to
peace, including host Governments that seek to stifle
missions, we must use all the tools at our disposal to
change that behaviour.
But time after time the message sent by the Council
is one of disunity and confusion. We had a chance last
year to bring pressure to bear on the parties in South
Sudan, but at the crucial moment we failed to deliver.
We cannot complain now about the tragic status quo
in that country if we are not prepared to act ourselves.
Once deployed, we must recognize when a
peacekeeping mission is no longer the right tool for the
job, when other parts of the United Nations system are
better placed to support development and peacebuilding
needs — as in Haiti, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. We
know that peacekeeping is but one tool available to
the United Nations. It cannot deliver every aspect to
the United Nations response to conflict. Peacekeeping
should exist alongside both conflict prevention and
peacebuilding work.
Where military force is necessary, the United
Nations is not the only organization capable of
delivering it. We need only look to West Africa, where
the Economic Community of West African States has
demonstrated regional leadership through deployments
in Mali and in support of the political transition in
the Gambia. Or to Somalia, where the African Union
Mission in Somalia is degrading the threat from the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab.

06/04/2017

We must conduct regular and robust reviews of
missions to establish where current situation sit on the
spectrum of conflict and ensure that we are responding
and resourcing them appropriately. Pledges of troops and
equipment need to meet specific shortfalls identified by
the United Nations, including the deployment of more
women. We need to develop a greater breadth and depth
of capabilities so that the United Nations can deploy the
most appropriate tools to deliver mission mandates.
Ultimately, peacekeeping must perform better.
That means high-quality training, appropriate
equipment, medical provision and skilled and
courageous leadership. Missions are the human face
of the Organization to so many people in the world.
They have to act to uphold the principles that we all
represent, while holding peacekeepers to account for
underperformance or misconduct, especially when
there are allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Peacekeepers’ successes save lives, and we owe it to
them and the people they protect to ask those tough
questions and find the right answers.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the United
States presidency for underscoring the importance of
strengthening the political objectives and dimensions
of peacekeeping operations. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for a very innovative and reformist approach to
the entire peacekeeping continuum. We fully support
his vision to raise the efficiency and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations — one that is both timely
and needed.

But military operations can only create the
space for the political process to progress. We must
therefore redouble our efforts to address the political
challenges to peace — not only the security ones — if
we are to deliver the Secretary-General’s agenda on
sustaining peace.

Recent developments in some operations make
this debate even more relevant and timely. Peace and
security today are threatened as never before. It is
therefore necessary to evaluate how the effectiveness
of the operations of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations can be enhanced, especially in the face of
asymmetrical conflicts and the rise of terrorism and
extreme violence.

My final point is that, if and when we deploy
peacekeeping missions, we must make sure that they
are effective. That means better mission planning, more
pledges of troops and equipment and stronger mission
performance. Mandates must be limited, realistic and
prioritized, with a clear end goal and the benchmarks
for getting there, while building on and complementing
the work of other parts of the United Nations so that we
can measure the impact of their activity and hand them
over when the peacekeeping task is complete.

Despite those limitations, in many countries
peacekeeping operations have helped countries to
close the chapter of conflict and open a path to normal
development. At the same time, United Nations
peacekeeping and the response by the international
community as a whole have been challenged and found
ineffective in some cases. These setbacks provide
important lessons for deciding how and when to deploy,
and what structure and streamlining is needed to
support United Nations peacekeeping. They also serve

10/26

17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

as a political tool to restore and maintain international
peace and security.
My delegation offers the following observations to
ensure a sharper political focus, drawn from current
missions as a whole rather than specific cases.
First, peacekeeping, with its operational facets,
can never become the overriding focus. It must be
considered in conjunction with conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and development. Those concerns must
all be addressed simultaneously if the root causes of
political conflict are to be addressed and the risk of
conflicts recurring reduced. All efforts must be based
on timely early warning and analysis of the drivers
of intra-State or inter-State disputes that escalate into
violent conflict.
Second, engaging regional organizations and
neighbouring States in resolving conflicts is becoming
increasingly important. Recent success stories from the
Lake Chad basin and the Great Lakes region, which I
visited last month, call for more such joint initiatives by
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the United Nations. Mediation efforts
by neighbouring groups of States and Heads of State
have yielded considerable success. They will need to
be reinforced by the peace missions of the Department
of Political Affairs, the collective United Nations
multilateral system, media and civil society — as
powerful agents of political change.
Third, the General Assembly and its Member
States are also positive political influences for funding
and bilateral assistance. Political objectives can only be
reached if both the host Government and the parties on
the ground take ownership and responsibility.
Fourth, political gains can be sustained only if they
are supported by disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; security sector and rule-of-law reforms;
and the promotion of human rights. Fragile States must
be offered security and assistance programmes to
promote their social and economic recovery and their
long-term development. It is also necessary to consider
if guarantees for the safety and security of United
Nations personnel can be reasonably obtained from the
main parties or factions.
Fifth, while considering new mandates or
extending existing ones, the Security Council must
take into account whether the parties to a conflict in a
country have committed themselves to a peace process

S/PV.7918

and whether a clear political goal is reflected in the
mandate. The Secretary-General and the entire United
Nations system should call for a periodic strategic
assessment to identify all possible options for United
Nations engagement, to determine what actions need
to be taken when political processes break down and
whether the mission should continue.
Sixth, the Security Council will henceforth be
expected to monitor peacekeeping operations more
closely and on an ongoing basis, considering the
present-day growing threats of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant/Da’esh, A1-Qaida, Boko Haram and
other violent extremist and armed groups. That raises
the questions of whether we have sufficient means and
resources to do so and how to proceed.
Seventh, funding must also be considered from
the overall security, political, military, humanitarian
and human rights conditions on the ground when
missions begin and when their mandates are extended.
If missions are ended or downsized, we must also
consider the consequences of those measures and
whether the security vacuum will be filled by terrorist
groups. The key question is: How do we prevent such
groups from making inroads into new territories, thus
creating further regional and global insecurities?
Eighth, recent setbacks in the field provide insight
for a thorough ongoing evaluation of mission objectives
and their completion. It is critical to design proper
exit strategies and alternative future arrangements to
ensure stabilization after mission withdrawal. Such a
framework is necessary for every mission.
Ninth, we appreciate the immense efforts of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
Department of Field Support to improve the system
of force generation. However, there is room for
improvement, such as introducing a rotational system
for troop-contributing countries (TCCs). This could
create a better environment among TCCs and increase
the overall effectiveness of field missions.
Political diplomacy and peacekeeping go hand in
hand. There is no body parallel to the United Nations,
with its peacekeeping operations and its three essential
pillars under the Charter. It is thus up to us to see
how best we can deploy and support United Nations
peacekeeping as one of the invaluable and indispensable
tools in the context of the New Agenda for Peace.

17-0929411/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United States to convene
this meeting. We thank Secretary-General Guterres
for his briefing and for his nine reform points. China
supports the Secretary-General’s important efforts to
enhance United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In the 70 years since their establishment, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have played an
important role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Given the profound changes in the
international situation and the increasing complexity
of peacekeeping environments and missions, the
effective implementation of peacekeeping operations is
facing grave challenges. The international community
has high expectations for improving United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and in this respect I wish to
share the following observations.
First, it is key to abide by the basic principles of
peacekeeping operations and handle relations with the
host country appropriately. The purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence or defence of the
mandate, otherwise known as the three peacekeeping
principles, form the cornerstone of peacekeeping
operations and retain an irreplaceable guiding role in
the new context.
In carrying out peacekeeping operations, it is
important to fully respect the sovereignty of the host
country and value its views, assist it in enhancing its
security capacity-building, and engage in beneficial
interaction with it.
When a host country requests it and the situation
allows for the exit of a peacekeeping operation, the
Security Council should guide the Secretariat in
establishing a clear exit timetable, so as to avoid
an indefinite stay on the part of the peacekeeping
operation in the host country. Peacekeeping operations
must adapt to changing dynamics and adjust their size
as appropriate, so as to optimize peacekeeping resource
flows and provide tangible assistance to countries with
more pressing needs.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations must have clear,
actionable and focused mandates. Such operations
revolve around the core tasks of conflict resolution and
sustaining peace. It is important to plan the mandates
of peacekeeping missions with full consideration given
to the actual needs of the host country, the security
12/26

06/04/2017

environment on the ground and the capacity of the troopcontributing countries (TCCs), as well as other factors,
while adapting its priorities to changing situations at
every stage of the mission.
The Secretariat must proceed from the overall
perspective and in the long-term interest of maintaining
international peace and security, take effective measures
to improve the command system for peacekeeping
operations, enhance missions’ work by improving their
efficiency and efficacy and strengthen their ability to
respond to complexities so that they can better perform
the duties entrusted to them by the Charter of the
United Nations.
Thirdly, enhanced communication and coordination
with the TCCs is necessary, as they are the main
players in peacekeeping operations and have made
major contributions and sacrifices to such operations.
Peacekeepers from the TCCs have been performing
their duties on the front lines and are best informed
as to the challenges and difficulties facing them in the
fulfilment of their tasks.
The Security Council should enhance communication
with TCCs and receive in-depth knowledge of the
progress made by peacekeeping operations, the situation
in the host country and the difficulties facing TCCs. It
must fully respect the views of TCCs and take active
measures to enhance the security of peacekeepers and
strengthen early-warning capacities with respect to
potential security threats, as well as provide enough
logistical support to ensure that security and medical
equipment, supplies and measures are available.
Nine of the 16 United Nations peacekeeping missions
are located in Africa. Twelve of the largest-contributing
TCCs are African countries. Enhancing communication
and coordination with African countries in the field
of peacekeeping and increasing assistance to African
countries are imperative in order to effectively improve
peacekeeping operations. In recent years, the African
Union has been actively committed to enhancing the
joint self-reliance of African countries and has achieved
considerable success in self-reliant peacekeeping
efforts. China has always supported Africa in resolving
African issues in an African way. China has always
supported the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations in their efforts to play active
roles in the resolution of regional issues.
China supports the United Nations in tfurther
expanding and deepening its cooperation with the
17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

African Union in the area of peace and security, while
listening carefully to the views and concerns of African
countries on peacekeeping and actively supporting
Africa’s peacekeeping capacity-building.
Over the years, African Union-led peacekeeping
operations have played a crucial roles. The United
Nations should increase its political support to them,
provide greater assistance in the areas of staff training,
logistical assistance and financial support and give
positive consideration to setting up a sustained and
stable funding mechanism.
As the biggest TCC among the five permanent
members of the Security Council and the secondlargest contributor in terms of assessed contributions
to United Nations peacekeeping, China has made an
important contribution to the cause of United Nations
peacekeeping. China is implementing across the board
all of the commitments announced by Chinese leaders to
further support United Nations peacekeeping operations
by actively building up a stand-by peacekeeping force,
vigorously advancing the dispatch of helicopters and
providing training to peacekeepers from around the
world, African countries in particular. China will
work to facilitate the China-United Nations peace and
development fund’s ability to take more concrete action
for developing countries, especially African countries,
and help Africa to enhance its peacekeeping capacitybuilding.
China is ready to work
together with the
broader United Nations membership and make a
greater contribution to further improving United
Nations peacekeeping operations and better maintain
international peace and security.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank the Secretary-General for his important briefing
and assure him of France’s full support for the approach
that he has just set out. I also thank the American
presidency for having convened this meeting. The issue
bringing us together today, peacekeeping and the men
and women serving in peacekeeping operations — the
Blue Helmets — are very much the identity and very
face of the United Nations.
I should like to make three specific points.
My first is that United Nations peacekeeping
operations save lives every day; their work is invaluable.
In the past, in Namibia, Cambodia, El Salvador,
Slovenia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Timor-Leste and Côte

S/PV.7918

d’Ivoire, and today in the Central African Republic,
Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan, Lebanon and Darfur, Blue Helmets have been
preventing clashes, protecting civilians and clearing
the way for political processes. They do so at a low cost,
because the peacekeeping operations budget accounts
for only 0.5 per cent of the world’s annual global
military expenditure. This is therefore an essential and
responsible investment.
The major traumas that have taken place since
the Second World War occurred where peacekeeping
failed — I am thinking here of Srebrenica and
Rwanda — and where peacekeeping was not present,
such as in Syria. Those failures are rightly etched
into our collective memory. But we all know that
Blue Helmet bases frequently represent a vulnerable
population’s only hope in the face of armed groups that
terrorize, loot and kill, their only way out and their only
recourse, quite simply, for even a chance at survival.
Who else would want or be able to ensure the protection
of civilians in so many dangerous theatres? On the other
hand, who would want to be responsible for abandoning
the peoples of South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or the Central African Republic to their fate?
In that regard, I would like to commend the actions of
the almost 110,000 men and women who are deployed
and working today to avoid such tragedies, and to pay
tribute to the more than 3,400 peacekeepers who have
lost their lives on mission since 1948.
My second point is that United Nations peacekeeping
is constantly under review and continues to be
committed to improving and moving forward. There
has been an ongoing focus on improving peacekeeping
for years, and much has already been done. The most
recent integrated and multidimensional operations are
based on a concept whereby their mandates revolve
around both immediate and vital priorities, such as the
protection of civilians and human rights, and longerterm tasks, such as support to political processes,
reforms and the restoration of State authority, which
are a guarantee of effectiveness and a successful,
sustainable exit from a crisis. Those mandates require
an integrated approach on the part of all United Nations
actors, including funds, agencies and programmes. The
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General have
become the conductors orchestrating the continuum
of peace, security and development that we try
to encourage.

17-0929413/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

On the operational front, peacekeeping missions
are now expected to protect civilians actively and
robustly, as the recent actions of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)have
shown. We have been scaling up troops, capacities and
leadership, as well as training, equipment, intelligence,
medical support, language capacities — which the
countries of la Francophonie have worked particularly
hard to advance — air support and police components.
That list is not exhaustive, but these are all areas that
are evolving significantly. This is a big effort, and the
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat have
put a great deal into it. Thanks to that progress, United
Nations operations can bring the greatest legitimacy
and the most comprehensive approach in responding
to a conflict. National operations such as those that
France is deploying in the Sahel and the Central
African Republic can act only as supplements, not
substitutes. But the United Nations is not always the
right tool or the only one. That is where partnering with
regional organizations makes sense, and we support the
joint United Nations efforts with the African Union
under resolution 2320 (2016), based on comparative
advantages and in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Does that mean that all is well? No, but my third
point is that we have to make the right diagnoses and
be firm in administering the cures. Some difficulties
arise from specific situations, while others are more
systemic. Sexual abuse has undermined peacekeepers’
integrity and their calling as protectors. Serious failures
of the imperative to protect civilians, in South Sudan
and elsewhere, are still shocking. From maintaining our
zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse to investigating
mandate failures, we must do everything possible to
correct and prevent such serious dysfunctionality. But
overall, our diagnosis must be fair, since some of the
structural difficulties of peacekeeping are outside an
operation’s control. If some remain for too long, or if
others seem too timid, that is because they can succeed
only if they are based on the triple foundation of a
unified Security Council, the joint political willingness
of the parties involved to emerge from conflict, and
troops who are determined to implement their mandate.
Based on those considerations, France urges that we
draw various conclusions that can enable us to continue
to adapt peacekeeping to our current challenges. Those
conclusions include, first, closing an operation and
14/26

06/04/2017

transferring its responsibilities to the country team
when a mandate is fulfilled, as is currently the case
with the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. To
that we could add the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, which have largely achieved their objectives.
Drawing the right conclusions also means recognizing
that some missions — such as the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, MINUSCA and the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon — must be maintained because they play a
vital role, despite the frustrations that can result from
the slow pace of political processes.
Drawing the right conclusions also means
continuing to work to ensure that the operations are
truly in a position to succeed. There are several elements
to that. The first is encouraging the Security Council
to be united in directing operations. That support is
essential to their success. The second is strengthening
our support to political processes, including when they
are driven by our regional partners, as in South Sudan.
Every effort should be made to ensure coherence in our
collective action and in achieving results. We should
remember that for those political efforts to succeed, the
violence has to stop and civilians have to be protected.
The third is structuring relationships with host States so
that we can have a genuine exchange of commitments
and responsibilities. That is why we support mutual
commitment frameworks and making them routine. The
fourth is continuing our efforts to give operations the
right troops, skills and equipment for their mandates.
That requires maintaining a tripartite partnership
among the Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries, to which France is an
active contributor. Lastly, drawing the right conclusions
means being ambitious and demanding in our efforts
to better integrate United Nations peacekeeping into
its global environment and the peace continuum that
the Secretary-General is promoting, with France’s
full support.
Why has peacekeeping, which began as an ad hoc
concept, seen its ambitions and its resources grow in
this way? Because it is a tool for all of us, and because
it has been proving its usefulness for 60 years. We
commend the significant discussion we have had
today — for which I would once again like to thank the
United States presidency — since it will enable us to
17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

make our collective action stronger and more effective
than before.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s debate, and
the Secretary-General for his statement, which pointed
the way to making the radical changes in peacekeeping
missions that can make them more fit for our times.
Italy is a global security provider. We are the top
contributor of Blue Helmets among Western countries.
In addition, we participate in a range of non-United
Nations missions, such as those in Afghanistan, Iraq
and Somalia, as well as that fighting human trafficking
and terrorism in the Mediterranean.
In a world that has seen a dramatic increase in
security challenges, peacekeeping continues to be a
crucial tool for maintaining peace and security. We
should not forget United Nations peacekeeping’s many
success stories, which we should be building on. The
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, for example,
plays a fundamental role in its interposition between
the parties and as a mediator, through its tripartite
mechanism. It is a concrete example of conflict
prevention through patience, dedication and continued
efforts by the parties and of a mission that makes a huge
contribution to regional stability. In West Africa — in
Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire — peace missions achieved
their goals thanks also to the political dimension of the
United Nations presence, to a coordinated action at the
regional level and to the critical role of the Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations Office for West Africa.
As Secretary-General underlined, we need a more
holistic approach to peace. Peace operations should be
seen in the broader context of prevention, peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and post-conflict stabilization, in a
sort of peace continuum where the quest for political
solutions must be a primary goal. Yet, of course,
resources are limited and should be utilized in a costeffective way, including by progressively closing the
gap between the resources the Organization spends on
peacekeeping — almost $8 billion — and the budget for
mediation and special political missions, which is about
$600 million.
We agree that peacekeeping missions should
be regularly reviewed to assess their effectiveness,
adherence to their mandates and the need for
adjustments to address evolving situations. However,
when examining or phasing out peacekeeping missions,

S/PV.7918

we should avoid decisions driven only by the need to
reduce costs, and avoid early disengagement that may
lead to a redeployment of new missions in a deteriorating
environment, as was the case in the past. Strategic
patience should be at the core of our evaluations.
Peace operations should be shaped by four main
principles. The first is the primacy of politics and
the centrality of the people. A peacekeeping mission
should have as a core objective the support for inclusive
political processes aimed at national dialogue and
reconciliation. Protecting civilians in conformity with
the Kigali Principles, to which Italy subscribed, must
also be one of its main functions.
The second principle is mandates. We should
define an entry strategy, attainable objectives and
measurable benchmarks for all the parties involved.
Clear benchmarks for launching a responsible exit
strategy should be provided at the outset. Sequenced
benchmarks linked to political progress in the country
should be established, as well as local ownership of
stabilization to prevent dependency of the country on
a mission. Mandates of course should also be flexible
to evolve as the situation evolves. We should not refrain
when possible from phasing out a military mission
with a more agile and light-footprint mission based on
specialized police units and civilian units focused on
stabilization, the rule of law, justice and the protection
of civilians.
Thirdly, the involvement of regional actors and
the role of regional and subregional organizations are
key to establishing an effective and successful political
process. In that regard, I wish to mention the report (see
S/2008/813) prepared in December 2008 by the group
of experts chaired by Romano Prodi, which called
for predictable financial support for United Nationsapproved African Union peacekeeping missions. In
that context, the European Union can also have a major
role to play in complementing United Nations efforts
on the ground, improving cooperation on mandates and
mission planning and concluding agreements to operate
jointly with the United Nations, as is already the case in
Mali, in the Sahel, and in the Central African Republic.
Fourthly, if we talk about efficiency, intelligence,
equipment and training are essential. Technological
innovation in particular is crucial to improving the
performance of peace missions and increasing the
security of peacekeepers, as highlighted by the use
of unmanned aerial vehicles in the United Nations

17-0929415/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which Italy first provided to the
mission several years ago.
Finally, training, in particular predeployment and
mandate-oriented training, is key. There must be a
strong commitment to achieving the highest standards
of conduct of United Nations peacekeepers, promoting
initiatives between countries, providing training to
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs and
PCCs) and donors, including efforts to prevent sexual
abuse and exploitation. The long-term challenge
consists of promoting the self-sufficiency of TCCs and
PCCs. In that regard, allow me to recall Italy’s role as
a training and logistical hub, thanks to its facilities in
Vicenza, in joint venture with the United States, in
Brindisi, the Global Service Centre, and in Turin, the
United Nations Staff College.
In conclusion, I wish like others to pay tribute
to the women and men serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and in particular to those who
have lost their lives over the years.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for the timely initiative and the
opportunity to have a fruitful discussion on the flagship
United Nations activity, namely, its peacekeeping
operations. We also commend the Secretary-General
for continuing the practice of personal briefings to
the Security Council on various critical issues of
international peace and security.
It is common wisdom that these days the world is
an increasingly dangerous place to live in, warranting
more and not less engagement of the United Nations in
the area of peace and security. Ukraine, as an active
troop- and police-contributor and a country where a
foreign-led armed conflict continues to rage, views the
issue of maintaining peace and conflict prevention as
the most important task of the Organization.
Over the years, peace operations have proved to be
an adaptive instrument and contributed to the resolution
of numerous conflicts. A number of United Nations
peacekeeping success stories have contributed to an
increase in demand for United Nations peacekeeping
operations, leading to their significant expansion
in size, geography, budget and resources as well as
in mandates.
Following the report (see S/2015/446) of the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
16/26

06/04/2017

various aspects of peacekeeping operations have been
extensively debated both by the General Assembly and
the Security Council. We fully share the view that lasting
peace is achieved not through military but political
solutions. United Nations peacekeeping operations are
merely one of the tools to achieve adequate conditions
on the ground for advancing a respective peace process.
Peacekeeping operations are a tool, and not a
solution, for conflicts. Yet sustainable de-escalation
and progress in peaceful settlement and peacebuilding,
including holding elections, are not possible without
a robust international security presence capable of
ensuring and monitoring implementation of all securityrelated provisions until the legitimate security sector
and law-enforcement institutions are established or
restored. That is why today United Nations peacekeepers
are expected to deliver more. That is why the task of
protecting civilians has evolved into an integral part
of United Nations peacekeeping. Performance in this
area is often decisive for the success and legitimacy of
a peace process.
Therefore, even in situations when political
negotiations are in a stalemate, peacekeeping operations
continue to play an important stabilizing role and
should be provided with adequate technical, human and
financial resources. If a peacekeeping operation loses
the trust of a local population, the political process has
minimal chances of succeeding. In that regard, we fully
agree with the need to identify the missions that are in
need of structural reform and to thoroughly consider
every mission’s mandate and monitor the efficiency
of its implementation, with a focus on the protection
of civilians and achieving a political solution. We
believe that missions should be provided with clear,
coherent, achievable and, at the same time, resilient
mandates sufficient to ensure the security and safety of
civilians, including stopping illegal inflows of weapons
and mercenaries.
Taking into account that the security situation
on the ground in conflict areas can change swiftly
and dramatically, such mandates should include
provisions enabling peacekeeping operations to
use force in circumstances of direct threat to its
personnel or civilians, including terrorist threats. The
Security Council as the one and only United Nations
peacekeeping-operations-mandating body should be up
to this task.
17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Another crucial aspect is the timely transition
from peacekeeping operations to other forms of United
Nations presence. We have witnessed a success story
in the steady restoration of peace in Côte d’Ivoire.
Ukraine is proud to be among those troop-contributing
countries that have actively contributed to this
endeavour by supporting the United Nations operation
in that country. In that regard, one can clearly see how
success is achieved through carefully gauging the
nature and strength of United Nations involvement
against progress in consolidating stability and peace.
We also believe the same approach should be applied to
Liberia, which is already on its way forward, assuming
full responsibility for its security from the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.
Speaking of the right toolbox, United Nations
peacekeeping today is trying to address challenges of
the twenty-first century using tools from the twentieth
century. I would not be divulging a big secret if I
said that sometimes United Nations peacekeepers are
underequipped and poorly informed, and therefore
may refrain from intervening even in the face of
terrible atrocities.
As the world’s technological revolution continues,
the cliché image of a typical United Nations peacekeeper
remains that of a soldier in a blue helmet with
binoculars. It is high time to transition from traditional
peacekeeping to smart, cost-effective peacekeeping by
introducing modern technology, from data-gathering to
remote observation and non-lethal weapons. That could
be of great help with regard to the protection of civilians
and, indeed, the entire scope of peacekeeping mandates.
Many of those issues were reflected in the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) and the report of the
Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation in United
Nations Peacekeeping in 2015. However, besides the
introduction of unmanned aircraft in two missions
and surveillance balloons in one capital, not much has
been implemented since then. Soldiers with binoculars
remain. It would seem appropriate to request of the
Secretary-General to report on the implementation of
the Panels’ recommendations and prepare a study on
the comparative cost effectiveness of digital vis-à-vis
traditional peacekeeping. We are confident that the
United Nations could benefit immensely from a
plethora of technologies to assist peace operations.
Missing such opportunities means missing chances
for peace, as has happened far too often in the past

S/PV.7918

when the United Nations was ill-equipped to carry out
difficult mandates.
One more issue that we should not overlook is
overreliance on United Nations mission support.
However, in that regard as well, we have to implement
a long-term approach. In some cases, host countries are
becoming dependent upon a United Nations presence,
while in others missions’s long-lasting life cycles
might be a sign of their indispensable role as a local
and regional factor in security issues. We share the
vision that our main goal should be to ensure that every
United Nations mission is a success story rather than an
endless process with no light at the end of the tunnel.
Last but not least, over the past decade, the role of
the relevant regional arrangements in promoting peace
and security has only expanded. The engagement of the
Economic Community of West African States in the
Gambian post-electoral crisis is the most recent case
in point. The United Nations should therefore build
and enhance its strategic partnership with regional
organizations by working in concert with them and
using the comparative advantage of each actor in
peacekeeping and conflict management. If there is a
conclusion from the open debate on conflicts in Europe
organized by the Ukrainian presidency in February (see
S/PV.7886) from which the Council should benefit, it is
that kind of interaction is more important today than
ever before for cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the European Union and NATO.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of Ukraine to strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and accordingly its readiness
to work constructively with all parties involved.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Madam President, for organizing
this important meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his useful briefing and,
frankly, for having been such a driving force for the
revitalization of the United Nations, including in the
area of peace and security.
This meeting has certainly attracted a lot of
attention within the broader membership of the United
Nations. It has also already stimulated interesting
discussions among members of the media, academia
and civil society organizations. That is indeed a good
thing, and we are among those who truly believe that
there is a need for a frank discussion on reforming

17-0929417/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations to make them
fit for purpose.

necessary because, as the High-level Independent Panel
rightly noted,

We thank the United States presidency for the
concept paper (S/2017/287, annex) framing the topic
for our discussion, which we have found useful and
carefully crafted.

“Many of the constraints to improving peace
operations are political in nature, and can be
addressed through political will to find compromise
and to respond to long-standing challenges”
(S/2015/446, p. 16).

What we are discussing today is critical for the
lead role that the United Nations plays in ensuring
international peace and security. That has been a
recurring theme in the Security Council. Without any
doubt, the whole membership of the United Nations
has agreed upon the need to reform peacekeeping.
Approximately two years ago, we undertook a major
review of peace operations in all their aspects. That was
done in close consultation with all Member States and
other relevant stakeholders. What essentially guided
that major review process was indeed the absolute need
for United Nations peacekeeping operations to change,
adapt to new circumstances and ensure their increased
future effectiveness and appropriate use.
In our opinion, the outcome of the review certainly
lived up to expectations in making an array of important
recommendations aimed at enhancing the efficiency and
effectiveness of peace operations both at the strategic
and operational levels. We believe that the outcome
of the review has also raised the extremely pertinent
and serious questions that have been brought up by the
concept paper, and the review covered much ground in
responding to those queries. It therefore appears to us
that this meeting affords us a great opportunity to lay
a strong foundation for the implementation of most of
the recommendations that are contained in the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(HIPPO) (see S/2015/446).

There is therefore a need to work in close consultation
and partnership with troop-contributing countries and
other relevant stakeholders.
In the context of our discussion today, I would like
to bring up two points. Although they are not new ideas,
we feel that they should be underlined. We need to have
a clear political strategy to effectively respond to the
peace and security challenges affecting us today. The
significance of investing in prevention has long been
evident. It is not only a matter of being cost-effective;
most important, it is a matter of saving lives. That
was the primary reason for the establishment of the
Organization — to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.
Whenever the need arises, we should be able to use
the range of tools available in a pragmatic and flexible
manner while taking into account the realities on the
ground. Peace operations have been and continue to
be one of the most important tools in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security.
If peace operations are guided by a clear political
strategy attuned to specific conflict situations, they
can indeed deliver better results. The same is true
with regard to any given exit strategy, which should be
appropriately aligned with the transition from conflict
to sustainable peace.

We have a Secretary-General who is truly
committed to implementing the necessary structural
reforms in line with the HIPPO recommendations,
and who has already begun to take concrete steps in
the direction of improving the peace and security
architecture of the United Nations so as to make it fit
for purpose and deliver results in the most efficient and
cost-effective manner.

In all our efforts to ensure greater efficiency and
effectiveness of peace operations, we should therefore
be cognizant of the specific context in which such
missions operate and the strategy at stake. There
should be no one-size-fits-all approach, which could
have undesirable consequences. We may perhaps need
to look at how the strategic reviews of missions are
conducted. There is a feeling that such reviews could
be improved to realize their goals.

We should be expected to support him because
some of those important reforms cannot be carried
out without bringing all Member States on board.
Unquestionably, that is frustrating as building the
necessary consensus is never easy, but it is absolutely

The other important point that needs to be stressed
is the need for global regional partnerships, which is no
longer a matter of choice but of necessity. That has been
a topic of discussion in the Council, and it is encouraging
to know that there is now a greater appreciation of that

18/26

17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

important reality. Such partnerships are unquestionably
instrumental not only in enhancing the responsiveness
of the United Nations to address conflict situations, but
also in ensuring greater efficiency and effectiveness.
Finally, as one of the leading troop-contributing
countries, we definitely attach great importance to
strengthening United Nations peace operations in all
their aspects. Our long-standing contribution to United
Nations peacekeeping operations is dictated by a strong
conviction because of our history in multilateralism
and collective security. This is attested to by our
track record of the past 70 years, as well as by the
performance of the thousands of our peacekeepers who
are currently operating in some of the most volatile
conflict situations, making sacrifices for the cause of
regional and international peace and security. This,
by the way, began in the early 1950s, when, as the
representative of France said, peacekeeping was only
an ad hoc concept, in its infancy.
Ethiopia is ready to look at the possibility of hosting
a high-level open debate at the level of Heads of State
and Government in September, during its presidency
of the Council, two years after the high-level review
on peace operations, with a view to facilitating serious
discussions and follow-up of the implementation of the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations and charting the best way forward.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the presidency for its
initiative in convening this briefing today. I also thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his informative briefing.
Japan is deeply committed to United Nations
peacekeeping and is the third-largest contributor to its
budget. We are eager to discuss how this vital tool for
international peace and stability can deliver the greatest
impact on the ground.
Our goal in reviewing peacekeeping operations
should be to ensure that peacekeeping achieves results
consistently. It is thus our essential task to undertake
serious, well-informed discussions to determine in
concrete terms what we want each mission to deliver.
Today’s discussion must be put into context: while
we should always seek to improve the efficiency of
United Nations peacekeeping, overall it is a costeffective tool. To give just one example, an analysis
carried out by the United States Government
Accountability Office in 2006 found that the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was costing less

S/PV.7918

than half of what a United States operation of equal size
and duration would have required. Our priority is not
to simply scale back or downsize peacekeeping, but to
ensure that it is effectively employed where it can make
a difference with limited resources.
In the process of reviewing operations, some
improvements may take time. But one measure we
can implement this very day is to hold more in-depth
discussions in the Council on the mandates that we
authorize. We tend to add on different capacities to
missions in response to individual circumstances, but
we must stop to reflect on this habit. The Council has
the primary responsibility to identify a mission’s core
objective and priorities through focused discussions.
The clarity and effectiveness of mandates, and thus
of peacekeeping itself, stem from the quality of such
discussions. This requires us to methodically review and
analyse information from the field, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. A recent good example
is the extensive discussion on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo between Council members
and troop-contributing countries, which resulted in a
clearer and better-prioritized mandate.
We must assess whether the continued deployment
of a given peacekeeping operation fits the reality on the
ground. We often hear that shrinking mandates or troop
levels can undermine peace and security if the timing
is not right. But this cannot be an excuse for status quo
mandate rollovers without serious consideration. We
need deeper discussions in the Council to link political
processes closely to mandates. We should also consider
whether the timing of deployment is appropriate in the
conflict spectrum.
We must be prepared to constructively discuss
peacekeeping exit strategies with an understanding
of the context on the ground, including what would
follow on from a premature withdrawal where political
solutions are elusive. In doing so, the Council should
explore enhanced coordination with the Peacebuilding
Commission, which can play an important role in the
transition from peacekeeping to post-conflict recovery.
As one means of making peacekeeping even
more cost-effective, Japan proposes that we further
explore coordinated initiatives to increase personnel
capabilities across missions. Individual troopcontributing countries are responsible for ensuring
high troop standards, but in many cases enhanced

17-0929419/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

capacity through additional training can be beneficial.
Triangular cooperation among the Secretariat, troopcontributing countries and a third country such as Japan
can help ensure that peacekeepers are well prepared for
the field. Standardizing this practice could be one way
of guaranteeing that missions consistently receive the
best personnel to complete their mandates.
We must use United Nations peacekeeping even
more effectively so that this vital tool can continue
to protect the most vulnerable while fitting into a
broader framework for sustaining peace that is built
on the pillars of peace and security, human rights and
development. There are, naturally, many views on how
this can best be accomplished. Japan hopes that today’s
briefing will mark the start of more in-depth Council
discussions involving a wide range of stakeholders on
each mission and mandate.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing provided today on
peacekeeping operations. I should like also to thank the
presidency for having convened this debate, at which
we can discuss the relevance of current peacekeeping
operations and ask ourselves whether these in their
current format continue to be the best mechanism that
we have to ensure international peace and security.
First of all, I would like to underscore the importance
of peacekeeping operations. Today this is the most
important instrument at our disposal to maintain peace
in places where it is most needed. By the same token,
we would like to underscore and pay tribute to the key
role played by the troops, military observers, police and
civilian personnel that compose the various missions.
These men and women are on the ground risking their
lives every day to ensure that the various missions can
fulfil the goals and tasks with which we have entrusted
them. With this in mind, I should like to thank each
one of these individuals for their work; we hope that
they return safe and sound to their homes after having
fulfilled their mission.
It is important to recall that peacekeeping
operations are slightly less than 70 years old and that
in all this time some 69 missions have been deployed,
of which 16 continue to be operational today. Among
the most notable successes of the Organization are
missions that have contributed to ending conflicts and
promoting reconciliation, including in countries of our
20/26

06/04/2017

region such as El Salvador and Guatemala. They have
also contributed to stabilizing Haiti.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia has been working
for 20 years with the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. In 1997, the Organization
signed an agreement with Bolivia under which it
became a troop-contributing country. In 1999, we
sent a 70-soldier component to cooperate in the work
of closing down the operations of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola; it fulfilled that mission
in full.
Bolivia also took part as a troop-contributing
country in the United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, which was in succeeded by the current
one, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
In each one of these missions, Bolivian troops acted
with the greatest professionalism, always respecting
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
acting in the framework of international law. Bolivia
currently contributes military observers to four of the
16 existing missions. We are committed to helping all
of them achieve their objectives and, to that end, our
personnel act based on the principles I have mentioned.
The United States delegation, which organized
today’s meeting, encouraged Council members to focus
on whether our peacekeeping operations, as they are
currently constituted, are still the mechanism best
suited to meeting the needs of the people on the ground
and achieving the Council’s political goals. That is why
it is important that we question the current value of
every one of our peacekeeping operations. There are
three points we should consider in that regard. The first
is the political support that every mission needs, from
the Government of the country where it is deployed,
from other Governments in the region and from the
international community in general. The second is
that we must always keep in mind the reason that each
mission was deployed in the first place. And the third
is that we must always keep each mission’s specific
mandates and goals in the forefront of our minds.
Where the first point is concerned, Bolivia believes
that every mission should have the political support
of the country or countries where it is deployed. It is
impossible to imagine a positive outcome, even when
a mission is complying with its mandate, if it cannot
depend on the consent of the main parties in every
17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

situation. Should that be the case, the mandate would
have to be restructured, even to the extent of questioning
its very existence if for one reason or another it cannot
rely on the consent of the parties.
That brings me to my second point, which is that
for missions to be seen as legitimate by the parties to
the conflict, it is essential that they are working for
the purposes for which they were conceived and are
upholding the principles of our peacekeeping operations.
They should therefore be impartial and serve only to
help build a lasting peace. They should never be seen or
used as an intervention force or be used to help justify
regime change. Every peacekeeping operation should
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries in which it intervenes.
With regard to my third point, it is vital for
a mission to always have a clear, measurable and
achievable mandate. We must use the tools available
to us, such as monitoring and evaluation mechanisms,
to ensure that missions are meeting their goals and
fulfilling their mandates. If for any reason they
are not, they must be evaluated and their mandates
reconfigured. The part of the United Nations system
that includes peacekeeping operations has ended up in a
vicious circle of self-perpetuating bureaucracies where
mandates have become distorted and the bureaucracy
has become an end in itself. In other words, we find
ourselves in a situation where we see no way out
and renew the mandates every year simply to avoid
further complications. It is therefore crucial that every
peacekeeping operation have a maximum lifespan,
after which it must, of course, be evaluated and shut
down. If the conflict is still going, a new mission
should be established, with new mandates and new
goals that should be measurable and achievable in the
time allowed.
Before I conclude, I should make one last point,
which deserves the Council’s full attention, although
it is unrelated to the previous ones. It is the issue of
the damage that peacekeeping operations themselves
can do, such as in the case of the cholera epidemic that
has affected Haiti in the past few years, and for whose
initial outbreak the Organization has already admitted
a degree of responsibility. It is important to ensure that
missions always coordinate with local authorities on
planning and staffing issues.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that the
Plurinational State of Bolivia fully supports the efforts

S/PV.7918

of every peacekeeping operation and is very grateful
to their personnel for their work and the sacrifices
they make.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing and taking the
initiative in today’s important debate. It comes at a
significant moment. The range and nature of threats
to international peace and security are evolving and
multiplying and, as the Secretary-General has told us,
the United Nations must make changes to its “culture,
strategy, structures and operations” in order to respond
to those new challenges.
Peacekeeping is an essential, unique and, by many
measurements, successful instrument in the peace-andsecurity toolbox of the United Nations. However, in
this day and age, for the Organization to live up to the
commitment in the Charter of the United Nations to
maintaining peace and security, those operations must
not only become more effective, they must improve the
contribution they make to sustainable peace. We should
also bear in mind that resources are finite and should be
used as efficiently as possible — although the starting
point is about saving lives, not money. And in order
to save lives, we have to prevent and solve conflicts.
For that reason, the focus in today’s discussion, on
the political foundations necessary for peacekeeping
operations to succeed, is particularly valuable.
The findings of the three 2015 reviews of the United
Nations peace and security architecture all agree on the
need for reform and provide a road map to achieve it. It is
now time to follow through on their recommendations.
At the heart of the reviews is a clear understanding that
the United Nations must take a more holistic approach to
maintaining peace and security. We welcome the work
that is already under way, including the internal review
of the Secretariat’s peace and security architecture.
We hope it will result in a United Nations equipped to
respond in a system-wide, well-coordinated fashion to
threats to peace and security. We support the nine areas
for focusing on reform that the Secretary-General put
forward this afternoon, and I would like to elaborate a
little on some of them.
First, almost every day the Council hears that
there are no military solutions to a particular conflict,
and in that regard we must recognize the primacy of
politics — meaning that peace can be delivered only
on the basis of political solutions that aim to sustain
peace. That should guide all peace operations and is

17-0929421/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

also crucial to the protection of civilians. Building
effective political strategies requires a thorough
understanding of a particular conflict and its context. It
means sometimes asking difficult questions for which
the answers will be unique to that particular setting.
The Council must therefore be supported in its work
and receive input from the Secretary-General with
reliable, high-quality conflict analysis, prepared jointly
by the whole of the United Nations system. Secretariat
briefings should give more comprehensive overviews
of a situation, so as to enable the Council to make
better-informed decisions. Strategic reviews conducted
in advance of mandate renewals should include clear
options to help inform Council decisions.
Secondly, the mandates adopted by the Council
should be truly fit for purpose. Agreeing on more
realistic, context-tailored and flexible mandates
will make successful outcomes more likely. Within
mandates, tasks should be prioritized, sequenced and
adjusted over time. Exit strategies and transitional
phases of peacekeeping operations should be analysed
and planned at an early stage, in cooperation with all
the relevant actors. It is important to understand what
success will look like by including clear and measurable
objectives accompanied by benchmarks for progress.
We should not be afraid to review mandates regularly
and make course corrections when needed. Clear
objectives and benchmarks are also an important tool
for dialogue with the host country, which is crucial. A
good example is the Mutual Commitment Framework
between the Central African Republic and the
international community, in which the responsibilities
are clearly delineated and demonstrate what all involved
have to bring to the table to deliver peace.
Thirdly, in order to improve the prevention of
conflict and the promotion of long-term stability,
the Council and the United Nations as a whole must
consider all the tools in the toolbox. They should be
used more strategically in support of identified political
objectives, with the whole of the United Nations system
acting in a holistic manner in support of countries.
Increased coherence between peacekeeping operations
and the United Nations development and humanitarian
systems is therefore critical. Police capabilities play
an essential role, distinct from that of the military,
and should also be integrated. Broader strategies that
address the peace continuum should be inclusive and
based on full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. And, as we all know but still do not
22/26

06/04/2017

always achieve, and as the Secretary-General rightly
said, the inclusion and effective participation of
women is key. Regional actors that undertake missions
on behalf of the Council, such as the African Union
Mission in Somalia, are indispensable, and must be
supported, including through predictable financing.
Lastly, the dialogue between the Security Council
and the troop- and police-contributing countries should
be strengthened and made more dynamic both for
the design and the implementation of mandates. The
experiences of those countries are an invaluable source
of information for the Council. In addition to listening,
the Council should ensure that United Nations troops
and police better reflect the diversity of the States
Members of the United Nations, meet the requirements
and standards and deliver on the task set out in mandates,
which requires contributing countries to declare any
caveats. Furthermore, the capacity-building needs of
peacekeeping should be assessed and supported.
I wish to stress that every peacekeeper and every
peacekeeping operation must do all they can when
civilians are under imminent threat. And of course,
there must be zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse, as the Secretary-General underlined.
The Charter of the United Nations sets forth our
commitment to join our strengths in order to maintain
international peace and security. Peacekeeping
operations are perhaps the most tangible symbol of
this objective. In this period of new challenges, we
stand ready to work with the Secretary-General, on
the Security Council and with the broader United
Nations membership to ensure the most effective
operations possible.
Mr. Abdoulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First, let
me extend our thanks to the American presidency of the
Security Council for holding today’s important debate.
The changing security environment and the
complex nature of conflicts make it imperative that
we reconsider the effectiveness and utility of tools
available for the Security Council to prevent, manage
and settle disputes. There is no doubt that peacekeeping
operations are among the most important of those
tools, which makes it all the more important that we
review them so that we can maintain their effectiveness
and credibility.
17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and would like to affirm to him that we support all the
principles that he suggested.
We welcome the presidency’s initiative to shed light
on the need to review current mandates to develop and
reinforce them. This will help a recommitment to ending
conflicts that have gone on for far too long, where some
peacekeeping operations have become mere symbols
of the inability of the international community to
effectively contribute to a final settlement of decadesold disputes.
Consequently, we do not necessarily consider the
objective of review as simply an exercise in cost-cutting
or achieving significant savings in peacekeeping
operation budgets. If we agree that the objective of this
review is to find ways of bolstering the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations by making them more
purposeful, then we believe that we need to undertake
a careful analysis of the political, security and regional
environments of peacekeeping operations. In addition,
we need to evaluate the effectiveness and impact of
the attendant tools of regional political initiatives and
sanction regimes.
Peacekeeping operations must be approached
from the perspective of the continuum of response to
conflicts, which means that operation mandates must
be developed in a context of ongoing engagement that
includes integrated, physical operational and pragmatic
approaches, within, of course, the specific context
under consideration. Mandates must be restructured
or realigned continuously in response to political and
operational developments.
It is also important that assessments be based on
elements that were proved necessary for the success
of those missions, including, for instance, a political
process that is supported regionally and internationally,
such as the current African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. This was also the case
for Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and Côte d’Ivoire before
the closure of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste and the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire, respectively. These were operations that were
deemed successful.
Meanwhile, exit strategies for the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti provide two examples where there is no
need for an extensive United Nations security presence

S/PV.7918

under a peacekeeping-operation mandate. Rather, the
United Nations presence should address the needs of
sustaining peacebuilding and reinforcing national
capacity-building to enable States and societies to
own and develop mechanisms that plant the seeds of
conflict prevention.
In addition to a credible framework as one
of the conditions for the success of peacekeeping
operations, maintaining the trust of the host country
in the credibility of the United Nations mission and the
resulting cooperation that would lead to the success of
such mission must remain a major focus in assessing
the relevance of a certain peacekeeping operation to
United Nations engagement in settlement efforts. A
poignant reminder of the importance of this perspective
is seen in the challenges faced by the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. In addition,
relations between the Congolese Government with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Malian
Government with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali went through
critical stages that had a negative impact on the
performance and effectiveness of the two missions,
which prompted a realignment and restructuring of the
missions’ roles to make them more responsive to the
needs and developments in the two countries.
The previous examples clearly show that the
effectiveness and function of peacekeeping operations
is a dynamic process requiring an integrated
multidimensional assessment and constant revision of
a mission’s role, mandate and structure. Consequently,
no effective review of peacekeeping operations and
their development can be undertaken without first
reviewing the peace and security architecture of the
United Nations, including the United Nations role in
sustaining peace by integrating the roles of all United
Nations and international bodies’ programmes and
agencies. This is why the Peacebuilding Commission
can play an increasingly important advisory role, as far
as every conflict is concerned, in helping the Security
Council realign mandates with the comprehensive
vision of sustaining peace and addressing the root
causes of conflicts.
Close consultations with troop-contributing
countries are of the utmost importance, especially
during the mandate-design and review stages, in order
to incorporate field experience into every mandate in
line with the concept of participation and collective

17-0929423/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

ownership of mandates. For this particular reason,
the tripartite consultation mechanism among the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat must be leveraged across deployed missions.

06/04/2017

I would like to make six points that we think
will contribute to effective mandates in future
peacekeeping operations.

Egypt is a major contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As such, we have offered
to host the 2018 ministerial meeting on peacekeeping
operations. We look forward to cooperating with the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries so that the meeting will represent a qualitative
leap in our common effort to develop United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

First, peacekeeping operations must not be
burdened by unrealistic tasks that exceed their capacity
and fail to recognize political and operational realities.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States.

Secondly, exit strategies must be worked out in
the early stages of mandate development based on
clear benchmarks and a specific time frame. These
elements should be reviewed periodically to allow
the Council to recalibrate the mandate in line with
recent developments.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for taking the time to come and talk to us about
peacekeeping and, more important, for his efforts and
willingness to look at peacekeeping reform in a way
in which we can make it more effective for those who
need it.

Thirdly, a strategic partnership with the host
country must be established and focus on national
ownership of dialogue and reconciliation efforts and
improved communication to build mutual trust. Such
an environment would greatly contribute to the success
of the mission while avoiding any obstacles.

I also would like to thank my colleagues for
participating in this important discussion. I think
that so much of what they said was valuable but,
more important, there is a collective effort to reform
peacekeeping so that it does more for people on the
ground in a manner in which it is not only efficient but
effective. I thank them for taking the time to do that.

Fourthly, sufficient attention must be given to the
building of national security capacity to allow the State
to assume the responsibility of protecting civilians.
Such an approach would eliminate the culture of
overdependency by the host country on the police and
military components of the mission, which makes it
more difficult to end a mandate when the time comes.
Fifthly, synergies and complementaries must be
encouraged between the United Nations and regional
organizations and arrangements in the area of conflict
resolution, based on the comparative advantages of
each. A case in point is the potential opportunity of
a partnership with the African Union to address the
crises of the continent, although the future of such
a partnership depends upon African peace support
operations having access to the budget of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

If asked what the United Nations does, the average
person would most likely say peacekeeping. The Blue
Helmet is the most recognizable symbol of how the
United Nations extends its presence and shows value in
the world. With more than a 100,000 total personnel and
a budget close to $8 billion, peacekeeping is the United
Nations most powerful tool to promote international
peace and security. We recognize in particular the
courage of those men and women who risk their lives
serving in peacekeeping missions, and we pay tribute
to the more than 3,500 peacekeepers who have lost
their lives to keep others safe. By drawing troops
and resources from many countries, peacekeeping
helps share the burden of promoting global security.
When peacekeeping works well, we see countries that
have been able to end internal conflicts, re-establish
democratic political processes and develop their own
capacities to protect their people.

Sixthly, new input must be given to the partnership
between the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries when implementing the zero-tolerance policy
to combat sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations in line with the general framework endorsed
by the General Assembly pursuant to resolution 71/278.

I think that we can all agree that peacekeeping
is far from perfect. Many of the Security Council’s
past discussions on reform focused on operations and
efficiency issues, and that is all extremely important.
Those efforts need to continue but, when I think about
United Nations peacekeeping, I go back to what I

24/26

17-09294

06/04/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

learned as a young accountant: go back to the basics and
ensure that there are measurables and accountability.
We need to work smarter. We need to show results.
We need to find value, and not just financial value. We
need to focus on what the original intent was. Are we
actually on track in accomplishing that intent? Are we
meeting the needs of the people?
Because we cannot continue these massive
missions forever, we need to focus on the people whom
we are supposed to lift up, the peacekeepers who lack
the support or the direction that they need and the
taxpayers who pay the bills. The simple fact is that, in
many cases, United Nations peacekeeping is just not
working. In Darfur, a 17,000-strong force designed for
yesterday’s challenges is not built for the needs of today.
In South Sudan, where United Nations staff helped save
hundreds of thousands of civilians, those vulnerable
people have no hope of returning to a normal life. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government
uses the United Nations to neutralize only the armed
groups that it wants, while leaving others untouched.
Outside of Africa, we have our mission in Kosovo that,
if we are honest with ourselves, has no real reason
for being.
The risk is that of creating an artificial, subsidized
peace that discourages real home-grown resolutions
to those crises. That is why we need to think and why
we need this kind of honest strategic review. We invite
Council members to join us in evaluating each of our
peacekeeping missions as their mandates are renewed.
Our goal is to identify those missions that lack the
underlying political conditions for a resolution, which
numerous studies have concluded is central to mission
success. To help guide us, we have developed a set of
principles to which, we think, missions should be held.
We have already touched on the first principle,
which is that missions must support political solutions.
The mission in South Sudan, for example, involves a
Government entangled in a civil war. At this time there’s
no credible political path to peace. The Government
lacks the incentive to end the conflict, and has made
the job more difficult for our peacekeepers. We cannot
manage our way out of that problem. While it may be
easier to accept and prolong the status quo, we are not
doing ourselves or the people on the ground any favours.
The Council must commit to bringing its political
pressure to bear on non-cooperative Governments.

S/PV.7918

The second principle is also fundamental. We need
host-country cooperation. This is not to say that the
Council should shy away from countries in which it is
not welcome or forego to exercise its right as mandated
by the Charter of the United Nations to intervene when
needed. But we need to acknowledge that, time and again,
missions have failed to help those on the ground when
host Government’s chose to obstruct them. In Darfur,
the Government sought to restrict our peacekeepers
from day one. It delayed visas, prevented freedom of
movement and delayed customs clearance for food and
equipment. The mission has suffered, which means that
the people on the ground have suffered.
Thirdly, peacekeeping mandates must be realistic
and achievable. Mandates should be targeted to the
challenges facing the country and given the resources
and the capabilities to do the job. At the same time,
we must avoid mission creep. It is common practice for
missions to gradually snowball over time as they pick
up increasing tasks and staff. What we end up with is
a monster mission with unclear priorities or reporting
lines. In Lebanon, for instance, the mission does critical
work to maintain stability along the Blue Line but,
beyond those core-monitoring tasks, the mission does
everything from publishing magazines to providing
a navy.
Fourthly, we must have an exit strategy. We should
agree early on what success looks like, how to achieve
it and how to set the country or region on the path
to independence from the mission. These strategies
should be considered at the earliest stages of mission
planning and should be central to United Nations
regular reporting.
Lastly, we must be willing to adjust mandates
both when situations improve and when they fail to
improve. Lifting up the people of those regions must
be our objective. When this is achieved, institutional
inertia cannot be allowed to prolong operations. When
circumstances fail to progress, we must be willing to
draw down or restructure the mission and look at other
ways in which to bring about stability.
We have already begun to apply these principles to
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
The Mission is working in a country in which it is
increasingly clear that the Government is preying on
its own people. Recent reporting revealed that the
State was responsible for human rights violations,

17-0929425/26

S/PV.7918

United Nations peacekeeping operations

including the killing of 480 civilians. Yet we ask our
peacekeepers to support the same Government. That
is why the changes that we made to MONUSCO’s
mandate last week were so critical. Henceforth, we will
focus on the protection of civilians and support for the
democratic transition of power. We will develop an exit
strategy, and we will demand real accountability from
troop-contributing countries.
I recognize that much of the commentary about
peacekeeping reform in the weeks to come will centre
on budgets and troop levels, but I believe that experience
shows that funding is no guarantee for success. I also

26/26

06/04/2017

recognize that there are those who say this initiative
represents a withdrawal of the United States from the
global stage. Nothing could be further from the truth.
The United States will continue to lead both here at
the United Nations and out in the real world. Part of
leadership is knowing when something needs to be
fixed and having the will to do something about it. I
look forward to working with all Council members to
do just that.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

17-09294
