UNITED NATIONS’

ECORDS

f.JN I 5,

th
MEETING:

18 SEPTEMBER

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
.Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2396/Rev.

1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . , , . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(cl) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 15162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15316);
(c) Letter dated 16 September 1982 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council(S/15392) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV 82396

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2396th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 18 September 1982, at 6 p.m.
Mr. Masahiro

Presidmr:

NISIBORI

(Japan).

to take a place at the Council table; I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council table; I invite
the representatives of Cuba, Egypt, India, Kuwait,
Pakistan and the Syrian Arab Republic to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Paesrnl: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

At the invitation

Provisional
1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
(N) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives
of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15316);
(c) Letter dated 16 September 1982 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15392)
The tnmting

Ms. Tmfni (Lebat fhc Council
table; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organisation)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Roa Koari
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Krishnan
(India),
Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait),
Mr. Mahtnood
(Pakistan)
and Mr.’ El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic)
took the places reserved for them at the side cd the
Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2396/Rev.l)

of the Pwsidmt,

trnon) nnd Mr. B/urn (Israe/) tookplaces

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Democratic Yemen and Greece
in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

IVNS called to order at 6.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Al-Ashtal
(Drmocratic
Yemen) and Mr. Dortrztas (Gmw)
took
the plrrc*es reserved for them at the side of the C’ouncil chamber.

The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316);
(c) Letter dated 16 September 1982 from the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15392)

4. Members of the Council have received photocopies of a letter dated 18 September from the representative of Greece to the President of the Council
requesting an urgent meeting. The text of that letter
will be issued as a document of the Council under the
symbol S/15401.

1.
The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings [2374th, 2375th,
2377th,
2385th, 2389th and 2394th meetings], I invite
the representative
of Lebanon to take a place at the
Council
table; I invite the representative of Israel

4. I should like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to the following documents: S/15382/
Add.2, which contains a second addendum to the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Beirut area; and S/15399, which contains the text of

3. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened in response to an urgent
request made to me by the representative of Jordan
earlier today.

1

a letter dated 18 September from the representative
of Jordan to the President of the Council.
6. The Secretary-General
ment. I now call upon him.

of what had happened there during the night, soas to
prevent repetition.”

wishes to make a state-

10. Since that time, I have received, today at
4.40 p.m., the following information from Mr. Blum,
the representative of Israel:

7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I wish to inform
the Council about developments
since its meeting
last night [2395th meeting],
in the course of which it
adopted resolution 520 (1982).

“The IDF were deployed west of the camps and
had left the access to the east open in the expectation that the Lebanese army would enter the camps
and take up positions, as called for by the Habib
plan. This did not happen. When the IDF found out,
on the morning of 18 September, they surrounded
the camps to protect the population.”

8. Immediately
after the adoption of that resolution, I cabled its text to the Foreign Minister of
Israel with a request that the latter should send to me,
before 2000 hours GMT on 18 September, information on action taken or envisaged by the Government
of Israel to implement that resolution, as well as any
other relevant information.
I also instructed Genera1
Erskine, the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision
Organization
(UNTSO),
to follow up
that request with the Israeli authorities.
Should the
Israeli authorities agree to co-operate on increasing
the strength of the Observer Group Beirut (OGB),
General Erskine is prepared to make immediate
arrangements,
in consultation
with the Lebanese
Government,
to send additional observers to Beirut.

A second message received later from Mr. Blum was
as follows:
“An arrangement has been reached between the
IDF and the Lebanese armed forces for the Leb
anese armed forces to enter the three camps, tha
is, Fakhani, Sabra and Shatila, tomorrow morninr
(Sunday) at 10.00 local time.”
11. Members of the Council will be aware of thf
reports in the media about the tragic events in wes
Beirut. This morning, United Nations observers of thi
OGB reported the following.

9. This morning, the Chief of Staff of UNTSO received the following reply from the Israeli Foreign
Ministry for transmission to me:

12. During the day on 17 September, fighting in thi
Sabra camp in the southern suburbs of Beirut was ir;
progress, and the presence of Kataeb units-which
are the military branch of the Phalange Party--war
observed at Bir Hassan, in the hospital and airporl
areas, in the vicinity of Sabra camp. West Beirut WBS
reported to be under IDF control at around 1500 hours
GMT on 17 September, with the exception of the
Sabra camp area.

“Due to the Jewish New Year, a formal response
from the Government
of Israel to the Security
Council resolution could not be forthcoming within
the time-frame
determined
for the SecretaryGeneral’s report. A senior Foreign Ministry official indicated, however, to the Chief of Staff of
UNTSO,
General Erskine,
that, as previously
announced,
the presence of the Israel Defence
Forces (IDF) in west Beirut was of limited duration
and did not, in any manner, limit the deployment of
the Lebanese army in any parts of Beirut. He reiterated that the Government of Israel had instructed
the IDF to evacuate its positions in west Beirut
when the Lebanese army was ready to assume
control over them in co-ordination
with the IDF.
Discussions to that end between Israeli and Lebanese army officers had been proposed by the
Government of Israel and accepted by the Government of Lebanon. In these discussions, plans would
be exchanged for the evacuation of the JDF from
west Beirut.”

13. From 1600 to 1830 hours GMT, on 17 September
very sporadic explosions were heard at an unde
termined distance north-west of Yarze, where the OGE
office is temporarily
located. Four minutes befar?
midnight GMT, flares were seen over the Sabra area.
14. In the morning of 18 September, all of west
Beirut was under IDF control. The presence of Katseb
units was again observed in Bir Hassan in the vicinity
of the Sabra camp, as well as an estimated 1,000 Kataeb
soldiers, at least, with tanks and vehicles in the airport area.
15. Two teams of OGB observers reached the Sabra
camp at 0830 hours GMT and found many clusters of
bodies of men, women and children in civilian clothes
who appeared to have been massacred in groupsof
10 or 20. The Sabra camp is dominated by two lBF
positions situated 200 and 500 metres, resPectivelYI
west of the camp. According to information received
from the Lebanese army, the units seen in the Bir
Hassan, Sabra and airport areas were in fact Katfieb
units mixed with Lebanese de fwro forces coming
from southern Lebanon.

Subsequently,
the following addendum to the above
reply was received from the Israeli Foreign Ministry
by UNTSO in Jerusalem:
“Already,
in the course of the day, these discussions resulted in several positions being handed
over by the IDF to the Lebanese army, including
those in the street of the Banks. Also today, the
IDF surrounded the camps, when it became aware
2

16, As of 1800 hours GMT on 18 September, the
IDF was deployed in and around Beirut, controlling
the city with mechanized troops on the main axes and
road junctions as well as with infantry patrols. No
JDF withdrawals have been observed south or west of
the approximate line of separation of forces indicated
in my report of 15 September [S/15382/.4dd.I, pax. 41.
The deployment of Lebanese army and internal security units also remained unchanged, with some minor
adjustments.
Lebanese forces and Kataeb forces
were manning check-points
and were controlling
traffic east and south of the approximate line of separation. However, the forces that had been observed in
the airport area during the morning were no longer
.there at 1800 hours GMT. No local armed elements
-the Lebanese national movement, Amal or Murabitun-were
observed west or north of the approximate line of separation of forces.

24. I think it is also well worth noting that, in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
area in the south, conditions have remained quiet and
UNIPIL
has successfully prevented the harassment
of the civilian population by any armed groups.

17. During the period under review, OGB observers
continued to enjoy substantial freedom of movement.
Their strength stood unchanged at 10.

25. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, on whom I now call.

18. Upon receiving the first word of the events this
morning, I directed the United Nations spokesman to
issue the following statement on my behalf:

26. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization): In the annals of the history of atrocities, Sabra
and Shatila are now ingloriously
inscribed, together
with Auschwitz and My-Lai, and west Beirut along
with the Warsaw ghetto, the Judeo-Nazis in Tel Aviv
with the Nazis of Berlin. The Judeo-Nazis desecrated
the Day of Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year.
It is now marked in the annals of history as the Black
Rosh Hashanah. It is a day of shame, a day of shame
on which the Judeo-Nazis have insulted Judaism and
have insulted the Jews everywhere by committing
the most atrocious and hideous of their crimes.

renewed approach to the Israeli authorities
with a
view to obtaining their co-operation in increasing the
number of United Nations observers in Beirut. In this
connection, the members of the Council have noted
that the present United Nations observers reached
the scene of the killings in Beirut at 0830 hours GMT
this morning and have been reporting about the situation.
23.- However, it seems to me that, in the present
situation, unarmed military observers, however courageous or numerous, are not enough.

“The Secretary-General
has heard with shock
and horror the reports of the killing of civilians in
west Beirut. He once again calls urgently for an end
to the violence,”
19. I subsequently received a visit from the representatives of France, Italy and the United States, who
handed me a statement urging the immediate dispatch
of United Nations observers to the sites of the greatest
human suffering and losses in and around Beirut, I was
also informed by the representative of Lebanon that
his Government concurred in that request.

27. The involvement
of the Israeli troops in Beirut
is very clear. The Israeli colonel outside the Shatila
camp told press reporters that he was working on two
principles: first, that the area should be “purified”
-and to purify an area of its residents is nothing but
Nazi doctrine, Nazi terminology
and a Nazi act; and
secondly, that the Israeli army should not be involved.
I wonder. The facts speak differently.

20.
In this connection, I should point out that as
early as 13 June 1982, I had recommended that the
strength of the United Nations observers in the Beirut
area should be increased from the present level of
IO observers. I have kept the Security Council informed of the difficulties that have been encountered
in giving effect to this plan, which was also endorsed
by the Council in its resolution 516 (1982).

28. It is a known fact that the troops who stormed
the camp were Israeli commandos who had sought
the help of some militiamen from the renegade Haddad
forces. It is the Israeli army commandos who stormed
the camp and committed those crimes. The media,
sind particularly
the graphic visual medium of television, have provided us with much more than we
can take. Bulldozers were used to pile up rubble on
the dead in an attempt to conceal them, but arms and
legs were sticking out of the rubble, the arms and legs
of women and children, 1,500 of them-yes,
1,500 helpless civilians,
mostly women and children,
were
butchered in cold blood, The men were rounded up,
placed against a wall and shot in a very Nazi-like
fashion, and their resting place was a mass grave. We
have witnessed a holocaust, a genocide, in 1982, and
on this black day of Rosh Hashanah. For how long

21.
I wish to assure the members of the Council
that the inability to increase the number of United
Nations
observers in Beirut has not been for lack of
t-epeated efforts to get the necessary co-operation.
I wish also to say that the observers actually in Beirut
co-operated
to the maximum of their capacity with
the multinational
force while it was present in Beirut
and have continued, since its departure, to provide us,
within
their limited means, with as much first-hand
information
as possible. I wish to take this opportunity
to pay a tribute to those gallant officers.
22.
Immediately
after the visit of the three representatives,
I instructed General Erskine to make a
3

can we Palestinians, can the Security Council, can this
conscience of humanity,
remain impassive,
condemning, in President Reagan’s words, “in outrage
and revulsion”?
Is this the way to deal with such
criminals?

sonnel, as decided by the Palestinians,
have feft
Beirut and moved away from Beirut. But who is to
protect the civilians and provide safeguards for them?
3.5. Yet, we sit here and deliberate. In our opinion,
the mere sending of observers and giving authority
to the Secretary-General to send a monitoring team is
not sufficient. It will not deter the criminals. Something more than that should be done. The Council
should send a force-and
I am not trying to trespass
on the sovereignty of Lebanon-but
as long as there
are no guarantees for the safety and security of our
people, unless the Council provides for the return of
our people to their homes and enables them to do so,
it is the Council’s responsibility to save those people
and ensure their safety; otherwise, we will not sit idly
by and be butchered in cold blood. I am sure that it is
not the intention of the Council to see the repercussions of such a crime widening.

29. Three medical doctors were killed outside the
Akka Hospital, despite the fact that they were waving
a white flag. They were met by a hand-grenade which
exploded. Three of them died; the fourth was seriously
wounded, The bodies of 1,500 innocent civilians were
strewn across a wide area; I need not describe it, since
everyone has probably seen it on television.
30. Yet the Judeo-Nazis in Tel Aviv tell us that the
act was perpetrated by Christian militiamen
or Christian Phalangists, or a Christian-this or a Christian-that.
That is a malicious and criminal tendency in thinking.
They are trying to create a Christian and non-Christian
battle; this is but further proof of their racist approach.
We warn against such malicious tendencies.

36. In our opinion, the first step the Council shoull
take is to eject the criminal from this court. The crimi
nal has to be sent out: there is no room here for crimi
nals. Yet, it is the duty of the Council to invoke it
own powers, powers entrusted to it by the Charter o
the United Nations. People have to respect the deci
sions of the Council: that is laid down in the Charte
itself.

31. We were told, and the Israeli authorities had
assured the United States Government, that the Israeli
army was there on a mission of peace. What kind of
mission of peace was it to eliminate the people? The
Israeli army is not only responsible for that crime
but is its perpetrator.

37. But one permanent member has obstructed thr
work of the Council and kept the criminal here be
cause it was in collusion with that criminal. Yes
some other countries have with goodwill participated
in the multinational
force; I believe that France and
Italy joined that force with all goodwill and good
intentions. But what did they achieve? They achieved
the removal of the Palestinian elements and other
Lebanese elements that had been defending Beirut
against the criminals, thus laying the groundwork for
the criminals to go into west Beirut and commit the
hideous crimes which today the Council is meeting
to consider. But to consider to do what? The Council
must shoulder its responsibilities.
The Charter confers
powers on the Security Council. Why not invoke them?
Criminals have no place here. Judeo-Nazis who are
practising acts of State terrorism have no place here.

32. When Chairman Arafat and the PLO decided to
move our armed forces from Beirut to spare the city
further destruction, we trusted and we were confident
that what had been conveyed to us would be honoured.
An agreement had been arrived at stipulating that
“Law-abiding
Palestinian
non-combatants
left
behind in Beirut, including the families of those who
have departed, will be subject to Lebanese laws and
regulations. The Governments of Lebanon and the
United States will provide appropriate guarantees
of safety in the following ways: the Lebanese Government will provide its guarantees on the basis of
having secured assurances from armed groups with
which it has been in touch, and the United States
Government
will provide its guarantees on the
basis of assurances received from the Government of Israel and from the leadership of certain
Lebanese groups with which it has been in touch,”
Neither

38. Yes, we are still counting on the support and
understanding of the Council and we remain con*
vinced that it will face up to its responsibilities aad
defend and protect the lives of innocent people.

of these guarantees proved to be of any value,

33. Perhaps we were at fault for having trusted the
United States. But for how long can the Security
Council be prevented from involving itself in protecting the lives of people?

39. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretcrtion from Russinn): Just two
short weeks ago, a number of fighters from the PLO
left west Beirut. They left so as to save the civilian
population of the capital of Lebanon and to avoid
creating victims. That was an extremely n&k ~1
of humanism for the Arab nation by a number 01
fighters of the PLO.

34. The United States undertook to deploy temporarily a force of approximately
800 personnel as part
of a multinational
force to provide appropriate assistance to the Lebanese armed forces as they carried out
their responsibilities
concerning the withdrawal of the
Palestinian
personnel in Beirut. The Palestinian per-

40. Meanwhile, how did Israel behave’? lsmcl, in
violation of all the relevant decisions of the COt~nsif,
4

moved its troops further forward and completely occupied the capital of Lebanon. We have seen scenes
of this on television: Israeli troops ruthlessly firing
and massacring al1 those who could have defended
the civilian
population
in the Palestinian
refugee
camps, Having done that, the Israeli troops surrounded the camps of the Palestinian refugees and set
up their tanks there. Then they opened up the gates
of those camps so that their henchmen who are maintained by them-the
armed Phalangist soldiers and the
so-called de ficto forces of Major Haddad-could
complete those evil crimes.

take strong and effective measures to halt this barbarism, this massacre of the Palestinian people, to save
those who are still alive and to curb the aggressor.
48. We know full well that Israel has already on
many occasions disregarded decisions of the Council. Therefore, we consider that the decision we take
today must contain a provision to the effect that the
Council as a whole, in its entirety, including in particular all its permanent members, warns Israel that in
accordance with Article 2.5 of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is obliged to abide by the decisions of the
Council and to carry them out. The Soviet delegation will insist that such a provision be included in the
draft resolution on which we shall have to vote today.
And if any delegation objects to such a provision, on
any pretext whatever, we will reserve our right to
name that delegation at a meeting of the Council so
that the whole world might know who it is that is trying
to protect the Israeli aggressor, the Israeli criminals,
the Israeli neo-Nazis.

41. A new and horrible chapter has been written in
this tragedy of Lebanon. Indeed, it could freeze the
blood in the veins of all honourable people. Reports
from the Lebanese capital indicate that, under cove1
of the Israeli occupiers, the most monstrous crimes
have been committed against the defenceless civilian
population.
The scope, scale and methods of these
crimes are comparable only to the crimes of Hitler’s
Nazis.

49. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I cannot find words
which could even remotely express my delegation’s
feelings of horror and revulsion at the cowardly and
barbaric genocidal crime-which
only the Zionist
Begin, Shamir and Sharon, notorious terrorists, their
clique and the infamous clients on their pay-roll are
capable of committing-of
cold-bloodedly
massacring
and mutilating
Palestinian
children and men and
women, young and aged, all of them unarmed.

42. Hundreds of innocent people, including the aged,
women with infants and whole families, have already
been methodically
killed in cold blood. That is the
horsifying scope of this tragedy, and that is the horrible gift of the Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Begin,
on the eve of the Jewish New Year.
43. We all know the manifestations quite well: a
stab in the back, Fascist henchmen and hangmen
-these are well known in the Soviet Union, in Poland,
in France, in Italy and in the cities of other countries;
we all knew them well during the Second World War.

50. The networks, which showed a fleeting glimpse
of the victims of that genocide this afternoon and
gave a more elaborate report later this evening, warned
their audiences to be prepared for the shock of seeing
those horrendous scenes in which bulldozers were
dumping countless victims into mass graves. Most of
the inhabitants of those unarmed refugee camps had
already, as members may have seen, been wiped out
during the two and a half months of bombardment
with
Zionist American-supplied
weapons of mass destruction. I was not surprised by what I saw, for this has
been the incessant pattern of murder and destruction
which the Zionist Nazi racist gangs have been perpetrating against the Palestinian
people ever since
Menachem Begin, winner of the Nobel peace prize,
desecrated the hallowed soil of the Holy Land when,
in 1943, he arrived in Palestine as an immigrant.

44. Having entered into this inhuman war against
the Lebanese people, the Israeli aggressor has finally
removed its mask and transformed the country into an
enormous death camp.
45. As for the so-called “Peace for Galilee”, how
much hypocrisy there is in that slogan! It has turned
into completely
ruthless genocide against the Palestinians and the Lebanese. That is the “peace and
order”
brought to Lebanon by the bayonets of the
Israeli occupiers. It is extremely similar to the new
Fascist order in Europe; the two are as alike as two
drops of water. The Soviet Union has issued a warning
regarding the Israeli invasion of Lebanon.

5 1. There is hardly any time to elaborate or to condemn. What we face today is the question of the survival of the uprooted and occupied Palestinian people
confronted with the bloody butcher’s knife.

46. Although Israel must bear full responsibility for
this invasion of Lebanon, this new and horrible tragedy of Beirut will leave bloodstains on the consciences
of those who gave the bringers of death the opportunity and the instruments to carry out their crimes,
those who placed weapons in their hands in order to
ensure political and diplomatic cover in the face of
the outrage and revulsion of the entire world.

52. The initial dispatches talk about the massacre of
close to 1,500 refugees. But no one is yet in a position
to make any count; bulldozers have already buried
countless people, as the Israelis did in the south, but
a few brave journalists and a few survivors have had
a bird’s-eye view of those bodies the savage criminals
did not have time to bury in deeper graves.

47.
The Soviet delegation considers that the Council must today-and
I would emphasize “today”5

53. Israeli tanks had encircled the Palestinian refugee
camps since they conquered an undefended Beirut
three days ago and cut them off from the rest of the
city. This was reported in the United States press and
attested to by all those who have received dispatches
from Beirut. The Israelis and their henchmen, whether
they be the renegade Major Haddad or others, committed their massacres during those three days under
the protection
of Israeli tanks, in connivance and
mutual participation,
as Sharon had openly said would
be done-in
his words-” to wipe out, to eliminate, to
destroy”. Those are the preliminary facts; many more
will soon be unravelled.

on how to achieve this goal. That would be the salva.
tion of the United Nations if we are to maintain the
Organization which the authors of the Charter had
envisaged.
59. There are many alternatives
to the vacuum
resulting from a failure expeditiously to take such a
course of action, which is, to say the least, belated and
honest individual
self-reliance,
regional collective
self-reliance, or outright alliances between peaceloving States and peoples throughout the world which
rightly feel that their existence is threatened, What is
dishonest is to continue on a course of immobility and
inaction, which has wrought so much suffering and
destruction on so many people who have placed their
trust and security in an immobilized
guardian of international peace and security.

54. The information
conveyed to the Council this
evening discloses the participation
of 1,500 Israeli
commandos, as the observer of the PLO has informed
the Council. The real question confronting the Council is literally “to be or not to be”, for we have become ominously
a lame duck and, lamentably,
an
esteemed body which is being looked upon by the
whole world as paralysed by inaction. This is a universal view that must not be allowed to continue any
longer. Notwithstanding
the fact that the five permanent members are the principal guardians of world
peace and security and the non-permanent
members
are the freely and duly elected members of all the
regions and peoples of the world in their billions, the
Security Council is the highest executive organ of the
United Nations which all these delegations represent.

60. The revolting massacres inflicted upon unarmed
Palestinian refugees in Beirut during the past two lo
three days highlight this imperative need. The Council
is duty-bound to ensure that Israel’s heinous crimes
shall not go unpunished by the international community, the backbone of which is the Council.
61. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Greece. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
62. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): Thank you, Mr. President, for acceding to my request to participate in this
debate, under the Charter of the United Nations.

55. The Palestinian people has been and continues
to be a people under trusteeship; the Territory of
Palestine was passed on by the League of Nations to
the United Nations in 1947 to be held in trust until
all of its inhabitants had been enabled to return to their
homeland and redeem their inalienable rights.

63. It is with shock and indignation that my GOVernment has learned of the appalling massacre of
hundreds of innocent Palestinians in their own camps
in Beirut. I shall be extremely brief, since I do not
believe that this is the moment for rhetoric. Such an
exercise would show lack of respect for the victims,
as well as insensitivity
to the tragic situation still
prevailing in the Lebanese Republic, the population of
which has suffered immensely,
particularly in the
last weeks.

56. The Council, and particularly its five permanent
members, has a sacred duty, under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to send contingents of
armed forces to protect the Palestinian people from
additional acts of genocide. As many troops as necessary can be enlisted and obtained, and I assure the
Council that they would be forthcoming
from the
overwhelming
majority of the Member States. The
Charter specifically provides for that, and nothing less
should be accepted or countenanced.

64. The Council has on many occasions condemned
the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, as well as the breaches
of law which have occurred subsequently and have led
both to untold human suffering and incalculable
material destruction.

57. As the Secretary-General
has said in his annual
report on the work of the Organization,
the world is
“perilously near to a new international
anarchy”.]

65. We do not need yet another resolution which
would simply repeat the previous ones and remain
unimplemented
in contempt of the Council and of
international public opinion as a whole. What we really
need is an urgent and succinct resolution that Will
provide, without any delay whatsoever--namelYi
within the next 24 hours-for
adequate, effective
measures for the protection of the Palestinians in I&
anon, as well as of all the civilians in that country,

58. Condemnations
have been rendered
totally
meaningless and irrelevant,
as have all resolutions
which Israel regards with contempt and derision. If
the Council should fail to implement
its clear-cut
mandate under the Charter, then the most honourable way is for the Council either to declare its inability
to continue functioning or to discuss ways and means
of restoring its authority and shouldering its solemn
responsibilities
and begin without delay deliberations

66. Let us hope that the members of the Counci’
will rise to the situation and thus help in restoring
6

r

conditions of security in Beirut, The very prestige and
credibility of the Council, which so unfortunately have
been severely damaged by well-known failures in the
past, are once more at stake. Let us hope that the
Council will meet the challenge, which is both a political and a moral one.

76. I wish to say that, despite what the Council
has heard in the report of the Secretary-General,
in Lebanon there has been clear denial by the Kataeb
party-which
was mentioned by name-of
any participation whatsoever in the ugly massacres that have
taken place. The Lebanese, once more and more than
ever, are united in censuring any such action and in
expressing their horror at this action.

67.

Mr. LIANG Yufan (China) (interpreiution
from
Chinese): First of all, I should like to thank the Secretary-General for the report on the situation in west
Beirut he made just now.
68. The Chinese delegation has learned with great
shock that a large number of innocent Palestinians,
including
old people, women and children
were
massacred in cold blood in two refugee camps in west
Beirut. This violent crime is the direct result of the
incursion by Israeli agression troops into west Beirut
and is another debt of blood owed by the Israeli authorities to the Palestinian people.

77. I would say that whoever provided this information has probably fallen prey to the clear conspiracy which is obviously aimed at preventing the Lebanese from cementing their unity and from moving
forward in the process of healing their wounds, restoring their national sovereignty and electing, in
accordance with the Constitution,
a President who
will at last try to put the country together and enable
it to survive.

69. The Government and people of China once again
strongly condemn the incursion of .Israeli troops into
west Beirut and the Fascist atrocity committed
by
them.

78, I do not know whom to believe: Mr. Blum or
President Reagan. The representative of Israel seems
to have told the Secretary-General
that the Lebanese
army had not taken over its positions, and yet I read
in the very clear statement issued by the President
of the United States, Mr. Reagan, that the Lebanese
army has been thwarted in its effort to take over by
the Israeli occupation that took place beginning on
Wednesday. 1 repeat: the Lebanese army units could
establish control over the city; they were thwarted
in that effort by the Israeli occupation that took place
beginning on Wednesday. The Lebanese army had
already started to assume its responsibilities.
It was
assuming its responsibilities
very gallantly.
It was
prevented from doing so and was removed from the
scene.

70. The’ink has hardly dried on resolution 520 (1982),
which was adopted by the Council yesterday, and the
Israeli aggressors have committed new crimes in west
Beirut. It is an extremely urgent matter to stop the
hands of the aggressor and to restore the sovereignty
of Lebanon.
71. To this end, the Chinese delegation believes
that the Council should consider taking urgent and
effective measures so as effectively to ensure that
resolution 520 (1982) and other relevant resolutions be
fully implemented
and a normal and peaceful life in
Beirut, and the sovereignty of Lebanon, be restored,
and that no more massacres and acts of violence be
inflicted on the Palestinian civilians.

79. No Lebanese, whether in or out of uniform, could
have reached the scenes of the massacre without going
through Israeli lines; this is clear from the map. Least
of all could any Lebanese have gone there armed, or
in a tank, without the acquiescence-and
I do not say
more-of
the Israelis.

72. The Israeli authorities must comply with the
relevant resoiutions of the Council and, pursuant to
resolution
520 (1982), as a first step, immediately
withdraw
all their troops to the positions occupied
by Israel before 15 September. Should the Israeli
authorities
continue to defy the resolutions of the
CoLincil and the stern demands of the international
community,
the Council should consider taking serious
measures
to effect necessary sanctions against the
aggressors.
73.
The PRESIDENT:
sentative
of Lebanon,

75. I have asked to speak in order to say this: let
nobody try to incriminate Lebanon by his dirty work.
Let no one, by inference or insinuation, try to accuse
any Lebanese of the ugly and criminal acts that have
taken place in Lebanon and that dishonour our soil.

80. The Lebanese army is prepared to assume its
responsibilities
again. In fact, it had started to do so,
and it is going to do so. But are we now to entrust
the Lebanese army with the task of guarding the
graves?

The next speaker is the repreon whom I now call.

81. I sense a desire in the Council to send international forces to Lebanon. I presume the Lebanese
Government
will be consulted. But, pending those
consultations,
I wish to say that the Lebanese army
would undoubtedly
welcome any international
role
which will emphasize the military as well the political
credibility of all the security measures that have to be
taken: that would be only normal,

74.
Mr. TUl?NI
(Lebanon): I shall not delay the
Council’s
action, for which we are all pleading, by
describing
further than has been done the carnage that
wits perpetrated in Beirut or by expressing the sentiments
of horror and revulsion of the world community
and of every decent human being.
7

This is the President of the United States, a man not
known to be unfriendly to Israel, a man not knownto
be unsympathetic t0 Israel. +As a matter of fact, ArabAmerican relations have, In many instances, often
fallen short of what we have sought because of that
special relationship of the United States with Israel
and because of the specific sympathy, personal and
otherwise, that President Reagan himself had with
Israel. Yet, this is the judgement of the Head of State
who is perhaps the closest to Israel. I think that should
be an adequate criterion for the reinforcement of the
co]]ective judgem.ent that hasalong existed with regard
to Israel’s behaviour, its racist leanings, its brutality
and its indiscriminate use of its forces against civilians,

82.

In fact, I have just heard from my Government
that all commanders of the Lebanese armed forces
assert that they are able to shoulder their responsibilities fully and that they are able to maintain law
and order and to control the situation.
83.

The Government of Lebanon had indicated in
manner its desire to see the multinational force delay its departure at the time that
departure was announced. When consulted, the Government of Lebanon will respond in a manner that wi]]
emphasize our confidence in ourselves and our confidence in our ability fully to assume our resPonsibilities, with or without help. But we shall also maintain our confidence in the international comrm.mitY
and plead for it to exercise its ability to take whatever
measures it deems necessary to restore peace and
security in Lebanon.
the most explicit

88. We are meeting for a more specific matter today,
We are meeting because-and
here I would disagree
with Mr. Tuini-it
was not by innuendo and insinuation that Israel stated that certain Lebanese forces
had committed this carnage. They spelled it out in
an official statement, a statement that attacked in all
directions. They said, and I quote from their prepared statement:

84. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis
Maksoud, the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States, to whom the Council extended an invitation at its 2347th meeting, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

“Israel conducted an inquiry into reports that at
least 100 Palestinians had been massacred in two
refugee camps, since the State of Israel condemns
any act of murder.”

85. Mr. MAKSOUD:
We have resumed the debate
in the Council a bit sooner that was anticipated. In its
belief in international legitimacy and morality, the
Council expected that the 24 hours’ grace allotted to
the Secretary-Genera1 to report on compliance with
resolution 520 (1982) would be unimpeded because of
two factors, namely, respect for the Council, on the
one hand, and for the New Year of the world Jewish
community, on the other. It appears that Israel had no
respect for either. Let me quote from the statement
President Reagan made today:

We are on the verge of witnessing the emergenceof
a very humanistic Israel. They do not insinuate; they
say it outright in their official statement: “As soonas
it was discovered that a massacre was going on , , ,‘I,
It took them some time to do this; they did not know
about it. Israel knows when to be blind; Israel knows
when to make its statement. Israel did not know that
a massacre was taking place in the Palestinian refugee
camps. What a terrible trauma it must be for the Israeli
representative that Israel should be accused in the
Council by everyone, including the President of the
United States. He will undoubtedly reveal his senseof
shock at this attempt to encircle and morally choke
this neo-Nazi regime. He will probably want to show
that Israeli officials and the Israeli army did their best
and that if it were not for Israel’s occupation of west
Beirut a bigger massacre would have occurred. Thatis
the official Israeli statement. I quote further: “The
massacre is only a proof of what we feared might hap
pen.” You see, they did not know that this wasgoi@
to happen under their control. The presence of the
Israel Defence Forces has prevented a much greater
massacre from taking place. Perhaps Israel should
introduce a resolution in the Council whereby the
Council can express its thanks and appreciation forthe
noble humane role Israel has undertaken because+
instead of 1,500 women and children and men dead
in the Palestinian refugee camps, there could have
been more. Well, there might be more tomorrow if the
Council does not adopt immediate and active measures’

“During the negotiations leading to the Palestine
Liberation
Organization withdrawal from Beirut,
we”-that
is, the United States-‘&were assured that
Israeli forces would not enter west Beirut.”
86. Did President Reagan misunderstand
Israel?
Was there a lack of communications
between Israel
and the United States? Have they not developed
relations sufficient to ensure semantic precision? Is the
President of the United States not saying exactly what
has happened, or is Israel lying to the President of the
United States? I leave that to the judgement of the
Council and to the United States, that it may reassess
its special relationships with Israel.
87.

The President, in his statement today, continued:

“We also understood that, following withdrawal,
Lebanese army units could establish control over
the city. They were thwarted”-as
Mr. TuCni mentioned earlier-“in
this effort by the Israeli occupation that took place beginning on Wednesday. By
yesterday’s military control of Beirut, Israel claimed
that its moves would prevent the kind of tragedy
which has now occurred.”

89. By now, Israel cannot bluff the world aflYlonger*
Israel is trying to put the blame on the Lebanese-who
8

have begun a process of national cohesion; unity and
reconciliation as a matter of human rededication-on
those whom in their statements they called “extreme
Phalangists”,
despite the fact that they know that
nobody, no Lebanese and no Lebanese army, can
reach that place unless brought in by Israel itself. And
no Lebanese would be dragged in by Israel to conduct
such a hideous crime.

to impose penalties that would teach it a lesson and
in order that the United Nations not become inoperative, as the League of Nations was so rendered by
Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. Such action is necessary because Israel, as I have so often repeated during
the tragic events in Lebanon, wants to make the
Palestinians despair of any solution, of achieving their
human rights and of having a homeland, and the Lebanese of having their unity restored. It wants to mgke
all of us lose hope and it wants to make the United
Nations helpless before the diktat of the Jewish nazism
that has been let loose in our area.

90. If certain elements were brought in by the Israelis
to conduct this process of pre-planned systematic
extermination
in order that it become the Deir Yassin
to scare the remaining Palestinians away, then perhaps
Israel niight have used some of the elements of Saad
Haddad, whom it had trained, equipped, provided
with logistical support and moved around and allowed
to play havoc in occupied Lebanon. But in ascribing
the undertaking of such a criminal act to a mainstream
political force in Lebanon which has provided a President-elect and now another presidential candidate,
Israel is deliberately
attempting
to pre-empt the
constitutional
process and to make any candidate
extremely
controversial,
thinking that by such innuendo and insinuation it will reintroduce civil strife
among the Lebanese and foment civil conflict between the pathetic refugees in the camps and the
population
of Lebanon,

94. We ask the Council to take action to deter Israel.
Let us monitor the record of this criminal entity in
our region, this State that has used terrorism as a
pattern of behaviour and that is seeking t? enshrine
it as a doctrine which must be universally accepted,
while humiliating the Palestinian refugees who believed
in the sanctity of agreements, who believed that
agreements are to be lived up to, who believed that the
United States, by its word of honour, would guarantee the basic survival of these helpless refugees in
their camps. They believed that; and they still believe
it, in spite of their tragedy. We hope that within the
next few hours their trust will not have been betrayed.
95. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

91. Therefore,
at this crucial moment observers
are welcome, and we appreciate the Secretary-General’s attempt
to have a more effective observer
team. We in the League of Arab States think that such
a team of observers to monitor and to prove many of
the accusations of the Lebanese and the PLO is necessary: but we think that it is definitely insufficient and
inadequate.
Of course, it is important for our jurisprudence and for history; it is important for a further
awakening of the moral conscience of the entire world.
Monitoring
Israel’s crimes is necessary to deepen
our awareness of that Israeli monster that has been
let loose on the region; but monitoring presupposes
that Israel can be made accountable, that Israel respects world opinion, that Israel does not have contempt for international
law, that Israel does not consider itself an exception to international
norms and
rules and that Israel behaves in a manner rendering
it acswerable to certain universally acceptable moral
codes.

96. Mr, ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait): This is no time to
make a lengthy statement; this is a time for immediate
action. The massacre that has befallen the Palestinian
refugees in what remains of their camps which had
earlier been ruthlessly destroyed by Israeli bombing
and aggression is all too clear and obvious to all. It
requires no further description.
97. The Palestinians believed and trusted in agreements which the United States Government
itself
guaranteed. Those agreements have been savagely
flouted by the Israeli invasion of west Beirut and by
the planning
and sponsoring of an extermination
campaign against the Palestinians in the camps.
98. The Council is called upon to take immediate
measures that will ensure the safety and survival of
both Lebanese and Palestinian civilians in Lebanon
who are threatened by a veritable holocaust.

92.
But monitoring
is not sufficient; it only allows
future generations to know the record of Israel and its
crimes of extermination,
The carnage today should
not be monitored only. It has already been monitored
by the world media, by all the intelligence services of
the world and by United Nations observers, and it
has been condemned by everybody.

99. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
100. Mr.
AL-ASHTAL
(Democratic
Yemen):
Mr. President, you will excuse me if, under the circumstances, I refrain from expressing words of congratulation and admiration for your stewardship and
that of your predecessor.

93.
What is necessary is much more than monitoring.
It is necessary for the Security Council to take immediate action, not only to thwart Israel and to penalize
it for the crimes it has perpetrated, for its defiance
and for its desecration of human existence, but also

101. We are appalled by the Israeli carnage that
took place yesterday in Palestinian camps in west
9

Beirut. Israeli commandos
have been committing
untold crimes against innocent Palestinian
women
and children. Purporting to be keeping the peace in
west Beirut, Israeli forces have now fully occupied
west Beirut, only to direct their bayonets against
Palestinian civilians.

Charter of the United Nations affords such possi- 1
bilities. It very clearly and forcefully says that the
Members of the United Nations agree to accept and
carry out the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with its provisions.
109. In conclusion, let me again stress that now is
the time to act, to show sensitivity to the demands and
urgency of the situation.

102. It is simply an unparalleled
massacre by an
occupying Power. Israel is playing havoc with innocent
lives in defiance of all norms and in defiance of the
Council, which only yesterday called for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from west Beirut [resole-

110. Mr. de PINIl%
(Spain) (interpretation
from
Spcrnish): May I congratulate you, Sir, on your ac.
ceding to the presidency of the Council, We thought
that this was going to be a quiet month. Unfortunately, Israel has once more shaken us out of our siesta
and is keeping the Council constantly occupied.
Mr. President, I wish you every success in conducting
our business.

tion 520 (1982)].

103. The Council is called upon to salvage its own
credibility and to save the innocent population of west
Beirut. No pretext, of whatever nature, should be
used to stop the Council from taking most urgent
necessary action. The whole world, and especially the
Arab world, is waiting for the Council to be moved
by this Nazi-like slaughter and to use its power to
stop this genocide.

I 11. I avail myself of this opportunity also to con.
gratulate the outgoing President, Mr. Dot-r, of Ireland,
on the work he did last month,

104. Mr. KRYSTOSIK
(Poland): At the very outset,
Sir, may I congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
Knowing your abilities, we are convinced that you
will successfully conduct the proceedings of the
Council. We wish you success in discharging your
difficult duties.

112. This introduction
would be incomplete were
I not to welcome the new representative of the United
Kingdom, although for special reasons he is today not
present in the Council,
113. I should also like to say a few words to (he
Secretary-General, first, for the masterly report he has
put before us on the tragic situation in Lebanon and
secondly, for the most specific information he gave a!
an introduction to his annual report, in which he ha!
sounded the alarm and drawn attention to the Coun
cil’s responsibility for maintaining and strengthening
peace and security, which, unfortunately,
is in a
precarious position today.

105. Let me also express our sincere appreciation
to your predecessor, Mr. Dorr, of Ireland, for his work
in the demanding and difficult month of August,
106. Once again, tragic news from Lebanon has
shocked the world. Public opinion is deeply moved,
having heard of the brutality and the scale of the
mass murders and atrocities. We cannot but see the
rapid deterioration of the situation and the enormous
sufferings of the civilian population. There is an urgent
need for its protection. It is a matter of utmost emergency.

114. Once again, the Council is facing a tragic re
surgence of the crisis in Lebanon as a consequence Of
further Israeli armed intervention. When the material
reconstruction of the country seemed about to begin,
at least in the capital, and when it seemed that the
bases were being laid for stabilization and the Eestablishment of full sovereignty and political inde.
pendence for Lebanon, the occupation of west Beirut
by the Israeli army, in flagrant violation of the recent
cease-fire agreement, and the massacres in the Pal*
estinian refugee camps have dashed those hopes aad
most seriously and extraordinarily
worsened the
situation.

107. One point must be put straight here, and it
should be particularly emphasized: whatever troops
and armed units are carrying out the massacre, responsibility for it lies with Israel, It is Israel which has
flagrantly violated all 10 of the resolutions concerning
the situation in Lebanon adopted recently by the
Council. The time for decisive action by the Council
is already long overdue. There is an urgent need for
decisiveness and the co-operation of all the members
of the Council to stop the bloodshed in Beirut immediately. The Council cannot remain indifferent when
its resolutions are ignored.

115. Israel has constantly disregarded the resolfi
tions of the Council, and with this last action it is Once
again challenging this main organ of the United N*
tions, again placing a11 of us, as individual members
of the Council, face to face with our responsibilities,

108. The existing situation calls for decisive steps to
protect the lives of innocent civilian victims, the Paiestinian and the Lebanese who are now left at the mercy
of the henchmen operating in cold blood, The measures taken by the Council should be effective. The

116. After a long and arduous negotiating Process
leading to the withdrawal of the PLO forces f’oy
Beirut no sooner had the contingents of the mullp,
nation;1 force been withdrawn-a force that had plaYed
10

an outstandingly important role in the cease-fire-than
Israel, on the pretext of the tragic death of the President-elect of Lebanon, Mr. Bashir Gemayel, invaded
and occupied all of west Beirut. In an attempt to
explain their latest act of aggression, the Israeli authorities have maintained that the assassination of the
President-elect
of Lebanon created a serious situation of instability and that the Israeli army was obliged
to take action to ensure the maintenance of public
law and order in west Beirut.

124. We solemnly call on the Council to act .immediately to guarantee the safety of the Palestinians
in west Beirut. We call upon the Council to decide
to dispatch immediately
United Nations forces or
observers on an emergency basis to prevent further
massacres. We call upon those countries which sent
multinational
forces to consider immediately
sending
them back to Beirut to secure the safety of the Palestinians. We also insist that Israel immediately
withdraw from Beirut and from Lebanon.

117. In this way, the presence of the Israeli army is
a cover for the kind of atrocities being carried out in
Beirut. Today, with the overwhelming news of the
massacres in the Palestinian refugee camps in southern Beirut, we know just what Israeli law and order
mean and who are responsible.

125. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
126. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
No words can express our anger, our sorrow and OUI
indignation
at the wanton execution of civilians in
Beirut, a process that started with the Israeli incursion
into west Beirut. But the International
Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), in its sober style, has issued
the ‘following press release, No. 1450, dated 18 September, which is more telling than any statement and
is entitled “Massacre in Beirut: ICRC reacts strongly”. The text is as follows:

118. When the Secretary-General
tried to increase
the number of observers from 10 to 50, the Israeli
Government replied that because of the observance
of a holy day it could not respond before Sunday.
Meanwhile, the tragedy keeps unfolding in Lebanon.
119. The Council can order the transfer of United
Nations forces to Beirut, but if the Government
of
Israel opposes that, our efforts will again be thwarted.
In such circumstances, the Council must give serious
thought to the measures that should be taken in the
face of such rebellion in order to maintain Lebanon’s
integrity, political independence and sovereignty, as
well as international
peace and security.

“ICRC delegates in Beirut have reported that
hundreds of chiIdren, adolescents, women and old
people have been killed in the Shatila quarter of
Beirut, their corpses lying scattered in the streets.
“The ICRC has also ascertained that wounded
patients have been murdered in their hospital beds,
while other patients and doctors have been abducted.

120. The prestige of the Council is in serious jeopardy.

“On Friday, 17 September, and Saturday, 18 September, ICRC delegates in Beirut had to evacuate
two hospitals which, because of these conditions,
couId no longer function. This has come at a time
when other hospitals in Beirut are overcrowded
with wounded and dead.

121. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Egypt, I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
f22. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): We are horrified and shocked. A massacre of hundreds of human
beings has been committed: children have been murdered, women have been butchered and men have been
killed in cold blood. Who is responsible for those
crimes? The responsibility
of the Israeli army of
occupation is absolutely clear to us. This day will be
a day of shame for Israeli policies and measures and
those who gave the orders.

“Meanwhile,
some 300 people have taken refuge
at the ICRC delegation in Beirut, and the number is
increasing hourly.
“The ICRC solemnly appeals to the international
community to intervene to put an immediate stop to
the intoierable massacre perpetrated in Beirut on
whole groups of people and to ensure that the
wounded and those who treat them be respected
and protected and that the basic right to live be
observed.”

123. It is our considered opinion that this massacre
was calculated, first, to exacerbate tension in Lebanon and undermine
efforts for conciliation
and
restoration, for peace and security in Lebanon; and,
secondly, to create conditions that would serve as a
pretext for Israel’s continued occupation of Beirut
and Lebanon.
We are confident that the Lebanese
people will reject all such conspiracies against itself,
its future and its brethren. We are confident that
everybody
by now knows what operation “Peace
for Galilee” is all about.

127. Sharon and his henchmen in Beirut are tonight
serenely inebriated with Arab blood as they commemorate a Rosh Hashanah-a
New Year-which,
knowing the Israeli objectives, may be expected to
be as cruel and tragic as each and every year since
the inception of the Zionist State.
11

128. Happy Rosh Hashanah, Mr. Blum, as you eat
and drink over Arab corpses, Palestinian and Lebanese alike.

cease-fire, could not have stopped in time, or COR.
trolled, the criminal whims, the criminal instincts of
the brothers Begin, Sharon and Shamir, and others:
the Begin, Sharon, Shamir gang. The Arab people can
be fooled no longer by United States guarantees; those
guarantees prove, as the representative of the PLO
said, that the omnipotent,
omniscient, omnipresenl
United States bears a large part of the responsibility
for Israeli crimes against Arabs: old crimes, new
crimes and future crimes. The purveyor of arms and
aid to Israel, the United States, bears that responsibility towards the great Arab nation as a whole
-great Arab unity is bound to come, whether Israel
likes it or not-and
towards each and every Arab
country, as well as towards each State member of the
Council.

129. Israeli
Caterpillars,
made in America,
are
busily bulldozing the site of the crime en mnsse, to
remove the corpses of people whom Sharon and his
henchmen and allies-whoever
they are-have killed,
assassinated and executed. The corpulent Sharon has
certainly gained some additional weight as a result of
this new orgy. Obesity seems to be a state of mind.
130. The Council is meeting less than 24 hours after
resolution 520 (1982) was adopted. Since that resolution was adopted, a most ominous development has
taken place, and the Council is bound to consider it.
It is an ominous development,
pregnant with grave
and sinister repercussions, some of which we can
already predict and some of which are unpredictable
but no less sinister for that.

135. Collectively
and individually,
you, as members of the Council, bear a responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations to make good your
resolutions, your promises and your obligations arising
from that Charter. The Secretary-General
has complained time and again about the impotence of this
body to carry out its obligations, We gave you those
obligations. If you do not carry them out, we will take
them back. You hold a monopoly on force, Why, then.
do you throw this responsibility
upon us, the small
countries, and through your silence and impotence
encourage so highly developed a super-Power as the
United States and its surrogate, Israel, to monopolizc
the use of force and to crush the Arabs, to crush the
Africans, to crush the Latin Americans, to crush the
Asians?

131. The indiscriminate
massacre of innocent civilians which is taking place at this very moment-the
Rosh Hashanah-proves
beyond the shadow of a doubt
that the present crimes are an extension of the Machiavellian and deceitful slogan, “Peace for Galilee”, a plan
launched on 4 June 1982 in order to achieve three
goals: first, to liquidate the Palestinian people physically, along with its legitimate
representative,
the
PLO; secondly, to dismantle Lebanon by rekindling
the flames of civil war; and thirdly, to divert attention
from the execution of a master plan aiming at the final
liquidation
of the Palestinian
people in the West
Bank and Gaza, as well as of the remnants of Syrians
in the Golan Heights annexed by Israel, an annexation which the Council, if it had not been for the United
States, would have condemned unanimously.

136. The Arabs are people known both for their
patience and for their impatience.
We have been
patient, but our patience is not unlimited. We have
never had any doubt as to the congenital criminality
of the Israeli mind, a criminality that is inherent, part
and parcel of the Zionist colonialist system in Palestine. Deir Yassin, Kubia, the assassination of Count
Bernadotte by the gentle foreign minister of Israel,
Mr. Shamir, Ezer Sharon, the king of Israel, and
Begin, who is received like a monarch in the United
States-Begin,
Sharon, Shamir, the three notorious
and most-wanted terrorists, visit the United States
and everyone bows-everyone,
that is, but the people
of the United States. Everyone bows to them because
of the votes they control, because of the money they
control, the technology they control, the universities
they control. But there are signs of revolt, a true revolt,
in many quarters.

132. One of the most important components of the
cease-fire was the saving of civilian lives. Yet, it is
quite clear that the Zionist interpretation-or
its
misinterpretation,
which is a lie, as I said yesterdayof the cease-fire does not have it so. That cease-fire
was worked out by the United States, the patron and
protector of its surrogate, Israel-and
the reverse
could also be true. We are confused: who is the surrogate? I do not know,
133. The cease-fire worked out by the United States
was intended to give Israel, and its surrogates, WI ever they are, a chance to continue the onslau ,lt
against unarmed civilians by the cowardly Isrz.eli
soldiers who hide behind their armour, those cowards
who enter refugee camps with their armaments, with
their tanks, to kill children, women and the elderly, to
execute the unarmed young because they are potential
warriors. The victims of this aggression, of this murder, are both Lebanese and Palestinians, not to speak
of other nationalities:
they are Arabs.

137. The masterpiece of Israeli cynicism and sadism
in the occupied territories, whether evidenced by the
bombing of Beirut and the south or by the killing of
civilians, is now set out before you, the members of
the Council, and yet that country is supposed to be
-as one member, its ally, has called it--‘% strategic
acquisition”,
“a garrison”, “a guardian and a beach“the only democracy in the
head of democracy”,
that kills, segregates, creates
Middle East” -one

134. Whatever has been declared today, we cannot
believe that the United States, the guarantor of the
12

1

‘ **-

-

pfugees and assassinates. We congratulate
States on its ally.

~38. However,

the

time

is not

the United

propitious

as that of my country, at the atrocities that have just
occurred in Beirut. I should also like to express to
the relatives, friends and compatriots of the victims
of these massacres our profound sympathy and deeplyfelt grief.

for

speeches. I could speak for hours about the criminal

history of Israel, but I would rather remind members
of the Council that it was only yesterday, 24 hours
ago, that it adopted a resolution to prevent the very
crime that is being committed today. Only yesterday,
we tried to prevent that crime, and now it has been
committed. According to democratic radio and television, which, financed by large corporations are, of
course, the very voice of truth and wisdom, Sharon
today informed US that the Israelis would remain in
Beirut for weeks, when only yesterday the Council
gave Israel 24 hours to withdraw.

144. These atrocities and the reasons behind them
must stop. By occupying west Beirut, in violation of
its commitments, Israel has attempted to justify its
action by invoking the need to ensure order and to
prevent further tragedy. By invoking such reasons,
Israel has arrogated to itself the right to be the sole
judge of its behaviour and has invaded Lebanon.
Basing itself on such ideas, Israel has refused to
implement
United Nations resolutions, paralysed
UNIFIL
in southern Lebanon, refused to co-operate
with United Nations observers, opposed any increase
in their number and, in general, refused any intervention by the United Nations.

139. The United States condemned Israel on paper,
but in the Council we heard no statement from the
United States. As the United States representative,
Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
is fond of saying with regard to
our statements, we took note of the fact that the
United States failed to explain its vote yesterday.
The reasons for that failure remain obscure. Why?
That country always explains its vote, everyone has
always explained his vote. In a tragic situation such
as the one we are now witnessing and have been
witnessing, one in which the United States is a guarantor of a cease-fire, why was there no explanation
of vote?

145. The least that can be said is that this attitude
and this deliberate flouting of the Charter of the United
Nations have not brought about the results which
Israel said it sought to achieve, and this is more than
a euphemism. Alas, we see where this has led.
146. I do not wish to speak further on that tragedy
and I shall simply quote what the President of the
French Republic said today:
“My reaction to the news I am receiving from
Beirut is one of horror. Those who bear the responsibility for such excesses are traitors to the cause
they believe they are serving. The international community must rise up in protest against such massacres and decide on the measures necessary to
prevent them.

140, There was no explanation because there was
no intention to implement the resolution that had been
adopted. That is the crux of the matter. We now ask
the Council, which has so far failed to implement
any of its resolutions relating to the Middle East,
Palestine or Lebanon, to impose concrete measures.
We want action. Small countries require action. We
have bestowed the power to take action upon the five
permanent members of the Council and upon its other
members as well. We want resolutions to be implemented, and if they are not implemented,
we want
sanctions to be imposed against Israel. We want to stop
Israel from committing such acts once and for all.

“France has already taken action to facilitate
the implementation
of peaceful settlements in the
region. In the present circumstances, it is resolved
to act once again. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
is in touch with the parties concerned with a view
to deciding what initiatives are desirable, including”
-and I stress: including-“those
involving the use
of United Nations resources.” [S//5407, N~~LJX I. 1

141. We ask the Secretary-General
to denounce
Israel in the strongest possible terms. He has done so
ln the past; he can do it today; he can do it in the
future. We need the Secretary-General.
His voice is
heard throughout the entire world; he is the guarantor of the Charter and of the United Nations.

147. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to speak.
I now call on him.
148. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
This is again Black Rosh Hashanah because the JudeoNazis have committed not only the crime of murder
but also that of perjury. The Israeli ambassador in
Washington, Moshe Arens, said today that his country had not given the United States a pledge not to
enter west Beirut after the withdrawal of Palestinian
and Syrian forces from the war-torn city. However,
in his statement, President Reagan said: “During the
negotiations leading to the PLO withdrawal from
Beirut, we were assured that Israeli forces would not
enter west Beirut.”

142. In his annual report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General
has already stated his
opinion with regard to the Security Council. We want
this opinion to be translated into action, and effective
action is not possible unless the Council adopts measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.
143. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France)
fifltW,ctrrtion fiutn FrcJtrca/t): First of all, I should like
to exPress my indignation and my revulsion, as well
13

149. Once a criminal
and a liar.

and a liar, always a criminal

hordes which, after having invaded all of southern
Lebanon, have now imposed their laws in the capital
of that country. The massacre could not have occurred without the weakness and the passivity of the
international community, which thus far has avoided
using firm language with the aggressor.

150. In sharing his outrage and revulsion over the
murders of Palestinian women and children, President Reagan expressed his “deepest regrets and
condolences to the families of the victims and the
broader Palestinian community”.
In the name of the
PLO, the recognized representative of the Palestinian
people, I wish to extend our thanks to the President
of the United States. He underscored “the desperate
need for a true peace in the Middle East, one which
takes full account of the needs of the Palestinian
people”.

156. What has happened in Beirut derives directly
from our indecision, from our side-stepping in the face
of the insidious determination
of the Tel Aviv leaders
to impose a reign of terror in Lebanon and thence
throughout the Middle East, The Council is thus
once again faced with its responsibilities.
Either it
assumes the responsibilities
conferred upon it by the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly
Chap
ter VII, or it must step down for ever, for it will have
left thousands of innocent people to be massacred
with impunity.

151, Since the United States Administration
decided
to deprive us of the pleasure of addressing it directly,
I can assure President Reagan, through you, Sir, that
the needs of the Palestinian people are but the legitimate needs of any people: the Palestinians wish to
live in peace in their own homes in their own country, Palestine, and to exercise therein their right to
self-determination,
Had those needs and rights been
endorsed, respected and exercised, our Palestinian
brothers and sisters in the refugee camps would have
been spared massacre. But the time is still propitious
for the Wnited States Administration
to join in the
international
consensus in upholding our rights and
bringing peace to the area and to the world.

157. The situation that prevails calls for the taking
of effective and urgent measures. It calls for the Council to apply the relevant provisions of the Charter and
to set up a force to be sent to Lebanon immediately
with a view to saving the defenceless population now
falling victim to terrorism.
158. The credibility of the Council and of the United
Nations itself depends on the decision that the Council will take. That is why my delegation joins in the
appeal made by previous speakers who have called
for swift action.

152. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have just received a letter
from the representative of Algeria in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisiona
rules of procedure.

159. The PRESIDENT:
of Israel.

160. Mr. BLUM (Israel): In his annual report on the
work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has
drawn attention to the ongoing decline of the United
Nations and invited us all to pause and ponder about
the reasons for this decline and about the remedies 10
check this process that has been going on for years,

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr, Sahwun
{Algeria) took the place reserved for him at the side
c-if the Council chamber.

161. I submit that tonight we have a very clear
demonstration of the reasons for this decline.
162. Put simply, the Organization
is increasin&’
perceived around the world as a body to which people
come to lie. I have postponed my intervention here
tonight. I first wanted to listen to this procession of
liars, and I was not disappointed, because lie they
did, and not in good faith. They lied deliberately.

153. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Algeria to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
154. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, at this tragic hour when we
are meeting you will allow me, even though this is the
first time that I have spoken in the Council, not to
dwell on your merits and those of your predecessor,
merits which I appreciate as being substantial.

/’
‘,

I call on the representative

163. A crime occurred in west Beirut last night.
Civilians were murdered, and we join all those who
genuinely express their revulsion and indignation at
such crimes. We do so because, in contradistinction
to most speakers seated around this table, we arenot
selective in our respect for human life.

155. Women,
children and elderly people have
been massacred in cold blood in refugee camps in
west Beirut. That horrifying massacre could not have
taken place without the help, complicity,
encouragement and, i~daed, cnll&or&~~af
the only force that
exists in %vest Beirut-&
other words, the Zionist

164.

But what are the facts?

165, The Israel Defence Forces have been deployed
west of the refugee camps in west Beirut. The eastern
14

side of all those camps was left open, free to access
by those who were to take control of the refugee camps
in accordance with the provisions of the Habib plan
-to be more explicit, the Lebanese armed forces. And
last Thursday and Friday it was clearly indicated to
the Lebanese Government that the time had come
for the Lebanese armed forces to take control of those
camps.
166. For reasons best known to the Lebanese Government, the Lebanese armed forces did not take
control of those camps. This morning, the IsraeI
Defence Forces discovered what had happened in the
refugee camps during the night. For the protection of
their inhabitants, those camps have been surrounded
from all sides, it being clearly understood that we
expect the Lebanese armed forces to take control not
only of the refugee camps but also of west Beirut in its
entirety, of Beirut in its entirety, of Lebanon in its
entirety.
167. I can inform the Council that an arrangement
has been reached with the Lebanese armed forces for
them to take control of the refugee camps in west
Beirut tomorrow, Sunday, at 10 a.m. local time.

interpreters to translate it for us. You are a worthy
disciple of the Black Hundreds, Mr. Ovinnikov.
This
is the kind of language that they employed in reference
to my people.
172. The representative of the State that established
the gulags, the representative of the country that has
done away with the rule of law, sermonizes here about
compassion for innocent human beings. How did you
put it? Of course you know exactly what happened
last night in west Beirut. You know that the people
were stood against the wall, golovoi k sfenke-with
their heads against the wall. Ironically,
and not surprisingly, as you know, this is the kind of execution
practised in your country. The notion comes from the
Lubianka, that notorious prison in Moscow. That is
where they execute people golovoi k stenke,
173. Do not try to apply your notions of humanity
and inhumanity to other places around the world.
174. But Mr. Ovinnikov is just one example. I shall
not run down the entire list, the sorry procession of
liars. I shall give two or three more examples.
175. The representative
of Jordan speaks for a
country which exactly 12 years ago massacred thousands of Palestinians in what became known as “black
September”.
I know that was a little family affair and
I should not mention it-

168. These are the facts. But let me ask you how
many of you are interested in the facts, How many
of you around this table are interested in the facts?
Is it not much more pleasurable to engage in an orgy
of hatred? In this body and in other bodies of the
United Nations, my country has been subjected to
many diatribes and orgies of hatred. And, having been
here for some years, I believe I have become immune
to this kind of treatment. But let me tell you in all
frankness that the Council has stooped here tonight
to new depths of moral degeneration and intellectual
depravity.

176.

Mr. NUSEIBEH:

177. Mr. BLUM
tomary to interject

(Jordan): You are a big liar.
/ .,
(Israel): Mr. President, is it cussuch remarks? I seek your ruling.

178. The PRESIDENT:
I appeal to all representatives: please be moderate and exercise some courtesy in speaking out. That is what 1 beseech all representatives.

169. I know that, once I am finished, such defenders
of the United Nations as the diplomatic mercenary
Mr. Maksoud will jump up and rise in defence of the
Organization.
I am not endowed with a sense of
prophecy, like Mr. Maksoud, this latter-day prophet,
who prophesied what I was going to say, but, judging
from past performance and past experience, I believe
I will not be deceived.

179. I call on the representative
on a point of order.

of the Soviet Union

180. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretution
from Russian): In view of
the unprecedented
language used by the representative of Israel in the Council, which is an offence to
the members of the Council and to the United Nations
as a whole, I think the representative of Israel should
be called to order.

170. ‘A blood libel against my country is being spread
here. And some speakers have apparently forgotten
that the customary time for spreading blood libels
against Jews is Passover, not Rosh Hashanah.

181. The PRESIDENT:
Again, I beseech all representatives here to exercise moderation.
Of course,
sometimes there is a twilight area on which it is pretty
difficult to make a ruling; but if all representatives are
kind enough to exercise some moderation,
I think the
proceedings of the Council will be much smoother.

171. Well, I can forgive Mr. Ovinnikov such an oversight. He comes from an atheist State, and such hallowed customs apparently are no longer remembered
in those circles in the Soviet Union in which he moves.
But, Mr. Ovinnikov, let me tell you: you are absolutely
faithful
to a long tradition of pogwrnschiki in your
country.
And, for the benefit of those who probably
do not know that expression, which omniously comes
from the Russian language, I would invite the Russian

182.

I call on the representative

of Israel.

183. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The representative
of tl\e
Soviet Union seems to believe that he can use wi.11
15

impunity foul language against my country and that
we should not reply. We shall reply. There is no right
of reply in the Supreme Soviet, I believe; but we are
here at the United Nations, and there is still free speech
here at the United Nations.

countries and was ignored all these years. Syria and
the terrorist PLO were given a free hand in Lebanon.
189. When 100,000 Lebanese
were massacred
over the years, the Council was not convened in any
meeting, emergency or otherwise. Mr, Ovinnikov
was not interested; now he has his reasons: it is much
more convenient to talk about Beirut than about
the Panjshir valley in Afghanistan.

184. But to come back to the case of Jordan, we had
that little family affair in which thousands of Palestinians were massacred. Hundreds of them, including
PLO operatives, came fleeing across the Jordan River
to find refuge in the Zionist “hell”.
Yet, the representative of Jordan comes before the Council and
sermonizes the way he does.

190. We are paying for the indifference of the Organization and of its individual
Members, the callous
indifference to the agony and tragedy of Lebanon over
all these years. But is it not somewhat hypocritical
now to come and pose as people who are concerned
with humanitarian matters?

185. Then we have the representative of Syria, who
with his characteristic lucidity took Israel to task-the
spokesman for the rCgime that perpetrated the horrible
crimes in Hama. We still do not know the exact figures of the people massacred there: they range from
6,000 to 25,000. And Mr. El-Fattal has not had the
courtesy to inform us of the precise figures. So he
asked for the floor to make an impassioned speech.

191. A tragedy occurred last night in Beirut. We
condemn it; we express our revulsion; we are horrified by it. But, members of the Council, search
yourselves: are not all of you who have been napping
all these years also slightly responsible for it?

186. Mr. Maksoud has set himself up as the new
moral monitor
of the United Nations.
Curiously
enough, he has also spoken on behalf of the Government of Lebanon. I must confess that we, at least,
have been under the impression that there is a representative of that country in our midst. But if Mr. Maksoud seeks new employment as an examiner of morals
and international
behaviour, he has chosen well. He
will have plenty to do. He will be able to examine
what happened at Hama, in Syria; what happened to
the Kurds in Iraq, and what happened in quite a few
other countries for which he claims to speak here.
He can also look forward to a career as a historian.
He can look into the massacre of the Palestinians in
Jordan, of Lebanese and Palestinians
murdered by
the Syrians and by the PLO in Lebanon over the
years, and so on. I am sure he can be assured of many
years of gainful employment.

194, Mr. DORR (Ireland): Mr, President, in view of
the seriousness of the issue and the tone which the
debate has taken, it is difficult to begin with the usual
courtesies. However, I may hope that in doing so 1 will
perhaps help to lower the pitch somewhat, so permit
me to take a moment to congratulate you, Sir-or at
least to wish you well-on taking over the Presidency
in this difficult month. I know how capable you
are and how well you will handle it, and I wish YOU
every success.

187. Let us for a change be honest with ourselves.
What we are seeing in Lebanon these days is nothing
but the tragic residue of international
indifference of
many years. One of our colleagues expressed sorrow
over the fact that he was robbed of his afternoon nap.
The trouble is that too many people have been napping
for eight years in regard to Lebanon.

195. I should also like to thank all those who
expressed their thanks to me for my tenure of that
seat during another difficult month, the month of
August, and I should like to join warmly in the ~1.
come to the United Nations extended to the new
representative of the United Kingdom, Sir John
Thomson.

188. How many meetings did the Council have over
the past eight years on Lebanon, Lebanon proper?
Anybody who would care to look at the records of
the Council will find that we continuously
and repeatedly asked for such a debate. We were ignored, studiously ignored. There are countries that historically
have posed as the protectors of the Christian community in Lebanon, and everybody knows that the
Christian community
in Lebanon has been pleading
with them over these years and has been seeking their
protection and their aid. They were ignored. The
Lebanese Government sought the protection of various

196. In recent days, we have had the shocking ass@
sination of President-elect Gemayel of Lebanon: we
have also seen the take-over by Israeli forces of west
Beirut. Now we have reports of a terrible massacre
in the Palestinian camps in and around Beirut. Like
other delegations, we are appalled at those reports,
and we are also deeply concerned at the whole situ*
tion disclosed in the Secretary-General’s oral report
to us.

192. I know that it is much more difficult to admit
to such guilt than to bewail the fact that an afternoon
siesta could not materialize.
193. That is why I have been saying that tonight
we had here a clear demonstration of the reasons for
the ongoing decline of the Organization.

197. In view of the appalling nature of what was
done, and in view also of the background to it Over
16

recent months, we think it right over this weekend
that the Council was called into urgent session. It is
clear that there is a general wish in the Council to consider urgently what steps might now be taken to
ensure that there is no repetition of this kind of atrocity.

204. My delegation does not tell lies, nor does it
engage in a diatribe or orgy of hatred. It simply calls
upon Israel to co-operate in implementing
the resolutions which have been unanimously adopted by the
Council.

198. In view of the urgency of the situation,
be very brief and limited in what I say.

205. The PRESIDENT:
Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States, has
asked to make a further statement. With the consent
of the Council, I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

I shall

199. As a first and urgent step, we feel, like others
here, that it would be right to authorize formally, and
to back fully, the Secretary-General in increasing the
number of unarmed observers from 10 to 50. We would
also want to insist on their full freedom to deploy, and
to insist on the obligation of all concerned to cooperate fully with them in their difficult mandate and
in their efforts to monitor the whole situation and,
where necessary, to establish the facts.
200. But the mandate of unarmed observers, however courageous they are-and they are courageousis, and must be, limited. It may be necessary for the
Council to consider more than this, We would therefore favour a second stage. We believe we could request the Secretary-General
to undertake immediate
consultation
with the sovereign Government of Lebanon to see whether there are further steps which the
Council might consider to assist that Government in
ensuring full protection for the civilian population,
including,
in particular, the Palestinian population
in and around Beirut. That is the approach we would
favour, and we would favour action by the Council
rather than prolonged speeches.

206. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Sharing as I do the genera1
feeling of urgency, I shall be very brief. I note that the
filibustering technique utilized by the representative
of Israel to deflect attention from the central issue of
concern has, as anticipated, been pursued, When one
cannot answer criticisms, one tries to undermine the
credibility
of the critics. He has done so by going
around the entire Council table and calling everyone a
liar. When he was called a liar, he felt insulted, Yet
he can heap insults on everybody else in the pursuit
of his form of political terrorism in the Council, which
is only an outward manifestation of the regional terrorism Israel practices, If he continues to pursue this
course, he may be able to delay the adoption of resolutions, but I would hope that he will no longer be able
to paralyse the Council’s collective will.
207. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Soviet Union has asked to speak in exercise of his
right of reply, and I now call on him.
208. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpwtation
from Russian):
I would
have considered it beneath my dignity to respond to
the statement made by the representative of Israel had
he not gone so far as to insult the Council as a whole
and all its members individually.
He accused the members of the Council of dealing in lies.

201. Mr. GOULDING
(United Kingdom):
It was
suggested in our earlier consultations that we should
keep this debate short so that the members of the
Council
could return the more quickly to consideration of what action the Council should take in response to the terrible happenings in Beirut last night.
I had not, therefore, intended to speak, but after so
many speakers have stated their countries’
positions, I should like very briefly to state my own country’s position.

209. I would give only two specific examples of
occasions on which the representative
of Israel has
dealt in lies here. These examples have been proved
by actual events. My first example occurred in early
August, at one of the night meetings of the Council,
when the Soviet delegation, in its statement, said that
it had received information regarding a further advance
of Israeli troops towards Beirut. The representative of
Israel said that we were lying and qualified our statement as a lie. On the following day, the veracity of
the Soviet Union’s warning was confirmed and Israeli
troops were proved to have in fact moved forward,
If memory serves, I believe that, at one of the Council’s subsequent meetings, Mr. Blum took it upon himself to prove that, nevertheless, he alone was right and
that the facts and realities were somehow wrong. We
have not heard about that from Mr. Blum. But the lie
he uttered here after consultations with his Government remained a lie.

202. It is that the ruthless massacre of innocent men,
women and children has aroused indignation
and
revulsion
in my country. We condemn it without
reservation.
Two weeks ago there seemed at last to be
hope that we might soon see a return to some measure of peace and stability in Beirut following the
agreement
negotiated by Mr. Habib. Those htipes
now seem to lie in ruins following the assassination of
the President-elect
of Lebanon and the subsequent
invasion of west Beirut by the armed forces of Israel.
203.
Last night’s tragedy has confirmed our worst
fears of what the consequences of those events would
be. It has confirmed our belief that if the spiral of
violence
in Beirut is to be stopped, a first step must
be the immediate withdrawal of Israel to the positions
it occupied before 15 September.

210. My second example is the following. In one of
his statements, the Soviet representative warned that
17

if we did not prevent the movement of the Israeli
aggressor into west Beirut, the city of Beirut could
become another on the list of the world’s tragic cities,
a list that includes many European cities razed to the
ground, their civilian populations ruthlessly annihilated by the Fascist aggressor. Mr. Blum described
that statement by the Soviet representative as propaganda. Today, what we then warned about has,
alas, taken place. The civilian inhabitants-palestinian women and children-have
been massacred
with the assent and, indeed, with the participation of
Israel. The Soviet delegation was once again correct,
and once again, in this specific case, the representative of Israel lied.
211. I am sure that the “free” press in this country
will pass over in silence what is now being said by the
Soviet delegation. The “free” press in this country
publishes only the statements of Mr. Blum. That is
the criterion of freedom to which the press in this
country really adheres, but it is a poor and limited
freedom, in the end, and one that benefits only what
is pro-Israel.
212. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of
Jordan has asked to speak in exercise of his right of
reply, and I now call on him.
2 13.

Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): It is truly nauseating
that while Mr. Blum’s armed forces are being universally condemned throughout the world and while
their hands are still dripping with blood that has not
yet dried, he should have chosen to refer to a conflict
of views that occurred 12 years ago and in which
mere hundreds on both sides were involved.

area held by the valiant Palestinian fighters, the Israelis
chose by duplicity to commit an act of genocide in
violation of a gentlemen’s agreement, with the United
States as guarantor.
216. What happened in Jordan was never a quarrel
between Palestinians and Jordanians; the contenders
belonged to both groups. The Israeli representative
knows that perfectly well. Besides, it involved a handful of Palestinians who crossed the Jordan River, and
not hundreds, as he well knows. And I SBW them
-probably
five or six-on television.
The alien immigrants
who usurped Palestine
never repatriated a single Palestinian since the P&Stinians were uprooted in 1947. Is it conceivable that
they would now admit hundreds of Palestinians? NO
one would be happier than I if they did. But they will
never do that.
217.

218. Let anyone go to Jordan and he will see for
himself the brotherhood,
peace and prosperity which
all citizens and all inhabitants-Palestinian
and Jordanian alike-enjoy,
and let anyone compare that with
the reign of terror which has been imposed upon the
occupied territories and the Palestinian people and
which has now been extended to the valiant people of
Lebanon, who are also being treated as inhabitants of
occupied territories, Today alone, thousands of Lebanese civilians have been arrested, That was reported
on all the networks. There have been house-to-house
searches; in addition, a curfew has been imposed on
the newly occupied territory of Lebanon.
219. I would advise Mr, Blum not to reopen the
subject; otherwise, I shall introduce a volume and shaw
him the endless list of crimes which the Israelis have
committed from as long ago as 1943-1944 to this day.

214. I would answer him as follows, although I have
already done so many times before. This evening in
particular, I had not wanted to dignify the representative of Israel with an answer, or to allow him to
derail the discussion of the cowardly holocaust inflicted upon the Palestinian refugees last night while
the Israelis were celebrating their holiday, which must
have been a twofold one for them. I have had many
occasions to reply factually and in detail, and I shall
do so again, in rebuttal of the colossal lies of Mr. Blum
regarding this question. I am all too familiar with it,
He should know perfectly well that what happened in
Jordan 12 years ago was in fact a family quarrel that
emanated from Israel’s aggression and its occupation
of Arab Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza. In addition, it was a manly fight between two differing points
of view on how best to struggle against the Israeli
aggressor, who had not only occupied Palestinian
lands, territories and people, but was also devastating
large Parts of Jordan as Israel subsequently did in Lebanon and elsewhere.

220. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of
Lebanon has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply and I now call on him.
221. Mr. TUENI
(Lebanon):
I shall be extremely
brief. I do not think that anything that has been said
here this evening, particularly by the representative of
Israel, is apt to lead me to change my statement concerning the Lebanese army and responsibility for what
happened yesterday in my country.
222. However, I should like to reiterate once more,
in view of what we have heard, that we are prepared
to assume our responsibilities
fully and, should the
international community wish to be associated so as
to increase or emphasize both the political and militarY credibility of this operation, we should welcome
any such involvement,
Hence,
my Government
supports the proposal of the representative of Ireland
to ask the Secretary-General to engage immediately in
~mWltatiOns
as to how best the Council can aSsUm
its responsibilities.

215. It was never a perfidious criminal act unlike
the actions of the Israeli tanks and commandos that
ringed the refugee camps in Beirut. Having failed for
two and a half months to take even one inch of the
18

223. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Israel
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I hope he will be just as brief as the representative of,
Lebanon. I now call on him.

233. I shall first call upon those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.

224. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, I shall be
very brief indeed. I just want to remark on the statement made by the representative of the Soviet Union,

Spanidz):

225. First of all, I believe it is indicative of the state
of the Council that the representative of the Soviet
Union has become its foremost defender. Secondly,
I would be interested to know what amount of coverage the “free” press of the Soviet Union gives to
my statements. Thirdly, the Israel Defence Forces
moved into west Beirut last Wednesday. This proves
how accurate Mr. Ovinnikov’s
statement was last
August. Fourthly, Mr. Ovinnikov’s
statements last
August were foul and obscene in the language they
used in reference to my country, and so was his main
statement here tonight.

234.

Mr.

KAM
(Panama)
(intcrpretution
fi-cm
Despite the lateness of the hour, my delegation does not wish to deprive itself of the satisfaction of welcoming and congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month.

235. Similarly,
we cannot refrain from paying a
tribute to Mr. Noel Dorr, of Ireland, for the exceptionally skilful way in which he conducted the work
of the Council in the month of August.
236. Although he has already been here for a few
days, my delegation wishes to extend a welcome to the
new representative of the United Kingdom, Sir John
Thomson.
237. My delegation cannot find adequate words
fully to reflect our indignation and repugnance at and
condemnation
of the massacre committed
against
more than 1,500 Palestinians in the refugee camps in
west Beirut. The massacre of defenceless civilians
anywhere in the world is to be condemned, but the
massacre to which we have been referring tonight is
countless times as repugnant because it has been
committed against refugees who form part of a people
who are being prevented from returning to their homes
and are denied the right to their own property, theil
self-determination
and their own national State in
their age-old country. To the painful circumstance of
exile is added the permanent threat of violence, terror
and massacre.

226. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make
a statement. I hope that he, too, will be brief. I now
call on him.
227. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine Liberation
Grganization): I listened with great interest to the statement
of the representative of the United Kingdom.
228. When we came here, we did not think that we
were coming to a synod in cutnero. We were hoping
that the Council would take some action, at least to
guarantee the safety of, and provide some safeguards
to, the civilians in Beirut, especially the Palestinians
in refugee camps,

238. My delegation wishes to convey to the PLO.
the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, our feelings of deep concern at this terrible
massacre and to express our solidarity in the face of
this tragedy.

229. Mr. President, I would appeal to you and the
other members of the Council to take some such
action before the meeting adjourns.
230. The PRESIDENT:
There being no furthei
speakers, I shall now suspend the meeting in order to
enable the members of the Council to enter into consultations on the matter.

239. Since Israel invaded Lebanon last June, my
delegation has consistently voted in favour of all Council resolutions intended to bring about the total and
unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanese territory.
Similarly,
we have unreservedly
supported the need for respect of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon. In consonance with the unanimous feeling of
the international
community,
we have advocated the
re-estabtishment
of peace in Lebanon and national
reconstruction. Therefore, my delegation feels alarmed
at recent events which have contributed to a worsening
of the already delicate situation in Lebanon, making
the situation in that sorely tried country increasingly
dangerous.

231. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to document
S/15400, containing the report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Council resolution 520 (1982),
which is before them. The Council also has before
it document
S/15402, which contains the text of a
draft resolution which was prepared in the course of
consultations
among the members of the Council.
232.
I understand that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution in document
S/15402. If I hear no objection, I shall now put the
draft resolution to the vote.

240. Panama feels that it is urgent for the Council
to adopt effective measures to prevent a worsening
of the situation in Lebanon, particularly in Beirut, and
19

to reverse this tendency and bring about conditions
that would make possible the restoration of peace in
Lebanon.

249. Mr. KARRAN
(Guyana):
Notwithstanding
the late hour, I shall ask to be allowed to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. With your experience, good judgement and
skill, my delegation is confident that you will guide the
Council’s work successfully in the month of Sep
tember.

241. Once again, the Council has a formidable challenge before it. We hope it can discharge its mission
with the co-operation of all the Members of the United
Nations, in particular those permanent members of
the Security Council which are able to bring a decisive influence to bear on the solution of the crisis in
Lebanon. Therefore, my delegation will vote for the
draft resolution that is before us, since we consider
that it contains elements which constitute an important step forward on this path, although we are aware
that the solution to the problem of Lebanon will be
found only within the context of a complete, just
and lasting solution to the question of the Middle East,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations.

2.50. At the same time, I should like to express my
appreciation to the representative of Ireland, Mr. Noel
Dorr, who, with his usual skill, patience, resourcefulness and imagination,
conducted the Council‘s
work with distinction during the month of August,
25 1. My delegation would also like to welcome as a
member of the Council and to the United Nations the
representative of the United Kingdom, who is not
here with us this evening. The Guyana delegation looks
forward to working very closely with him during his
period at the United Nations.

242. Mr. IRUMBA (Uganda): The hour is late; therefore, I shall be very brief.

252. We have listened with dismay and qualm of
conscience to the clear and lucid report of the Secretary-General on the matter before us. We thank him
for his report. Unfortunately,
the assistance which
he sought in carrying out the mandate entrusted to
him was not forthcoming.

243. Our position with regard to the events in Lebanon has been well known. We stated it yesterday;
we also stated the root cause of the problem and
ascribed responsibility,
I shall therefore not repeat
that.

253. The world’s conscience has been shocked at the
news coming out of west Beirut. The Guyana delegation is appalled and horrified at what took place in
Lebanon on 18 September. More than 1,000 civilians
-Palestinian
women, children and men, defenceless
people-were massacred.

244. I have asked to be allowed to speak to express
our condolences to the bereaved families, to the PLO,
to the Palestinian people, and to the Lebanese people
and its Government
in the tragic deaths that have
struck many families in Beirut.
245. We shall vote in favour of the draft resolution
because we see it as a first step, at least, in arresting
the situation which is developing and could become
much more dangerous. We believe that the United
Nations, despite its detractors and those who organize tirades against it, has a positive role in ensuring
that the people of Lebanon and the Palestinian people
are protected and not subjected to more massacres.

254. Consequent upon intensive negotiations aimed
at bringing a halt to the sufferings in Lebanon, an agrcement was concluded. Honest and trustworthy people
accepted and acted in good faith on the terms of that
agreement. However, Israel, one of the parties to the
agreement, breached the good faith in which that
agreement was concluded and used the opportunity of
the withdrawal of the freedom fighters of the PLO
-which
was supervised by a multinational
forceto take control of west Beirut and caused one of the
most heinous crimes to be perpetrated against the
Palestinian people.

246. For those reasons, Uganda will vote in favour of
the draft resolution and hopes that all the other delegations will do the same. I appeal to the Government
of Israel and all those concerned in Lebanon not to
impede the implementation
of the resolution if it is
adopted.

255. I refer to the massacre of the Palestinian refu*
gees, evidence of which we have all seen on television
in our own living-rooms.
I take this opportunity to
express my delegation’s condolences to the relatives
and families of those who have suffered during this
massacre.

247. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/15402.

248. The PRESIDENT:
members of the Council
ments after the voting,

256. Looking at what transpired, one cannot help
concluding that the whole of this exercise had been
premeditated and planned, The Council has on various
occasions called for the withdiawal of Israeli fdrces
from Lebanon. On Friday last, in resolution j2f
(1982), the Council, in condemning the recent Israd
incursion into west Beirut in violation of the cease-

I shall now call on those
who wish to make state20

fire agreements and of Council resolutions, called for
strict respect for Lebanon’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence under the
sole and exclusive authority of the Lebanese Government, through the Lebanese army, throughout Lebanon. That resolution has not yet been implemented,
257. If the Council is to continue to carry out, its
primary function of the maintenance of international
peace and security, and thereby maintain its credibility, it must ensure that its resolutions are implemented. My delegation feels that, in the light of the
tragic incident which took place on 17 September, it is
imperative that the resolution we have just adopted,

21

and to which my delegation was pleased to lend its
support, be complied with. It is the barest minimum
we could demand in order to ensure the safety of the
Palestinian refugees and the civilian population
of
Beirut and in order to put an end to the genocide taking
place in Lebanon.

NOTE

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&s
des ventes.
New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

son1 en vcnte dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLIC’ACIONES

IAS publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
NWW
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
l’rom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section,
New

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Ies agences
A : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Ventas.
