S/PV.7634

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7634th meeting

Friday, 26 February 2016, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-05398 (E)
*1605398*

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting. On behalf of the
Council, I welcome Mr. De Mistura, who is joining
today’s meeting via video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: On behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, I hope to soon welcome the adoption of a draft
resolution that will help all of us address an issue that we
have been jointly working on for at least the past three
weeks. We have come a long way since the first meeting
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) in
Vienna on 30 October 2015. Much has transpired since
I last briefed the Council on 5 February, the day that
I suspended the inter-Syrian talks in the light of the
positions articulated by the parties and the lack of
progress on the ground.
Three weeks later, and as a result of the heavy
lifting done by members of the ISSG, particularly of
the co-Chairs of the two task forces that were formed
in Munich on 12 February, aid has been delivered in the
past 10 days to almost 110,000 people, and 200 trucks
are moving inside Syria in order to reach six locations.
The first World Food Programme test air-drop in Deir
ez-Zour has also taken place in order to reach an area
where there are about 230,000 people under siege by
Daesh.
Perhaps most importantly, we have had a provisional
agreement on the terms of a cessation of hostilities in
Syria, as announced by the Russian and United States
co-Chairs at the beginning of this week. The cessation
of hostilities is in fact meant to come into effect about
an hour from now at midnight Damascus time. This
2/18

26/02/2016

meeting therefore has a special significance on this
hopefully exceptional day and night for the Syrians.
Consequently, with your permission, Sir, I will give
the Council a rather unorthodox briefing. Rather than
walking Council members through the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2016), concerning which Council
members already have the Secretary-General’s letter of
17 February (S/2016/152), I would rather focus on the
post-Munich developments, many unfolding almost in
real time.
As an outcome of the ISSG meeting in Munich, we
now have specific obligations for the ISSG members
and the Syrians to fulfil. There are now a mechanism
in place to that effect, an agreed set of actions and an
immediate timetable and timeline. Council members
have just deliberated on a draft resolution that, I hope,
that will endorse all those steps. Let me give them an
idea of the hard work that will have brought us to this
stage once the Council has adopted the draft resolution.
First, on the issue of sustained humanitarian
access and a humanitarian task force, the Council
is well aware of the detailed briefings on the overall
grave humanitarian situation in Syria. Over the past
month alone, the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/862); the report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Syria (A/HRC/30/48); as well as the letter of the
Secretary-General of 17 February have painted quite a
tragic and harrowing picture of the desperate conditions
of civilians — including many women, children and
sick persons — in communities across Syria that are
besieged by the Government, by the opposition or by
Daesh. To that, we should add the unprecedented level
of internal displacement and the growing number of
Syrians embarking on an often fatal journey across
land and sea to seek safety and asylum in Europe and
elsewhere.
Humanitarian issues have taken a centre stage in
the latest ISSG deliberations in Munich leading to the
establishment of the ISSG task force on humanitarian
access, which has already met three times since
12 February. My Office, including my Senior Adviser
on Humanitarian Issues, Jan Egeland, and the United
Nations country team in Damascus, led by United
Nations Resident Coordinator Yacoub El Hillo, have
worked hard, together with implementing partners
such as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to generate
a humanitarian plan, as requested by ISSG. In the
16-05398

26/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

first instance, urgently needed humanitarian aid was
delivered to the besieged areas identified in the Munich
statement: Madaya, Zabadani, Moadamiya, Kafr
Batna — which is part of eastern Ghouta — Kafraya
and Foah.
Thanks to the prompt operational response of our
World Food Programme colleagues and the generosity
of ISSG members such as Germany, the United States
and the Netherlands, as well as technical support
offered by the Russian Federation, we also witnessed
the first test-run of air drops in a difficult environment,
such as that of Deir ez-Zour. We believe that to date, the
task force members have lived up to the commitment
they made in Munich by using their influence with the
parties to ensure an increased flow of assistance — not
enough, but quite an increased flow.
Those remarkable efforts were not without
difficulties or ongoing serious delays. That is why the
task force is addressing those, and we will be working
on them. We are still waiting for the approval of an aid
delivery for an additional 170,000 people in the besieged
areas. The simplifcation of approval procedures by the
Government still has some way to go and has yet to
occur, but we are working on that matter. A constructive
meeting took place yesterday between Deputy Foreign
Minister Mikhdad and our own team on the issue. We
hope to see the results soon. I personally addressed
that issue with the Syrian Government myself during
my visit to Damascus last week. I will continue to
follow up on these matters very closely because they
are of vital importance and they are a follow-up to the
Munich commitments.
Regarding the cessation of hostilities in Syria and
the ISSG ceasefire task force, less than three hours
ago I joined the Russian Federation and United States
co-Chairs in the first meeting of the ISSG ceasefire
task force in this very room from which I am addressing
the Council. In the presence of the ISSG members,
the two co-Chairs, who have been working all week
with partners in reaching out to the other parties on
the ground, have outlined the terms for the cessation
of hostilities in Syria announced on 22 February in a
joint press release by the Russian Federation and the
United States. Today, the two co-Chairs today noted
that the principal Syrian parties have announced their
willingness to participate in the cessation of hostilities
beginning midnight Damascus time, which is basically
less than one hour from now.

S/PV.7634

Armed opposition groups have announced their
commitment to, first, fully implementing resolution 2254
(2015) and participating — I repeat, participating — in
the United Nations-facilitated political negotiations.
This time we want them to stay there and not to move
from there until we have gone through at least the first
phase of negotiations. Secondly, they will cease their
attacks with any weapons, including rockets, mortars
and anti-tank guided missiles, against the Syrian armed
forces and any forces associated with them. Thirdly,
they will refrain from acquiring or seeking to acquire
territory from other parties to the agreement. Fourthly,
they will allow humanitarian access. Fifthly, they
will use proportionate force, which means not unless
required to address an immediate threat and if and
when responding in self-defence.
At the same time, the Syrian armed forces and other
forces associated with them have committed to abiding
by exactly the same points. That means ceasing attacks
with any weapons, including aerial bombardment
by the Syrian Air Force or Russian aerospace forces
against the armed opposition groups that are party to
the cessation of hostilities.
The ceasefire task force will oversee the
cessation of hostilities under the co-chairship of
Russia and the United States. Its primary functions
will include, first, delineation of the territory held
by Da’esh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other organizations
designated by the Security Council as terrorist that
are not part of the cessation of hostilities. Secondly,
it will issue communications to promote compliance
with the de-escalation of tensions. Thirdly, it will
assess the nature and credibility of incoming reports
of non-compliance in order to determine response
measures. Fourthly, it will determine and address
patterns of persistent non-compliance before referring
the matter to senior officials or a higher level.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the United Nations will support those
efforts in a secretariat capacity and through a so-called
permanent alert centre, better described as an operations
centre — a few metres from here, by the way — which
will be fielding and disseminating information to the
co-Chairs in the wider ISSG. In turn, we, the United
Nations, are not expected to characterize, assess and/
or de-conflict information received, a function that
will remain with the co-Chairs, which are the Russian
Federation and the United States, in consultation with
other ISSG members. The cessation of hostilities

16-053983/18

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

agreement, preceded by lengthy and detailed
discussions in Geneva and the capitals and the outcome
of intense consultations and negotiations, including at
the highest level, is in itself a major achievement, and
I think the Security Council will recognize that. The
communication of the commitment on the part of the
Syrian parties, essential to ending the war, is also a
very important step.
In this room today, the task force members agreed
to reach out to their respective contacts among the
Syrian parties to explain the functioning of the task
force, ensure the confidentiality of the discussions
within the task force itself and refrain from making
public comments about non-compliance reports
under review, in order to give enough time for such
non-compliance to be addressed. My Office, as the
secretariat of the task force, will issue periodic public
briefings on the task force’s behalf on the status of the
cessation of hostilities. Today’s draft resolution also
sets clear reporting requirements. Other parts of the
United Nations system will obviously retain their own
ability to comment on the situation in Syria within their
own mandates, but the briefings will be done here.
The initial indication of consent by the parties to
the conflict is indeed encouraging, but what we need
now is for the parties to abide by the terms of the
agreement. We have much work ahead of us to ensure
the agreement’s implementation, and the international
community, the ISSG and the Syrian parties must
remain steadfast in their own resolve. The draft
resolution that we hope will be adopted shortly is, we
hope, a further manifestation of the ISSG’s commitment
to delivering the parties to the agreement. Tomorrow,
Saturday — starting at midnight tonight, in fact — will
be critical. There will undoubtedly be no shortage of
attempts to undermine the process. We are ready for
them. We should not be impressed or overly concerned
and should realize that this is part of any ceasefire and
certainly of a cessation of hostilities.
The onus, however, remains with the co-Chairs,
the relevant members of the ceasefire task force and
all of us to work fast to defuse any tension that may
arise from potential crossed wires, disinformation or
incidents. The parties will have to show restraint in
cases where there are still discrepancies in information
on the presence and affiliation of groups. Daraya is a
case in point. For our part, we will do all we can to
support that important effort. My teams, both in Geneva
4/18

26/02/2016

and Damascus, will be on a rotating duty as of midnight
tonight to follow up on it.
In adopting resolution 2254 (2015), the Council
made it abundantly clear that only a negotiated political
solution can bring an end to this horrible five-year
conflict. The resolution also acknowledged that there
is a close link between a nation-wide ceasefire and a
parallel political process, and confidence in a political
process will indeed increase the prospects of a ceasefire.
We all know it, and the people of Syria have been
telling and reminding us about it. In turn, a reduction
in violence will help create conditions conducive to
negotations, and progress on a cessation of hostilities
will drastically improve the conditions on the ground,
which in turn will lead to a significant scaling up of
humanitarian deliveries across Syria. As the SecretaryGeneral concluded in his letter to the Council, the
agreement reached in Munich represents a precious
opportunity for a speedy and credible resumption of
intra-Syrian talks.
Assuming, therefore, that, God willing, the cessation
of hostilities largely holds and the humanitarian access
continues unabated, I intend to reconvene — based on
consultation with the Secretary-General and hopefully
with the Council’s approval — the intra-Syrian talks
on Monday, 7 March, with the same representatives of
the Syrian Government in opposition, as well as the
groups of individuals associated with the Moscow and
Cairo meetings. As I told the parties at the outset of
the talks on 29 January, the agenda remains exactly
the same. It is based on resolution 2254 (2015), which
aims for a comprehensive political settlement through
negotiations on a political transition process pursuant
to the Geneva final communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
It is therefore my intention to focus on the core
issues defined by the Council in resolution 2254
(2015): securing agreements on credible, inclusive,
non-sectarian governance, a schedule and process for
drafting a new constitution, and elements and a schedule
for holding fair and free parliamentary and presidential
elections on the basis of that new constitution. We
have to build on the momentum that has emerged since
Munich to help the parties reach an agreement on these
matters in the shortest possible time. I am counting on
the ISSG, but also the Security Council, to ensure that
the parties come to Geneva again, this time ready to
engage, to stay and to stay engaged on the substantive
issues. I hope that the draft resolution that the Council
16-05398

26/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

may be adopting shortly will send a good signal in that
direction.
While the primary focus of the talks is governance,
I also intend to ensure that pressing confidence-building
aspects that matter most to the Syrian people will
continue to be addressed, including the release of any
arbitrarily detained people, in particular women and
children and individuals who have been kept hostage. I
am also bound by the resolution 2254 (2015) to ensure
the participation of the broadest spectrum of Syrians.
As I mentioned in my last briefing, in addition
to consulting with representatives of the Government
and the opposition, I have consulted and will continue
to consult with civil society representatives and
women — Syrian women. They make a remarkable
contribution and need to continue to make a remarkable
contribution to our work. I will continue this practice.
Since the recess of the talks, both the Civil Society
Support Room, which is a platform aimed at facilitating
the participation of civil society organizations in
Geneva, and the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board have
continued their preparations. They will continue doing
so and help us — and help me to do my job. Furthermore,
UN Women, which has worked closely with us over
recent months, has seconded a gender adviser to my
office to support both my work and that of the Women’s
Advisory Board.
In conclusion, we have so far, together, maintained
the ISSG momentum. It now needs to be sustained.
Both task forces are making progress — admittedly,
not enough — but progress that would have been
unimaginable just two months ago. The outcomes
from both are first good steps — a first step towards
sustained and unimpeded access throughout Syria in
terms of humanitarian aid, and a first step towards,
hopefully, a more durable nationwide ceasefire. I
cannot overemphasize how important, determined and
sustained political will is the good-faith implementation
of the cessation of hostilities for making this agreement
fixed.
On the humanitarian issue, it is essential not to
lose focus. Our position remains clear — all sieges
must end. The United Nations and other humanitarian
partners must be granted unhindered and sustainable
humanitarian access without preconditions, and
civilians must be allowed freedom of movement.
The ongoing support of the ISSG and of the Security
Council remain therefore critical.

S/PV.7634

As for the cessation of hostilities, which we hope
will be respected, it will not only create conditions
conducive to the resumption of meaningful negotiations,
but it will also and above all send a long-awaited signal
of hope to the Syrian people that after five years of
conflict there may be an end and a hope of an end to
their suffering. These are all sentiments reinforced by
ISSG members in today’s meeting and just endorsed, I
hope, by the Security Council through the adoption of
resolution 2268 (2016).
On all these aspects, the United Nations is ready and
present to provide support. The Secretary-General has
confirmed it, and I reiterate it once again on his behalf.
Everyone should do his or her share; we will do ours.
Critical fault lines are being addressed now carefully
and cautiously, be it which groups will be participating
in the cessation of hostilities or which areas are being
opened to access and how and on what priority basis.
This will remain a complicated, painstaking process,
but we should not give up since nothing is impossible,
especially at this moment.
Going forward, I will continue to heavily count on
the ISSG to resolve any possible ambiguities related to
the talks as they arise and will keep the Council fully
informed on progress as I have done before. Resolution
2254 (2015) was a ray of hope and a moment of hope
that remains ongoing. It unanimously expressed
the international community’s grave concern at the
continued suffering of the Syrians, the persistent and
brutal violence and the perverse impact of terrorist and
violent extremist ideology.
We are now at the crossroads and we have the
possibility of turning the page in the Syrian conflict
after almost six years of one of the bloodiest conflicts
in recent memory. It is potentially a historic juncture,
bringing an end to the killing and destruction and
giving new life with renewed hope to the Syrians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. De Mistura for his briefing and for his work.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it. Members of the Council
have before them document S/2016/185, which contains
the text of a draft resolution submitted by the Russian
Federation and the United States of America. I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

16-053985/18

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2268 (2016).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing and for his
dogged efforts — no matter how many obstacles are put
in his way — to seek a way out for the people of Syria
from this abysmal conflict.
We are gathered here at a critical moment.
Resolution 2268 (2016), which we have just adopted and
in which the Security Council endorses the cessation of
hostilities in Syria, offers a genuine opportunity for a
pause, at least in part, in the fighting in one of the most
brutal conflicts the world has seen in a generation, a
conflict that for the past five years the Security Council
and the international community have been unable
to stop. This resolution endorses a set of practical,
concrete steps, along with terms to which the parties
to the conflict must commit, to reduce the violence and
create space for a long overdue political transition.
There is some scepticism as to whether this
cessation of hostilities, which is scheduled to go into
effect in less than an hour, at midnight Damascus time,
will be respected from the outset or, just as important,
whether it will hold with time. That scepticism is more
than reasonable, given previous efforts that the Council
and other multilateral institutions have undertaken to
try to stop the monstrous violence and immeasurable
suffering experienced by the Syrian people. Yet that
record does not change the fact that this is our best
chance to reduce the violence. Today, as in every
previous effort, the only measure that matters is not the
words on the page of this resolution, but whether these
commitments are actually put into practice and whether
these commitments lead to real changes on the ground.
For that to happen, first and foremost, the parties
to the conflict must abide by the terms endorsed
today. To that end, the United States has continued to
6/18

26/02/2016

consult closely with the major Syrian armed opposition
groups, which have confirmed their acceptance of the
terms of the cessation of hostilities through the High
Negotiations Committee or directly with us. The vast
majority among them are ready to participate in the
cessation provided the Syrian Government, and the
Governments and forces supporting it, abide by their
commitments under the terms. We are therefore deeply
concerned by the continued Syrian and Russian aerial
bombardment of towns across Syria, aerial bombing
that has caused massive displacement and hundreds of
civilian deaths. Many of the towns being hit by Syrian
and Russian bombers are towns such as Daraya, a
suburb of Damascus that is being pummelled up to this
very day, a town that is not held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant or the Al-Nusra Front. It is hard
to seem serious and sincere about ceasing hostilities
when you ramp up fighting right up to the minute the
cessation of hostilities is to take effect.
Secondly, those countries with influence on the
parties must use it to press the parties to live up to their
commitments. And thirdly, when violations occur, as
inevitably they will, a sober, coordinated response is
critical. The International Syria Support Group (ISSG)
has set up a task force assigned specific steps to address
allegations of non-compliance, including working with
parties to de-escalate violence that could quickly spiral
out of control.
Let us be real. It is going to be extremely challenging,
especially at the outset, to make this work. In a world
of horrific crises, arguably no crisis has done more
to threaten international peace and security or has
inflicted as much human suffering as the conflict in
Syria. We are all now broken records here in the Council
about the fact that this crisis cannot be resolved through
force alone and that it will require a political solution.
We have heard it; we have said it. But today we have an
opportunity. If we can make this cessation of hostilities
hold, which is a very big if, we will take a genuine step
towards that political solution we have been talking
about for so long.
As we all know, if implemented, a cessation of
hostilities would not apply to terrorist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which will
continue to fight. Yet even a partial de-escalation would
make a real difference in the lives of Syrians, and it
would also allow us to expand the reach of humanitarian
access, which, despite the modest gains that have been
made in recent days and weeks, is extremely limited
16-05398

26/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

and extremely inadequate, particularly when it comes to
hard-to-reach or besieged areas, where people continue
to starve to death and die of treatable illnesses owing
to a lack of medicine. Man-made starvation continues,
man-made deaths, because medicine is being stripped
from convoys. Regular, sustained and unimpeded
access must be granted to all Syrians in need, no matter
where they live.
A cessation of hostilities will also help foster
conditions in which Special Envoy De Mistura could
reconvene talks between the parties in Geneva, which is
crucial to working towards the political transition that
offers the only long-term solution to Syria’s conflict.
That transition, as we have said all along, must be a
transition away from Bashar Al-Assad, who has lost all
legitimacy to lead. As President Obama said yesterday,
it is clear that after years of his barbaric war against
his own people, including torture and barrel bombs and
sieges and starvation, many Syrians will never stop
fighting until Al-Assad is out of power.
The cessation will not itself ensure that a political
solution is reached, but it does at least create conditions in
which one is possible. Beyond respecting the cessation,
the parties can take other meaningful steps to build
confidence, starting by releasing detainees, especially
women and children, who continue to be subjected to
deplorable treatment and inhumane conditions.
Let me conclude. All are aware that on 11 February
the ISSG issued its statement in Munich, which set out
the initial terms of the cessation of hostilities that is
supposed to go into effect shortly. Not long after the
statement was issued, a group of around a dozen Syrians
huddled in the rain outside a checkpoint in the town of
Kilis, along Turkey’s border with Syria. The men are
just a handful of the nearly 4.5 million Syrians who
have fled their country since the conflict began. These
Syrians were actually waiting to go back into Syria in
hopes of retrieving their families and bringing them
to safety in Turkey. A journalist asked them if they
thought that the deal reached in Munich would actually
lead to a pause in the violence, No, they all said, without
hesitation. One of the men, a 25-year-old named Faisal,
who would not give his full name out of fear that his
loved ones still in Syria could be harmed as a result,
said of the ISSG statement, “The deals they make there
are so isolated and detached from this reality here”.
Whether this effort at a cessation of hostilities helps to
change that reality, the reality on the ground for people
like Faisal and so many millions of Syrians who have

S/PV.7634

been through what no human being should ever have
to endure, whether that happens depends in significant
part on what the nations in this Chamber do when the
cessation begins less than an hour from now.
It is true that our actions alone will not determine
whether or not the cessation of hostilities holds. Even
if we all act in good faith, other parties have to power
to sabotage the cessation by their actions. Yet it is also
true that the failure by any one of our nations to live
up to our part of the deal, which includes working to
ensure that the commitments made are honoured,
pressing on the parties within our respective spheres
of influence and making sure that sober, united steps
are taken to de-escalate violations when they occur,
could also result in the failure of the cessation. If this
collapses,we will lose the most tangible opportunity we
have had in a very long time to reduce the suffering
of the Syrian people and to create space for finding a
political solution that will finally bring them peace.
So much depends on what we do. Let us not squander
this chance.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Today another important collective step has been taken
towards achieving a political solution to the conflict in
Syria. The Security Council, in the resolution that it has
just adopted — resolution 2268 (2016) — endorsed the
joint statement of the Russian Federation and the United
States of America as the co-Chairs of the International
Syrian Support Group on the cessation of hostilities in
that country, on conditions that are part and parcel of
that joint statement.
This document and the resolution that has
been adopted, which Russia co-sponsored, must be
implemented strictly and without any preconditions.
The process of implementation itself must be monitored
reliably. What is important is that the resolution was
adopted at almost exactly the same moment as the
cessation of hostilities is entering into force in Syria.
Many armed groups in Syria have already declared that
they are ready to comply with its provisions.
As was confirmed in the joint statement, the
cessation of hostilities regime will not apply to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra or
other terrorist organizations that have been recognized
as such by the Security Council. The combat against
them will continue. Our position is that the longterm stabilization of Syria will be impossible without
eliminatimg the terrorist threat in that country.

16-053987/18

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

To achieve that goal, it is essential to put an end
to efforts to use terrorists as a weapon for suspect
geopolitical aims. All sources of supply to the terrorists
must be shut down reliably. At the Syrian border we
must prevent illegal flows, which allow criminal
groups to prosper and thrive. We need to put an end
to the continuing infringement of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria by external forces.
The joint actions agreed with the United States can
contribute to making this a real turning point in the
Syrian crisis, which has gone on for far too long. We
now have a real chance to end the violence and to step
up our collective combat against terrorism and improve
the very serious humanitarian situation in the country.
Of vital importance is the fact that we are creating new
conditions for developing the political process under the
auspices of the United Nations and that the main role
will be played by the Syrians themselves. That process
should ensure a meaningful role for the Syrians that
did not leave their homeland during the many years of
conflict, in particular the Kurdish population, which is
one of the key elements in the counter-terrorist efforts.
In other words, it should ensure a meaningful role
for all the representatives of the ethnic and religious
components of Syrian society.
We understand that this process will be difficult
and complex given how entrenched the conflict has
become and the various efforts to derail the initial
progress. However, inter-Syrian negotiations must
be resumed as soon as possible and we should move
forward on all the remaining aspects of the agenda. In
fact, the resolution we have just adopted affirms that.
We hope that the United Nations will be impartial and
principled in its support of this process and that Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura will play a constructive role.
At the same time, we need to be firmly committed
to all provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and the other
foundational documents. We should not single out
individual components of those documents in order to
take advantage of the changing situation on the ground
or to benefit the selfish priorities of any particular
opposition group. Any measure that could derail the
political process by establishing preconditions should
be rejected. We should not be at the beck and call of
radicals, but rather should urge them to engage in
dialogue. At the same time, we must end the harmful
practice of providing external support to armed groups.
That has had a very negative impact on the political
8/18

26/02/2016

process and threatens the future of the cessation
of hostilities.
We expect the Syrian actors, the States of the
region and the entire international community to act
responsibly and implement the whole range of decisions
on the Syrian political solution. The cornerstone of this
process should be the interests of the Syrian people. We
cannot squander this historic opportunity.
Russia has consistently supported a political
solution to the conflict in Syria. Through our joint
efforts, we launched the Vienna process and established
the International Syria Support Group. We supported
some of the most important foundational decisions of
the Security Council on this conflict. We believe that
the groundwork laid today for constructive cooperation
will be essential to success on the path towards a
peaceful solution.
In a broader context, we should discuss the
possibility of developing a comprehensive strategy for
political stabilization and the socioeconomic rebuilding
of the Middle East region and North Africa. The
solution to the challenges that the region is facing must
be collective. The proposals of the Russian Federation
to initiate broad-based cooperation in that area remain
as valid as ever.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
wishes to thank all the members of the Security
Council for their constructive engagement in dealing
with one of the most important issues in the Arab
world, namely, the Syrian crisis. We also wish to pay
a special tribute to both the Russian Federation and the
United States of America for their efforts that led to the
announcement of the cessation of hostilities in Syria,
which represents progress towards a ceasefire. This
initiative has been strongly supported by Egypt in the
framework of the International Syria Support Group.
Resolution 2268 (2016), adopted today, provides it with
a legal framework and support.
We stress the need for all parties to the conflict on the
ground — Syrian and non-Syrian alike, be they involved
either directly or indirectly in the conflict — to cease
their hostilities at the time specified in the resolution.
We also stress that any party that chooses not to abide
by the cessation of hostilities agreement or the Council’s
resolution, or would violate that agreement, should
alone bear the grave consequences of that action.
16-05398

26/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Egypt welcomes the cessation of hostilities
agreement and today’s resolution. We welcome their
stress on the need to improve the humanitarian situation
in Syria and to combat terrorist organizations. In that
context, we affirm that a political solution that meets
the aspirations of the Syrian people to freedom and
democracy and maintains the unity, sovereignty and
institutions of Syria, in line with the communiqués of
the International Syria Support Group and resolution
2254 (2015), is the only way to an end the humanitarian
suffering of the Syrian people and enable Syrian State
institutions to eliminate terrorism.
Egypt therefore welcomes the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, which have just begun
through proximity talks with the Syrian Government
and opposition groups in Geneva. We call on the Special
Envoy to resume those talks as soon as possible and to
finalize the arrangements for the resumption of United
Nations-facilitated formal negotiations between the
Government and the broadest possible spectrum of the
Syrian opposition, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015),
which provides for a clear plan of action that is binding
for all parties. All partners present on Syrian territory
and all parts of Syrian society must participate in that
process in order to maintain Syria’s unity.
We therefore reiterate the need for the entire Syrian
opposition to be represented at the formal negotiations,
as set forth in resolution 2254 (2015). Those must
include the Arab and Kurdish groups engaged in
combating terrorism, especially the terrorism of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra
Front in northern Syria. It is important to underscore
that those groups have already made significant gains
by liberating large areas from the grip of terrorists.
The armed conflict in Syria has assumed
unimaginable dimensions. The Syrian people have
been bearing the unbearable. Now is the time to put
intentions to the test. It is time for accountability. I call
on all parties without exception to stop attempting to
please the warring parties at the expense of the Syrian
people. I call on all parties to work to empower the
Syrian people to take control of their future without
foreign intervention.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2268
(2016), which endorses the cessation of hostilities
agreement in Syria, which will enter into force in less
than one hour. France has lent its full support to the

S/PV.7634

adoption of the resolution, which offers hope for an
immediate improvement of the situation of the Syrian
people.
Throughout the nearly five years of the Syrian crisis,
France’s position has remained constant in support of
the primacy of diplomacy over war in order to find a
political solution that meets the aspirations of the Syrian
people. For four months and since the first meeting in
Vienna in October 2015, France has fully supported the
diplomatic process that enabled the establishment of
the International Syria Support Group, the adoption of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the beginning in January of
formal inter-Syrian negotiations under the auspices of
the Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
France wants to see a process that will lead to
tangible results for the Syrian people, not a process for
the sake of a process. It certainly does not wish to see a
process that would merely serve as a smokescreen to hide
a military escalation, the main victims of which would
be the civilian population and moderate opposition. We
are of the firm belief, which was solidly and explicitly
recalled by the Secretary-General in his letter of
17 February to the Security Council (S/2016/152), that
as long as Syrians see no difference in their daily lives
the negotiations will have no credibility. In that context,
the cessation of hostilities agreed by the United States
and Russia on 12 February should be welcomed as a
contribution to the de-escalation and a step towards the
settlement of the Syrian conflict. France, as I have said,
fully supported the adoption of resolution 2268 (2016)
endorsing the parameters of the cessation of hostilities.
This milestone is both a sign of hope and a test.
It represents the hope that, for the first time, Syrians
will see a decrease in the violence and bombings that
haunt their daily lives, and a test of the good faith of
the parties on the ground, including foreign Powers,
that have accepted the cessation of hostilities. The
role of the Security Council is therefore to support
without hesitation anything that might lead to a lasting
reduction in violence. However, the Council should also
be realistic and exacting. As such, everything must be
done to implement the agreement on the ground. To that
end, France deems it necessary to exercise the utmost
vigilance on two points.
First, the implementation of the agreement should
be closely monitored, as mistrust between the parties
on the ground has never been higher. In that regard,
we recall that only those terrorist groups explicitly

16-053989/18

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

designated by the United Nations are excluded from
the cessation of hostilities. Strict interpretation of that
point should be observed as, without it, peace cannot
be established. The International Syria Support Group
task force, which will report to the Security Council,
will be the collective judge of its implementation. As
long as the parties to the conflict remain the sole judges
of violations and the resumption of hostilities, the whole
structure will remain fragile.
The second point concerns attaining an effective
and sustainable reduction in violence. In order for
the inter-Syrian Geneva negotiations to resume on a
credible foundation, we must ensure that the obligations
recalled in resolution 2254 (2015) and the Munich
communiqué — in particular the full, safe, unhindered
and unconditional access of humanitarian assistance
to affected populations — are fully implemented. As
the Secretary-General himself indicated in his letter of
17 February, negotiations can succeed only if based on a
credible and solid foundation. It will be up to the Special
Envoy to determine whether these conditions are met
on 7 March. The resumption of talks will be possible
only if the commitments undertaken are scrupulously
applied by the regime and the outside Powers that
support it. In that regard, we are very concerned about
the intensified bombings carried out by Syrian and
Russian armed forces right up to the final hours before
the entry into force of the cessation of hostilities.
France will encourage the opposition High
Negotiations Committee to return to the inter-Syrian
negotiation table as soon as the full and lasting
implementation of international obligations has
been noted, in particular humanitarian access to all
besieged areas, as well as the effective implementation
of the cessation of hostilities. The High Negotiations
Committee is a major stakeholder and plays an essential
role in the success of the negotiations. In that context,
we deeply regret that it is not mentioned in the text
of the resolution, whereas it enjoys and should retain
our support.
If the cessation of hostilities holds, an initial
step will have been made towards a settlement to the
Syrian crisis. Nevertheless, as long as the cessation of
hostilities is not supported by political progress towards
a transition consistent with the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex), it will remain fragile and
reversible. In other words, the cessation of hostilities,
which is fragile by nature, should move towards a
ceasefire, which is more durable.
10/18

26/02/2016

Resolution 2254 (2015) sets clear objectives. Allow
me to briefly recall its terms. A ceasefire can take
place only alongside a political process that includes
the implementation of the first stages of the transition.
When the inter-Syrian negotiations between the regime
and the negotiators of the High Negotiations Committee
resume, the parties should begin to formulate the
terms of a compromise in order to set up a transitional
authority with full executive powers, in accordance
with the Geneva communiqué. France will continue to
contribute fully to the diplomatic efforts of the Council
and the International Syria Support Group with a view
to allowing diplomacy prove its effectiveness for the
benefit of the Syrian people.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing.
Not long ago, the International Syria Support
Group (ISSG) held its fourth foreign ministers’ meeting
in Munich, and took the important decision to expand
the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria,
stop the hostilities and to quickly resume the Geneva
talks. Positive results were achieved at the meeting.
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi led a delegation to
the meeting and made an important contribution to its
outcome. Recently, Russia and the United States reached
an agreement on cessation of hostilities in Syria, which
China appreciates. That agreement demonstrates that
the consensus reached at the fourth ISSG foreign
ministers’ meeting has been implemented.
Today the Council has unanimously adopted
resolution 2268 (2016), endorsing the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities in Syria. That demonstrates the
international community’s support for the diplomatic
efforts of the ISSG members and its firm commitment
to a political settlement of the Syrian question. China
welcomes this development. Political settlement is the
only way out of the Syrian crisis. No matter what the
circumstances, it is imperative to stay the course of
a political settlement. The international community
should take the important opportunity represented
by the Council’s endorsement of the agreement on
a cessation of hostilities in Syria to more vigorously
push for the implementation of the existing and
important consensus.
First, the relevant parties in Syria should strictly
implement the agreement on cessation of hostilities, put
an end to fighting and violence within the stipulated time
16-05398

26/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

frame, and speed up humanitarian access to relevant
Syrian areas so as to create conditions favourable to the
prompt resumption of the Geneva talks.
Secondly, the relevant parties in Syria should
strictly implement resolution 2254 (2015) and the
consensus reached at the fourth ISSG foreign ministers’
meeting, put the interests of the country and people
first, and quickly resume talks so as to place the
destiny and future of Syria firmly into the hands of the
Syrian people.
Thirdly, major countries in the region should stop
their mutual finger-pointing and instead take concrete
action to prevent the deterioration of the situation,
and play a constructive role in the forthcoming
implementation of the cessation of hostilities and
efforts to expand humanitarian assistance.
Fourthly, the international community, including
ISSG members, should put peace in Syria and the region
first, assume their respective responsibilities and play
their due roles in the effective implementation of the
consensus reached at the fourth foreign ministers’
meeting and resolution 2254 (2015).
China greatly appreciates the mediation efforts
of Special Envoy De Mistura and firmly supports the
United Nations role as the main channel of mediation
in the political resolution of the Syrian question. China
stands ready to maintain its positive and constructive
role in the political settlement of the Syrian question.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his briefing today and for all of his
sterling work in such challenging circumstances.
The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2268 (2016), endorsing the
agreement on a cessation of hostilities in Syria. I want
to join others in welcoming the cooperation between
the United States and Russia that made this agreement
possible. If implemented fully, this agreement could be
the most significant step forward in the past five years,
a step that brings us closer to an end to the violence
and one that brings the conclusion of this conflict into
sight, bringing about hope for a political transition.
I therefore welcome Special Envoy De Mistura’s
decision to reconvene rapidly political negotiations on
transition, in Geneva on 7 March. It is vital that we
seize the impetus created by this agreement. But as
set out in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/152)

S/PV.7634

on the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), there
are a number of actions still outstanding that need
to be taken forward to maximize the prospects for
successful negotiations.
First, the task force must agree a transparent
monitoring and verification process for the cessation
of hostilities, and, in the future, for a ceasefire.
Secondly, additional confidence-building measures
are still required to show the regime’s commitment to
the political process. Those must include the release
of arbitrarily detained people, especially women and
children. Thirdly, we need to see a complete end to the
obstruction of medical supplies to besieged and hard-toreach areas. That practice is completely unacceptable.
As we heard in the briefing from Stephen O’Brien (see
S/PV.7631) on Wednesday, there has been a significant
resumption of humanitarian aid access to besieged
areas, and that is welcome. But it is long-overdue, and
it is clear that there remain significant needs, including
reaching areas of eastern Ghuta. We must begin to see
that in the coming days.
There is so much more to do. Russia must turn
words into actions and use its unique influence on
the Al-Assad regime, its affiliated militias and other
backers to abide by this agreement. If they do, some
much-needed confidence will be brought to our hopes
for a political settlement; if they do not, we will falter
again and the spiral of violence will continue. We should
not forget that 1,380 civilians have been killed and 5,789
injured by Russian and regime airstrikes since Russia
began its campaign in Syria, including attacks on at
least three camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons. For all uor optimism today, we must therefore
recognize that the cessation of hostilities is an overdue
milestone. Rather than dwell on our past failures, let us
now seize the momentum and see urgent progress aimed
at a political transition — away from Al-Assad — and
a Government that represents all Syrians. That is the
only way to end the longer-term conflict, and in doing
so allow us to defeat the Da’esh threat.
Finally, I would like to make clear the United
Kingdom’s position that it is the Syrian High
Negotiations Commission that must represent the
Syrian opposition in formal negotiations in Geneva.
The Commission represents a broad sweep of the
opposition forces fighting in Syria against the tyranny
of Al-Assad. They deserve our wholehearted support,
which regrettably was not reflected in this resolution.

16-0539811/18

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

It is crucial now that all members of the international
community work in good faith to implement this
resolution and resolution 2254 (2015), alongside the
agreements reached in Munich. In doing so, we can
ensure that this finally is the year that the bloodshed in
Syria comes to an end.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
There are fewer than 10 minutes remaining before a
critical moment comes and we take a first and decisive
step to put an end to the war on the ground in Syria.
Only a few minutes remain for the most crucial phase
to begin, and Spain demands that the parties to the
conflict and their allies fully comply with resolution
2268 (2016), which we have just adopted.
I am grateful for the agreement reached by the
United States and the Russian Federation on the
cessation of hostilities in Syria, which has allowed
us to adopt this resolution today. Spain is ready to
support all United Nations efforts to that end. We
are confident in the work being carried out by the
International Syria Support Group to the draw the
map for the implementation of this agreement and
to implement a supervision mechanism. In the days
to come, transparency and rigour will be essential
elements for the success of this endeavour. After five
years of war, we face an extraordinarily complicated
theatre of operations in which the slightest provocation
can have consequences of enormous scale. That is why
we call for strict respect of the terms agreed upon, and
I reiterate that. We voted for this resolution with the
conviction that it can lead us to a new phase in Syria,
thereby contributing to establishing the necessary
conditions to provide a political solution to the crisis.
We welcome the fact that Syrian authorities and the
High Negotiations Commission of the opposition have
already joined the agreement.
The Secretary-General was very clear in his recent
report (S/2016/152) to the Security Council on the
situation in Syria. The fruitless logic of the military
path has left us with more than one quarter of a million
people dead, the largest humanitarian crisis of our time
and a sanctuary to the terrorism of Da’esh and Al-Qaida.
The sole alternative to breaking the cycle of violence
of the past five years is to implement resolution 2254
(2015), which underscores the importance of the parties
to the conflict to adopt confidence-building measures to
contribute, first, to the viability of the political process
and, secondly, to a sustained ceasefire over time. I
would like to highlight two such confidence-building
12/18

26/02/2016

measures, namely, humanitarian access and the release
of prisoners. Humanitarian access is already covered in
the terms of the cessation of hostilities. Moreover, it is
a demand that is supported by a long series of Security
Council resolutions. It is indispensable for there to
be continued and unhindered access. Restricting the
activities of medical and surgical teams cannot be
justified under any circumstances, and even less so
when there is a cessation of hostilities. The SectretaryGeneral, on his part, has called for freedom of
movement for the civilian population in besieged areas.
This resolution also calls for the release of arbitrarily
detained individuals, particularly women and children.
All along we have asked for an end to indiscriminate
attacks on the civilian population. We now trust that
resolution 2268 (2016) will make it possible for us to
leave behind this tragic chapter of the war in Syria.
However, we must call on the Government of Syria to
protect the civilian population, while strictly complying
with the standards of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. Those are necessary steps to
provide credibility to the parties staking everything on
a political solution. The fight against terrorism cannot
serve as a pretext to keep testing the process of dialogue
under the auspices of the United Nations.
Resolution 2254 (2015), which we adopted
unanimously barely two months ago, continues to be a
valid road map in Syria. The United Nations has played
the role we entrusted it. Spain has full confidence in
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan
de Mistura, and we thank him sincerely once again for
his decided action for peace in Syria. The international
community is already prepared for a new scenario of
reconciliation in Syria.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): It is zero hours Damascus
time, 27 February. By adopting unanimously the
new resolution 2268 (2016), we have endorsed in
full the cessation of hostilities in Syria announced
on 22 February by the United States and the Russian
Federation. I welcome efforts by Secretary Kerry and
Minister Lavrov, co-Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group, which opened up an opportunity to end
this long-lasting conflict. Resolution 2268 (2016) was
sponsored by the Russian Federation and the United
States, which I find most welcome. The adoption
and implementation of resolution 2268 (2016) should
lead to the full implementation of the most important
resolution, namely, resolution 2254 (2015). It is my
hope that the Russia-United States cooperation, as well
16-05398

26/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

as cooperation among other partners, will continue and
be strengthened in the process of the implementation of
both resolutions.
I should now like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura
for his briefing as well as, most important, his
tireless efforts to move the political process forward.
Japan welcomes the announcement of the scheduled
resumption of intra-Syrian talks on 7 March. As the
Special Envoy said, the start and maintenance of the
cessation of hostilities and the improvement of the dire
humanitarian situation are indispensable elements for
the success of those talks.
Japan has provided continuous assistance to Syria
for the development of its economy and improvements
in the livelihood of the people. It has always been a
matter of the highest priority for Japan that the people
of Syria be able to enjoy better lives. However, since the
crisis began, more than a quarter of a million Syrians
have been killed and 4.6 million have fled their country.
Japan will continue to work with others towards a
lasting political settlement by restoring confidence
among the parties through assistance that benefits all
Syrians, without marginalizing any groups.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join previous speakers
in welcoming the timely adoption of resolution 2268
(2016). Its unanimous adoption is a testament to the
resolve of the Security Council in seeking an end to the
bloody conflict in Syria. We also thank Special Envoy
De Mistura for his briefing, which provided us with
insight into a very crucial week for Syria, one which,
hopefully, will begin to define a better future for the
men, women and children of Syria.
Malaysia welcomes the announcement of the
cessation of hostilities by the International Syria
Support Group (ISSG), which is scheduled to begin
right now. We also welcome the agreement by the
Government of Syria and the opposition groups in
that regard. With the agreement of all parties to the
cessation of hostilities, including allied forces, we now
have a real opportunity to reduce violence and end the
senseless brutality that the conflict has inflicted upon
the Syrian people. The glimmer of hope presented to
the Syrian people after much work by the Council, the
ISSG and Special Envoy De Mistura over the past few
weeks must be made a reality. It cannot be allowed to
fail, because military escalation and the continuation of
conflict can only serve to inflict more damage on both
sides and to prolong the dire humanitarian crisis.

S/PV.7634

Malaysia was encouraged by the first round of
peace talks held by Special Envoy De Mistura late last
month. Unfortunately, the peace talks were suspended
due to the continued aerial bombardment and the
hindering of deliveries of humanitarian aid to people in
need. The cessation of hostilities and the breakthrough
in humanitarian operations last week give us fresh hope
that the peace talks can be resumed. We take note of
the planned resumption of talks on 7 March and call
upon all the relevant parties to participate in the United
Nations-facilitated talks next week. However, we would
caution against moving the goalposts too often. We
hope that the peace talks scheduled for next Monday
will proceed. The peace talks are extremely crucial,
and the only solution to the Syrian conflict is through a
political settlement. The sooner the relevant key actors
accept that, the sooner greater effort could be invested
to find a breakthrough to end the conflict and to work
for peace. We must therefore now shift our focus to
the political route and work towards implementing the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
We are heartened by the breakthrough made by the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners in securing
safe passage for humanitarian relief missions to the five
besieged towns in Syria. We have also seen the United
Nations carry out its first airdrop of humanitarian aid to
more than 200,000 people in Deyr ez-Zour. Given that
breakthrough, my delegation would reiterate that the
success in delivering humanitarian relief via airdrops
to the besieged areas must be replicated; it should not
be a one-off event. In addition, there are other besieged
areas inaccessible by humanitarian partners, and access
must be granted to those places. We again call upon
States with influence on the parties to the conflict to
do their utmost to ensure that the sieges end and that
humanitarian aid is accessible to all.
We are hopeful that the cessation of hostilities
among the relevant parties to the conflict will lead us
to the desperately sought-after political solution. It is
incumbent upon the Council to stand united in making
that happen.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing on the Syrian
issue, which has taken up so much of your presidency
in the month of February. My delegation also thanks
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his briefing.

16-0539813/18

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

In voting in favour of resolution 2268 (2016),
submitted by the American and Russian delegations,
my delegations has once again evidenced its
commitment and contribution to the arduous search for
a comprehensive, lasting solution to the terrible Syrian
tragedy in its humanitarian, security and political
dimensions. We welcome the spirit of cooperation
shown by the co-Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group — the United States of America
and the Russian Federation — in the drafting of the
resolution, which certainly represents a glimmer of
hope, however tenuous, for the beleaguered Syrian
people, who no longer know where to turn. The
resolution is concise in that it pertains to the terms by
which the cessation of hostilities is to be observed. It
is now past midnight in Damascus, and we hope that
the ceasefire will be effective and open up the way
for other confidence-building measures as part of the
political process in Syria. We welcome the fact that the
resolution reiterates the priority of prusing the fight
against terrorism and that, in that context, the cessation
of hostilities will not apply to the terrorist groups
identified by the United Nations, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front, in
conformity with resolution 2254 (2015).
Bearing in mind the recent positive steps forward
made in the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
besieged and hard-to-access areas, we are also pleased
to note that the resolution proposes a broad actions to
respond to this dimension, particularly the facilitation
of humanitarian access under the International Syria
Support Group task force, as well as unimpeded
access to all parts of Syria, particularly in areas listed
in the text. That is why the delegation of Senegal
calls on the parties concerned to fully respect the
cessation of hostilities in order to strengthen other
confidence-building measures aimed at achieving a
ceasefire throughout Syria with the support of the
international community. In addition to the exchange
of information in the framework of the task force,
Senegal awaits with interest specific proposals on the
monitoring mechanisms which the Secretary-General
is to submit to the Security Council.
In the light of all this and the need to support
the actions of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and to send a strong
message to the parties responsible for one of the gravest
humanitarian tragedies of our time, my country decided
to give its full support to resolution 2268 (2016). Once
14/18

26/02/2016

again, we thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
offer him the full support of the delegation of Senegal
in his very complex and sensitive task, in the hope that
the resolution we have just adopted will make his task
less difficult when the inter-Syrian negotiations resume
on 7 March.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Like others, we thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and
his tireless efforts. The delegation of Ukraine supported
resolution 2268 (2016), just adopted by the Security
Council, and wholeheartedly hopes that it will serve the
purpose of breaking the dangerous pattern of escalation
in Syria and help to bring this conflict to an end.
At the same time, we would like to register our
disagreement with the language of paragraph 4 of the
resolution in the part that recognizing the efforts of the
Russian Federation to reach understanding on the terms
of the cessation of hostilities. In reality, it is precisely
the Russian Federation’s support for the Government
forces in Syria that have taken the violence to a new level
in recent months. Russia is now trying to impose itself
as a mediator in the Syrian settlement process. Russian
tactics in Syria are similar to those in eastern Ukraine.
Like in Ukraine, Russia is stirring up violence in Syria,
including by supplying military personnel, providing
arms and ammunition, conducting combat operations
and spreading false propaganda. As we speak, I have
just learned from reports that, with less than one hour
left until Syria’s ceasefire begins, a Russian air strike
just hit the Al-Kinana hospital in Darat Ezza in Aleppo
province. The current situation in and around Aleppo
has too much in common with the tactics used by the
Russian armed forces during the siege of the Ukrainian
city of Debaltseve in February 2015 after the signing of
the Minsk package of measures.
Regrettably, our proposals to balance the text
of paragraph 4 of the draft resolution were not duly
reflected. However, preoccupied by the gravity and
urgency of the situation in Syria, the Ukrainian
delegation decided to cast its vote in favour of the
resolution. Our motivation is driven by our recognition
of the dire need to reverse this horrific conflict that has
devastated Syria and put the entire Middle East on the
brink of a larger regional escalation. That arrangement
is obviously long overdue, but what matters is that it
reflects a wide understanding that the Syrian people
cannot wait any longer and deserve peace and most
urgent help. Now that we have a glimmer of new hope
in Syria, we need tangible practical steps on the ground.
16-05398

26/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

That having been said, we cannot but underscore
the importance of the coming days and weeks, which
will be defining ones. The parties to the conflict, both
inside and outside of Syria, will have to prove with
deeds, not words, that they are committed to meeting
their obligations. This time there will be no room for
political manoeuvres or excuses. There will be only one
way — that of setting arms aside and engaging in a
serious political process.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We too
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, and we
commend him for his determination and optimism
in carrying forward a very difficult process. We also
commend the United States of America and Russia
for steering through the cessation of hostilities, which
should have taken effect a few minutes ago.
The backdrop to today’s discussions is five years
of devastation and failure in Syria. Late last year, the
Syrian parties were about as far apart as they have
ever been. There have been moments of promise, in
particular the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), and
subsequent agreements by the International Syria
Support Group. Sadly, after each of those moments of
promise, we have seen an escalation of fighting as the
Syrian Government and its supporters have tried to
leverage the situation to their advantage. That has been
deeply disturbing and disappointing.
At last, we have an agreement around a cessation
of hostilities, which is due to take effect in the coming
hours. We welcome that agreement, and were pleased
to vote today in support of resolution 2268 (2016),
endorsing it. If the cessation of hostilities holds it will
be the first time in five years that there has been an
agreed pause in the fighting in this bloody civil war.
The cessation of hostilities is an important step towards
a lasting ceasefire. It gives hope for a reduction in the
horrific violence and humanitarian suffering in Syria.
If it is to serve a meaningful purpose, parties to the
conflict and relevant International Syria Support Group
members must demonstrate a sustained commitment to
making it work in practice.
We recognize that the fight against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front
and other Security Council-designated terrorist
organizations must continue, but that will inevitably
open the risk that the wrong targets may be struck, be it
deliberately or inadvertently. That in turn could trigger
an unravelling of the cessation of hostilities and a

S/PV.7634

return to widespread conflict. All those who subscribe
to this agreement must act with extra caution to prevent
such an outcome, and in particular to avoid military
activity against non-designated groups, civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
Today’s resolution affirms the close linkage between
a lasting ceasefire and a parallel political process. We
hope that the cessation of hostilities agreement will be
remembered in history as the beginning of the end of
mass violence in Syria. We were pleased, therefore, to
hear from Mr. De Mistura that will inter-Syrian talks
will resume on 7 March and that that process will be an
inclusive one.
We think it right that the Council has today sent a
message to the Syrian parties that they must participate
in those negotiations on a political transition, and
that they must engage in those negotiations in good
faith. We have sympathy for those who promote
confidence-building measures to build the strength of
the platform upon which these negotiations must take
place. At the same time, the parties should not insist
on preconditions designed to scuttle negotiations before
they begin. All those involved in the conflict have a
responsibility to bring about and sustain conditions that
are conducive to constructive negotiations.
The full implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, including the one we have adopted
today, remains critical. That will require a genuine
commitment in the coming days and weeks to ceasing
hostilities, in accordance with the terms of the agreement
the Council has endorsed today. It also means urgently
allowing full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
aid to those who need it. That must include urgently
needed medical assistance. We hope we will also see
the release of detainees, particularly women, children
and the elderly.
Now is when the rubber meets the road, when there
must be hard decisions on difficult issues. Now is not the
time for political red lines. No side will get everything
it wants, and that includes the Syrian Government, the
opposition and regional and international supporters.
Any viable solution will be imperfect. Any political
solution will require compromise. We stand ready to
support Mr. De Mistura in his efforts to resume the
negotiations in Geneva, and we encourage the Council
to do all it can to assist him.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for being

16-0539815/18

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

steadfast and maintaining the hope that we could arrive
at the point we have reached today.
Angola supports today’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2268 (2016), on a cessation of hostilities in
Syria. It is a positive and long-awaited step forward in
the quest to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Syrian
crisis, and we will continue to support it, especially the
confidence-building measures aimed at establishing
the conditions necessary for the Syrian-led political
transition and dialogue that we in the Council have
never ceased calling for.
The establishment of an international task force to
ensure unimpeded humanitarian access and a ceasefire
in Syria is a timely initiative, given the worsening
refugee crisis, the brutality and the loss of the lives
of more than a quarter of a million people that we
have experienced. Allowing humanitarian agencies
to conduct their work, which can be effective only
with a cessation of hostilities, is crucial to stemming
the growing flow of refugees and the horror of the
hostilities that we have witnessed. We sincerely hope
that the cessation will hold under the monitoring
mechanism and we look forward to a resumption of
the intra-Syrian talks under the auspices of the Special
Envoy, now announced for 7 March.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
Special Envoy and wish him every success in the
next round of negotiations. We hope that this time the
cessation of hostilities will hold and that our focus will
shift to building bridges between the various factions
in Syria, based on the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), and to uniting our efforts to neutralize
and further work to eliminate the threat of hostilities
from terrorist groups. We may then be able to move
forward in order to build momentum for the political
track, while encouraging the holding of the ceasefire
and a move towards peace and stability in Syria and
the region.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the delegation of Uruguay, I would like to
thank Mr. De Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, not just for his briefing just now but also
for his untiring spirit, unceasing efforts and his
determination to advance the mission entrusted to him
by the Secretary-General and the Security Council. Our
thanks include his team as well, and we would like to
reiterate our confidence in their work. The Uruguayan
delegation would also like to thank the United States
16/18

26/02/2016

and the Russian Federation not only for drafting
resolution 2268 (2016), which we have just adopted, but
also for their efforts in helping to reach this new stage
in a conflict that has already gone on far too long.
On Wednesday, the Government of Uruguay issued
a communiqué in which, essentially, we expressed
our satisfaction with the recent announcement by
the United States Secretary of State, John Kerry, and
Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, as co-Chairs of the International
Syria Support Group, regarding their signing of an
agreement on the entry into force of a cessation of
hostilities in Syria. Uruguay believes it is an important
step forward in the efforts to put an end to the violence
and facilitate humanitarian access in Syria, particularly
to besieged areas. In that regard, we would like to call
on the parties to respect the commitments they have
undertaken and to work to effectively comply with and
implement them.
This is a sign of hope for the Syrian people and
an essential step towards achieving the effective
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). My delegation
voted in favour of the adoption of both resolution 2254
(2015) and resolution 2268 (2016), in the belief that this
is a first step towards achieving a lasting ceasefire,
which should make it possible to advance a political
process that will enable us to end this long conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We would first like to commend and acknowledge
the work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and to congratulate him on
his persistent efforts to work for peace in the terrible
conflict that the people of Syria have endured.
Today the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
voted in favour of resolution 2268 (2016), adopted
unanimously by the Security Council, in the belief that
the text reaffirms the view that a solution to the armed
conflict in the country must be political, peaceful and
negotiated. My country will support any measures
aimed at building confidence and peace. In that regard,
we welcome the announcement that a cessation of
hostilities is just about to take effect, and we hope
that all the parties involved will comply strictly with
the agreement. We are pleased that the stakeholders
who possess influence on the crisis in Syria are
displaying the political will needed to pave the way to
the peace that the Syrian people long for. We must act
16-05398

26/02/2016

The situation in the Middle East

decisively, and we believe that this quest for a space
in which to dialogue that has motivated the Russian
and United States delegations is an encouraging sign
in support to the efforts of the United Nations, Special
Envoy De Mistura and the Security Council.
We would like to express our appreciation and
support for the diplomatic efforts to achieve a firm
and lasting peace in Syria by all the parties involved.
We also welcome Mr. De Mistura’s announcement of
a resumption of intra-Syrian peace talks scheduled for
7 March, and we hope they will include representatives
of every sector and group involved in the conflict and in
fighting terrorism. We are aware that identifying shared
elements that will enable the groundwork for political
negotiations to be laid is a difficult task, but it is a highly
important one that will require the commitment of all
parties if we are to make concrete progress in helping
the people of Syria. We reiterate our call for peace
negotiations to continue without preconditions so as to
enable the Syrian people to overcome the tragedy of the
war that has made them victims of the actions of the
armed groups and terrorists operating in their country.
We have said since the beginning that, in order to
end the war, the peace process must include all parties
and that the Government of President Bashar al-Assad
must be recognized in this resolution. Venezuela
believes that the legitimate Government of President
Al-Assad is a key actor in the political equation of the
solution of the conflict. Excluding it from the talks
would be condemning them to failure. We also believe
that the Security Council has no authority to rule on the
legitimacy of the Syrian Government. That is up to the
people of Syria alone, and is a matter of respect for the
sovereignty of each country and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The people of Syria have their reaffirmed political
independence with the assistance of the international
community, free of foreign interference and imposed
solutions that favour interests other than their own.
In that regard, Venezuela reiterates its support for
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Syria, as well as its right to selfdetermination, in accordance with international law,
including the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The solution to the humanitarian crisis in Syria is
closely linked to the cessation of hostilities. We therefore
welcome the fact that in recent days humanitarian
assistance has reached at least part of the population in

S/PV.7634

urgent need of food and medicine. We understand that
it is not enough and, as we have said, much more must
be done in the humanitarian context. Nevertheless, this
concern is included in paragraph 6 of the resolution and
enjoys the support of the International Syria Support
Group. We hope that all parties will allow the end to the
siege of hundreds of thousands of people.
As has been agreed, the cessation of hostilities
does not apply to terrorist groups that are bleeding
Syria dry, such as Al-Nusra Front and the Islamic State
in Iraq and Al-Sham. It is important to note that the
Syrian Government, with the support of the Russian
Federation, is tirelessly fighting the aforementioned
terrorist organizations and their associates. These
terrorist groups threaten international peace and
security by expanding their actions to other countries
of the Middle East, North Africa and other regions.
The international community must provide its full
support to the Syrian authorities and all groups fighting
the scourge of terrorism. In this context, efforts must
be redoubled to prevent the financing, training and
transfer of weapons to these groups, as well as their
use and encouragement as instruments to overthrow
Governments in accordance with the resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly.
Finally, our country will remain committed to
achieving a peace in Syria that will bring an end
to this dreadful conflict on the basis of a political
negotiated solution under the leadership of the Syrian
people, its Government and the institutions, thereby
guaranteeing the sovereignty and independence of that
kindred country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. I also thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan De Mistura,
for participating by video-teleconference from Geneva.
Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, the
Syrian Government has spared no effort to reach a
political settlement. It has repeatedly demonstrated
its commitment and will pursue that approach on the
basis of its desire to end the bloodshed of our Syrian
people, restore security and stability and implement
the will of the Syrian people. The Syrian Government

16-0539817/18

S/PV.7634

The situation in the Middle East

has officially announced its acceptance of the cessation
of hostilities on the basis of ongoing military counterterrorism efforts against Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and
its affiliates, and other terrorist organizations linked to
Al-Qaeda, in accordance with the Russian-American
joint declaration, which the Government of Syria
considers to be an important step towards a political
settlement. We reaffirm our readiness to contribute to
the implementation of the cessation of hostilities.
To ensure the successful and timely implementation
of the cessation of hostilities, the Government of
Syria continues to coordinate with the Russian side
to identify the areas and armed groups to be included
in the cessation of hostilities as long as it remains
in effect. In this regard, we stress once again the
importance of controlling the borders, stopping the
support provided by certain countries to armed groups
and preventing those groups from strengthening their
capacities or changing their locations, in order to avoid
any eventuality that could undermine the agreement.
The Government also reserves the right of its armed
forces to respond to any breach of the agreement by
those terrorist groups against Syrian citizens or the
Syrian armed forces.
The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
participated in the recent Geneva talks in good faith
and full earnest in order to reach a political settlement
to the crisis in my country, Syria. Today, I reiterate the
readiness of the Government of Syria to participate
actively in all sincere efforts to reach a political
settlement in which Syrians and Syrians alone shall
decide on their future and their choices through a
Syrian-led dialogue among Syrians, without foreign
intervention. That would safeguard Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, pursuant
to the second preambular paragraph of resolution 2268
(2016), just adopted.
On the basis of the foregoing, the ball is again
in the court of the other parties, which have yet
to prove their good intentions and commitment to
facilitating the political settlement of the crisis in
Syria — without imposing preconditions on the
Syrian people and without interfering in our domestic
affairs — by ending their support and justifications for
terrorism and abandonging all actions that could hinder
political settlement. The Syrians are invited to work on
strenthening national reconciliation and to make every
effort to defeat terrorism and to rebuild a newSyria,
united in its territory and people, and to protect its
sovereignty and its national independent stability.
18/18

26/02/2016

In her statement our colleague, the representative
of the United States, said that there are no Al-Nusra
Front forces in the town of Daraya, located in a suburb
of Damascus. That is incorrect in essence and in
practice. There are Al-Nusra Front elements in Daraya.
I have circulated to members of the Council a list of
the names of hundreds of terrorist fighters who were
killed in Syria in 2015. Most are from Al-Nusra Front
and Da’esh, and some were killed in Daraya.
I recall that, as the experts of the Council’s
subsidiary committees are well aware, the real name
of the Al-Nusra Front is Al-Qaeda in the Levant. We
are talking about the Al-Qaeda organization. Who is
the leader of Al-Nusra Front? He is Abu Mohammad
Al-Julani, the former deputy of Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi,
the leader of Da’esh, who went his separate way and
established the Al-Nusra Front in Syria. The Al-Nusra
Front is in effect Al-Qaeda, and as its leader Al-Julani
has sworn allegiance to Ayman Al-Zawahiri, the head
of Al-Qaeda. Al-Nusra Front is thereby affiliated with
Al-Qaeda.
Al-Zawahiri appointed a Saudi mufti, Abdullah
Al-Muhaysini, to be the mufti for the Al-Nusrah Front
in Idlib, with the authority to address issues such issues
as the eating of liver and the beheading of people. In
other words, the head of an Al-Qaida affiliate has
appointed a person who is on the list of designated
individuals and entities sponsoring terrorism to be the
religious authority in Idlib in Syria. This is the true
face of the Al-Nusrah Front, even if some are trying to
overlook the facts and have it be considered as an entity
working to fight terrorism in Syria.
The Al-Nusrah Front is in fact part of Ahrar
Al-Sham, yet another terrorist organization. Created
by the Turkish intelligence services, Ahrar Al-Sham
works in the north of Syria near the border with Turkey.
Finally, some started to violate resolution 2268
(2016) the moment it was adopted. They have also
been saying things that have nothing to do with the
contents of the resolution. Therefore, I call upon the
representatives of those States that have spoken of
my country in an inappropriate manner, in violation
of the provisions of the resolution, to start abiding by
the resolution in this very Chamber before abiding by
it outside.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.
16-05398
