United Nations

S/PV.6147

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6147th meeting
Monday, 22 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Çorman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Skračić
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Puente
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in that country (S/2009/309)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-37565 (E)

*0937565*

S/PV.6147

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country
(S/2009/309)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. PoukréKono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
Also in accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Belgium.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Grauls to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/309, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Mr. Jan Grauls. I
now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to
present the latest report (S/2009/309) of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office (BONUCA) in that
country.
There were significant developments in the
Central African Republic during the period under
review. Those included the efforts to implement the
outcomes of the historic inclusive political dialogue
held in December 2008. The dialogue itself was widely
welcomed, especially by the people of the Central
African Republic, as the most far-reaching endeavour
towards genuine national reconciliation since the
eruption of the current crisis in the mid-1990s.
Members will recall that, in its presidential
statement of 7 April 2009, the Security Council welcomed
the successful convening of the dialogue and reiterated
“its full support for this process, as an effective
framework to foster national reconciliation and
stability in the Central African Republic”.
(S/PRST/2009/5, first paragraph)
The post-dialogue period has, in the main, been
characterized by two, sometimes contradictory, trends.
On the one hand, significant efforts have been and
continue to be made to implement the recommendations
of the dialogue with a view to consolidating the
momentum for peace in the country. A broad-based
Government was formed, a Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Steering Committee was established
and a Follow-up Committee was set up to facilitate the
implementation of the recommendations of the dialogue,
with the participation of the United Nations and other key
international partners.

09-37565

S/PV.6147

On the other hand, there has also been a
resurgence of rebellion in the north of the country — a
development that contradicts the spirit of reconciliation
that the dialogue sought to engender. For instance, on
21 June, there were reports of rebel attacks in Birao.
After several hours of fighting, forces of the Central
African Republic and of the Union des forces
démocratiques pour le rassemblement repelled the attack.
The total number of casualties remains unknown. The
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
and Chad (MINURCAT) has relocated 18 international
personnel of non-governmental organizations to
MINURCAT headquarters at Birao. Underlying those two
contradictory developments is a third element, namely,
the increasing fragility of the peace process in the Central
African Republic and of the country itself.
I have just returned from a visit to the Central
African Republic. I was able to see for myself the
impact of years of instability and insecurity on the
country. But I also heard words that reflected the
profound faith that the Government and the people of
the country have in the United Nations, which they
view as a reliable partner for the realization of their
aspirations to a better future. The problems are huge,
but I am convinced that the United Nations can help to
move them towards a solution.

the commission is established we will dispatch a
needs-assessment mission promptly to Bangui to assess
ways in which the United Nations can contribute to the
process.
The Secretary-General has called on the Central
African Republic authorities to ensure that elections
are held on schedule, as provided for in the Central
African Republic Constitution, in order to prevent a
constitutional power vacuum that could further
complicate an already fragile political environment,
including the possibility of renewed violence. We have
also urged all political leaders to avoid intimidation,
harassment and incitement and to work to eliminate the
current climate of mistrust and suspicion in the
political landscape of the Central African Republic. It
is especially important for the Government to
guarantee security and a level playing field for all
participants if the electoral process is to proceed
peacefully and with credibility.

As the Council is meeting here today, the
National Assembly of the Central African Republic is
holding an extraordinary session to discuss and adopt a
new electoral code to guide the preparations for and
conduct of legislative and presidential elections in
2010. We are concerned by claims by opposition
political parties that some key provisions of the code
submitted to the Assembly by the Government are at
variance with the version of the document that was
adopted by the ad hoc Committee charged with
revising the electoral code. The organization of
peaceful, transparent and credible elections is
contingent on the adoption of an electoral code that is
accepted by all stakeholders.

Another important challenge facing the peace
process is that of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of the country’s ex-combatants,
who have agreed to end rebellion and join the peace
process. While the concrete launching of DDR
operations has yet to begin, critical preparatory work
has advanced, with technical documentation adopted,
provisional lists of potential ex-combatants submitted
to the United Nations, and initial funding of about
$4 million released from the Peacebuilding Fund to
kick-start the project. During my meeting with
President Bozizé, he reaffirmed his determination to
take personal control of the DDR process and to make
available the financial assistance of 8 billion CFA
francs — about $16 million — pledged by the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) to finance DDR projects. At this point, I
would like to say what a critical role Ambassador
Grauls played in his most recent visit to the Central
African Republic in ensuring that this money was
available for this very valuable process.

Another key measure linked to the electoral code
is the establishment of the independent electoral
commission, as called for by this past December’s
inclusive political dialogue. That commission, to be
made up of different shades of political opinion and
civil society, would ensure a credible, transparent and
inclusive electoral process. We have received a request
for electoral assistance from the Government, and once

Subsequently, we were informed that a total of
5 billion CFA francs — about $10 million — of the
CEMAC funds had already been disbursed. The
Secretary-General has appealed to the international
community to provide additional support for the
successful completion of the estimated $30 million
DDR programme, on which the imperatives for
security and peaceful elections hinge.

09-37565

3

S/PV.6147

DDR is only part of a broader programme of
security sector reforms. Its success will strengthen
efforts to make progress towards security sector
reforms in the Central African Republic. A successful
security sector reform (SSR) would in turn help
institute, for the first time in nearly three decades, a
multi-ethnic, professional and republican military and
security establishment for the defence of democratic
institutions and not in the service of partisan and
mono-ethnic political movements. The SecretaryGeneral has appealed for international support for
programmes being put forward by the Central African
Republic authorities in support of the national security
sector reform strategy, including the organization of
the donors’ round table on security sector reform
scheduled for October this year.
During my visit to the Central African Republic, I
had the opportunity to visit the military component of
the peacebuilding mission of the Economic Community
of Central African States based in Bangui. This force of
520 troops is making a major contribution, in
partnership with the United Nations and other partners,
towards the stabilization of the Central African
Republic. I salute their courage and determination and
commend their Governments for the concrete
demonstration of political will and solidarity in support
of peace in the Central African Republic.
Two days from now, the Bretton Woods
institutions will examine the possibility of granting
debt relief to the Central African Republic under the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative. As
pointed out in the Secretary-General’s report, the
country’s macroeconomic reforms have been widely
acclaimed by international partners and are credited for
turning a previously bleak picture into one in which not
only is economic growth happening, but in which longterm prospects are rated as encouraging and deserving
of enhanced donor support. Should those reforms
continue and should the overall climate of political
stabilization persist, it is reasonable to be hopeful
about the possibilities of reducing the desperately high
levels of poverty and misery in the medium term.
The best way forward now is to address the
multifaceted problems besetting the Central African
Republic through the implementation of the recently
adopted strategic framework for peacebuilding. It is
vital that the Central African Republic take full
ownership of the road map, which identifies three key
pillars for sustainable peacebuilding, namely, security

4

through DDR and SSR, good governance, including
respect for human rights and the rule of law, and
development. The United Nations will work in
partnership with the Central African Republic to
support its efforts to implement these strategic
priorities.
Allow me to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the important contribution being made
to that end by the Peacebuilding Commission,
especially its country-specific configuration for the
Central African Republic, led by Ambassador Jan
Grauls of Belgium, who, as an example of his
commitment to the goal of promoting the sustainable
stabilization of the Central African Republic, last
month undertook his fourth mission to the country in a
year. He has been a strong voice of the international
community for reform and progress in the Central
African Republic.
Members will recall that the Council has
endorsed the Secretary-General’s proposal to transform
BONUCA into a United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA). The purpose is to maximize the United
Nations contribution to the Central African Republic,
minimize the risks of duplication and simplify
consultations with our partners, including the Central
African Republic authorities.
The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council sets out the proposed structure and staffing of
BINUCA, as requested by the Council in April. As the
transition process proceeds, the Secretary-General
proposes that BINUCA become fully operational by
1 January 2010. We will use the intervening period to
finalize recruitment of personnel and to address related
logistical and other preparatory tasks so that the new
Office can take off smoothly, as scheduled, on
1 January 2010.
I am delighted to have with us here today the
newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Central African Republic and
head of BONUCA, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, who
departs in a few days for Bangui to take up her
important assignment. The Central African Republic
authorities, during my recent visit, welcomed her
appointment, thanked the Secretary-General for his
continued support and reiterated their cooperation with
BONUCA. I also want to express my appreciation to
Mr. Sammy Kum Buo, the Director of the Africa II

09-37565

S/PV.6147

Division of the Department of Political Affairs, who
has aptly filled in for the past three months as Officerin-Charge in Bangui. He has done an excellent job in
bridging the gap.
In conclusion, allow me to add my voice to that
of the Secretary-General and other world leaders who
have paid tribute to the late Gabonese President for his
mediation in various conflicts across Africa. President
Bongo was a strong advocate of peace whose passing
has been felt not least in the Central African Republic,
a country that was close to his heart. Six months ago,
he personally travelled to Bangui twice within two
weeks to attend the opening and closing ceremonies of
the inclusive political dialogue. The Comprehensive
Peace Agreement for the Central African Republic,
which forms the foundation of the current peace
process, was signed exactly one year ago yesterday, on
21 June 2008 in Libreville, Gabon, under his
chairmanship.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe for bringing to the
Council’s attention the presence of Ms. Sahle-Work
Zewde, the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic. On
behalf of the Council, I wish to congratulate her on her
appointment and to convey our best wishes to her on
her assignment. The Council looks forward to working
with her.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jan Grauls.
Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset, Sir, to thank you for giving me the opportunity
once again to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission country-specific configuration on the
Central African Republic. I should also like to warmly
welcome the appointment of Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic and to assure her of the
Commission’s support.
Since I last addressed the Council in March, the
Peacebuilding Commission adopted its strategic
framework for peacebuilding on 6 May. The
framework is a kind of road map for achieving the
goals that the Commission has set itself. From 21 to
23 May, I led a mission to Bangui to officially present
the framework to all actors of Central African society.

09-37565

As Mr. Pascoe noted, the Commission has
decided to focus on three urgent priorities: security
sector reform (SSR) and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme
for ex-combatants; good governance and the rule of
law; and the identification of development poles, to be
considered as embryonic structures created to relaunch
socio-economic development throughout the Central
African Republic. Those three priorities correspond
perfectly to the conclusions reached by the inclusive
political dialogue that brought the Government, the
unarmed opposition, rebel groups and civil society
together in December.
The Commission is currently focusing its
attention on two files that are critical to stability and
peace in the Central African Republic. I refer to the
drafting and implementation of a DDR programme
thoroughly integrated into the SSR programme, and the
preparation for elections in 2010. Without successful
DDR, the electoral process may be compromised, and
without a successful electoral process the entire
country runs the risk of being destabilized.
The drafting of the DDR programme is
progressing. Considerable technical work has been
completed, and political conditions are being
established so that the programme can be launched in
optimal circumstances. In that regard, I note the return
of recalcitrant rebel groups to the peace process, which
is an encouraging sign. The financing of the early DDR
phases seems to be assured thanks, among other things,
to contributions from the Peacebuilding Fund and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and
to the agreement of President Bozizé to allocate to
DDR all the funds pledged by the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, pursuant to the
communiqué issued by the heads of State in Libreville
on 30 January. We encourage the Government of the
Central African Republic to pay those funds into the
UNDP Trust Fund in order to ensure their transparency
and effective management.
If the DDR process is to begin expeditiously, the
Steering Committee must rapidly proceed to validate
the submitted lists of recognized combatants belonging
to political-military groups. The Commission also
encourages the strengthening of the subregional
Mission de consolidation de la paix en République
Centrafricaine, which will be called on to supervise the
DDR programme.

5

S/PV.6147

I wish to say a word on the electoral process. If it
is to unfold in acceptable conditions, the process must
enjoy the assistance of the international community. In
that regard, the authorities of the Central African
Republic must urgently establish the Mixed and
Independent Electoral Commission, the only national
body authorized under the Constitution to undertake
preparations for elections and to adopt changes to the
electoral code. The activation of the Commission is
necessary to ensure the firm commitment of the United
Nations and other actors of the international
community.
In agreement with the Government of the Central
African Republic, it has been decided that an initial
assessment of the implementation of the strategic
framework will be carried out in six months. The
biannual assessments should allow us to maintain the
momentum of the peacebuilding process in the Central
African Republic.
In order to strengthen peace and stability in their
country, the people of the Central African Republic
need the support of the international community. The
encouraging signs to which I have referred are an
appeal to which we must respond positively. That is
why, since the strategic framework was adopted, I have
visited various Governments and organizations in order
to make international partners aware of the needs of the
Central African Republic and to invite them to join in
the Commission’s efforts. I have noted an upsurge in
interest in the Central African Republic, a country that,
perhaps with reason, was long considered an orphan of
international assistance.
It is important to involve non-governmental
organizations in those awareness-raising efforts. At the
most recent meeting of our configuration, two important
international non-governmental organizations confirmed
that they would increase their presence on the ground in
the country. Some countries have also conveyed to me
their willingness to consider specific proposals for a new
or increased involvement in the Central African Republic,
pursuant to the priorities of the strategic framework. I feel
that, while it may yet appear to be low-key, this renewed
interest of the international community in the Republic
must still be underscored.
The Peacebuilding Commission advocated the
transformation of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic into the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office, and in

6

that regard welcomed the presidential statement of
7 April (S/PRST/2009/5), whereby the decision was
taken in principle to establish the new Office as soon
as possible. The Commission is pleased to note that the
new structure for the Integrated Office, as proposed in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/309), will allow
us better to assist its work. The Commission especially
welcomes the establishment of a Human Rights and
Justice Section, to include prison experts, among
others, and of a Security Institutions Section. The
creation of the posts of Gender Adviser and Child
Protection Adviser are also very welcome proposals. I
express the hope that the new integrated structure will
be established as soon as possible in order to facilitate
the implementation of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
strategic framework. It would indeed be regrettable to
waste time.
With the death of the President of Gabon, the late
El Hadj Omar Bongo Ondimba, the Central African
Republic has lost a founding father of its peace
process. I salute the vision and untiring support that the
late President gave to the Central African Republic in
recent years in order to help it turn towards a more
hopeful future. The peacebuilding process will
continue to require the full attention of the Government
of the Central African Republic and its international
partners in the coming months and years.
The President: I think Mr. Grauls for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): My delegation welcomes your
presidency of the Security Council for June, Sir, and
congratulates you thereon. Turkey’s commitment to
peace in the world and its unequivocal support for
developing countries reflect its genuine desire to
promote truly global multilateralism. My country, the
Central African Republic, thanks the Turkish
Government for the multifaceted assistance it has
provided to the Central African Republic and will
continue to provide in the future.
The Central African Republic also thanks the
Secretary-General for his recent report (S/2009/309) on
the situation in the Central African Republic and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office (BONUCA) in that country. We commend
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for presenting

09-37565

S/PV.6147

the report and his informative briefing. We cannot fail
to note the full role that Mr. Sammy Kum Buo,
Director of the Africa II Division in the Department of
Political Affairs and Officer-in-Charge of BONUCA,
has played in recent months. His interim term was
noteworthy because he was able to address all the
thorny issues with the managing authorities and key
actors of the Central African Republic.
We also wish to congratulate Ms. Sahle-Work
Zewde on her appointment as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of BONUCA beginning
15 June 2009. We appreciate her appointment, which
was completed after a rigorous selection process. Her
experience is reassuring because she is already familiar
with the problems of the Central African Republic,
having worked on the subject within the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. My country
offers her its full support during her term in office. Our
hopes have been fulfilled and we thank the SecretaryGeneral most sincerely.
We must also pay well-deserved tribute to her
predecessor, Mr. François Lonseny Fall, for his
dedication and determination to move the Central
African Republic issue forward.
2009 is a key year for the Central African
Republic, which must now take courageous measures
to determine its future. The implementation of the
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue,
and in particular the establishment of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme,
the organization of general elections in 2010 and the
mobilization of resources, are the challenges to be
taken up in the coming months.
My delegation notes the progress achieved after
the holding of the political dialogue, including the
establishment of the Follow-up Committee for the
implementation of the dialogue recommendations, the
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Steering Committee and the High Court of Justice. Any
apparent delay in the implementation of those
programmes is due to a lack of financing, which has
yet to be mobilized.
At the political level, there is a genuine resolve to
move towards reconciliation, even if a few political
and military actors seem to be choosing the path of
force. My Government recognizes that the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement launched an
irreversible peace process. The Government is striving

09-37565

to make its influence felt in everyday affairs, as it has
informed the Council on several occasions.
President Bozizé met with the Libyan leader and
current Chairperson of the African Union and asked
him to support the cause of comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Central African Republic. The return to
the country of one of the political and military chiefs,
Abakar Sabone, is a good sign that the country is
progressing little by little along the path towards true
reconciliation. The DDR programme is advancing
slowly but surely. Working documents have been
created and lists of political and military groups
drafted, and a team has been established to manage and
mobilize contributions from the Peacebuilding Fund.
However, that programme must be brought into line
with security sector reform and the development hubs.
If they are to be reintegrated into civilian life,
ex-combatants must have training to allow them to
make a living. It is therefore important for the
development hubs to become a reality in due time.
Security and defence forces must also be
deployed in tandem with those programmes. At the
same time, that deployment is of major concern of the
Government of the Central African Republic, which is
doing its best to find financing because it wants DDR
to be implemented as quickly as possible. Funds
already collected by the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community will be allocated exclusively to
the peace process. We wish here to pay a well-deserved
tribute here in memory of His Excellency El Hadj
Omar Bongo Ondimba, President of Gabon, for his
personal involvement in helping to resolve the crisis in
the Central African Republic and for being a mobilizer
of funds to contribute to peacebuilding and
disarmament.
The issue of elections in 2010 is not problematic,
because the Government intends to respect the
electoral timetable. Thus, the draft electoral code to
launch that process remains under consideration by the
National Assembly. The Government is counting on the
support of the United Nations to successfully complete
the process.
With respect to humanitarian issues, it is
regrettable to note that, in the northern part of the
country, clashes between certain rebel groups —
including the Front démocratique du peuple
centrafricain and the Convergence des patriotes
centrafricains pour la justice et la paix — with the

7

S/PV.6147

Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA), have displaced
Central Africans inside and outside the country. We
also note a new manifestation of violence in the
northern part of the country — inter-community
violence. But the Central African Republic is also a
welcoming country, and has received Sudanese
refugees who have fled the violence in Darfur since
2007. Thanks to the joint action of the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the World Food Programme and other
humanitarian agencies, as well as the National
Commission for Refugees and the local population,
refugees and displaced persons are receiving
assistance.
Where there is violence, human rights violations
are inevitable and we bitterly regret that. The Central
African Republic is emerging painfully from a long
period of crisis and the deployment of its defence and
security forces is occurring gradually in areas where
violence persists because of the actions of rebel groups
and widespread banditry. Nevertheless, the authorities
of the Central African Republic have taken measures to
prevent all acts of violence in conformity with the law.
Thus, new penal and military codes are being finalized.
A national human rights commission will be
established to address all human rights issues in the
Central African Republic, including the rights of
women and children in armed conflict, as well as the
rights of refugees.
In the context of restructuring the army and
raising the moral standards of the military, on 11 June
the National Assembly enacted a military training law
for FACA and the police for the period 2009-2013. The
law is aimed at consolidating and conditioning the
necessary personnel for FACA and the national police
in the areas of recruitment, training, retirement and
career management, and at identifying the budgetary
contributions of the State and the international
community that are necessary in order to achieve the
objectives set for 2013.
Since our country has been on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the authorities of the
Central African Republic have cooperated fully with
the country-specific configuration on the Central
African Republic, chaired by Ambassador Jan Grauls,
Permanent Representative of Belgium. In his
determination and ardent desire for us to succeed, he
has taken a series of measures that have moved the
situation in the Central African Republic decidedly
forward. His many missions to Bangui and throughout

8

the world to plead the case of the Central African
Republic plainly demonstrate that he is a staunch
defender of those in need. The Central African
Republic is very grateful for his commitment.
The strategic framework adopted on 6 May 2009
resulted from intensive consultations among all
stakeholders in the Central African Republic and the
international community. That document, which will be
revised every six months, was presented officially to
the Central African Republic parties by Ambassador
Grauls when he visited from 21 to 23 May 2009. That
visit was truly successful in that it brought together
many members of the Government, civil society and
other stakeholders, including the media, which duly
disseminated the message of the Chairman of the
configuration on the Central African Republic.
National ownership remains the leitmotif of the
strategic
framework’s
success.
However,
the
international community should also demonstrate its
flexibility by lending its unconditional support to
achieving the set objectives.
The Government supports that programme and is
ready to invest in its success. May we all support the
configuration’s Chair in his determination to meet the
schedule for the best results. The fight against the poverty
afflicting most of the Central African Republic’s
population requires respect for the established
programmes. The political will of the authorities has
already been confirmed by its simple resolve to hold
elections in 2010 and to complete the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme as soon as
possible.
We welcome the decision to transform the United
Nations the Peacebuilding Support Office into the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic (BINUCA). That new
structure will allow the activities of the United Nations
system to be coordinated on the ground as it supports the
political, socio-economic and sustainable development
activities in the Central African Republic. The future
BINUCA will have the advantage of being deeply
involved in implementing the strategic framework.
While we generally accept the contents of the
report of the Secretary-General, we nevertheless have
an objection to raise with regard to paragraph 74. The
information contained in that paragraph, in our
opinion, is not in line with the history of the Central
African Republic. Contrary to what is written, the

09-37565

S/PV.6147

national day is celebrated solemnly and joyously by the
people each 1 December, except for one period only
when there were repeated mutinies. That celebration
takes place throughout the territory, without exception.
The Republic’s fiftieth anniversary, like those of
previous years, was greatly appreciated, and we expect
the same for the fifty-first anniversary in December
2009.
Lastly, we would like to reiterate our full support
for the activities of the United Nations in the Central
African Republic, which, we hope, will continue in the
future. The recent visits of Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe, head of the Department of Political
Affairs, were well received by the authorities in the
Central African Republic, which had not been visited
by a United Nations high official since the country
emerged from the crisis. Mr. Pascoe went to the

09-37565

Central African Republic without preconceptions and
to listen to the authorities. In that visit, we felt the
United Nations presence even closer to the Central
African Republic.
We also thank all other bilateral and multilateral
partners that are contributing effectively to the cause of
stabilization and sustainable peace in the Central
African Republic. They can rest assured of the full and
good cooperation of our Government.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

9
