S/2020/1155

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 December 2020
Original: English

Situation in the Sudan and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2524
(2020), by which the Council established the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and requested the Secretary -General to
report every 90 days on the implementation of its mandate. The report covers political,
security, socioeconomic and humanitarian developments as well as developments
related to human rights and the rule of law in the Sudan from 9 September to
23 November 2020, and provides an update on the establishment of the Mission. The
90-day report on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is included as an annex.

II. Significant developments
2.
Over the past months, the Sudan continued to make progress in its democratic
transition, despite considerable challenges. A key achievement was the signing of the
Juba Peace Agreement on 3 October after a year of negotiations. Meanwhile, the
situation remained fragile, with civil unrest in parts of the country, pockets of violence
in Darfur and tribal frictions generating clashes in Eastern Sudan. The economic
situation remained dire and humanitarian needs continued to grow.
Political and security situation
3.
The reporting period saw the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the
Sudan, which was the formalization of the peace agreement reached in Juba at the end
of August between the transitional Government, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front
(SRF) and the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi. The Agreement is a
crucial step forward in the implementation of the political benchmarks of the
transitional period as outlined in the Constitutional Document. It includes several
region-specific protocols and one protocol on national issues. The national protocol
notably stipulates that the 39-month-long transition envisaged in the Constitutional
Document is to start from the signing of the Agreement. It also st ipulates how
positions in the transitional institutions are to be allocated to the signatories. After
being endorsed by the High Peace Council on 14 September, the parties formalized
the Agreement in Juba on 3 October by posing their signatures.

20-15887 (E)

031220

*2015887*

S/2020/1155

4.
While this development was broadly welcomed in the Sudan as creating
momentum towards a more wide-ranging peace, some groups from Eastern Sudan
started to backtrack on earlier commitments, citing issues over representation, and a
number of political parties rejected the Agreement. The Agreement’s implementation
has faced challenges, including ambitious timelines. It stipulates, inter alia, that
representatives of the armed movements are to be appointed to the Sovereign Council
and the Council of Ministers within seven days of the Constitutional Document being
amended to reflect the provisions of the peace deal. The implementation of this
provision and many others remained pending.
5.
Following the signing of the Juba Peace Agreement, the Sovereign Council and
the Council of Ministers amended the Constitutional Document in a joint meeting
held on 18 October, thereby incorporating the Agreement into the Constitutional
Document as an integral part. This prompted discussion among political forces about
how such amendments needed to be made and, in particular, whether they needed to
be approved by the Transitional Legislative Council. The most controversial
amendment was the addition of article 80 to the Constitutional Document, which
provides for the establishment of the Council of Partners for the Transitional Period.
The Council, which consists of the Forces for Freedom and Change (FFC), the
military and the signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement, is mandated to discuss
major political issues that arise during the tran sition. The addition of article 80 was
criticized by some members of FFC, who denounced it as an attempt to supplant the
group’s role as a “political incubator” for the transitional period. They maintained
that only the Transitional Legislative Council had the right to amend the
Constitutional Document and called for the rescission of the new article. The
amendment to article 20 also gave rise to controversy, as it allows representatives of
the signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement who are members of the transitional
Government, to run in the elections following the transitional period.
6.
On 26 October, all transition partners, including SRF, agreed that there was a need
to move forward with the formation of the Transitional Legislative Council before the
end of November and confirmed the previous agreement that 60 members would be
selected by the military, 165 by FFC and 75 by the armed movements bloc with which
the transitional Government has reached peace agreements. That bloc thus far
comprised SRF and SLA-Minni Minawi. On 12 November, the Chair of the Sovereign
Council, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, granted a general amnesty to all
people who fought in Sudan’s armed conflicts, in line with the Juba Peace Agreement,
with the exclusion of those for whom arrest warrants had been issued by the
International Criminal Court or who were wanted for genocide and crimes against
humanity, or for war crimes falling under the jurisdiction of the Special Court for
Crimes Committed in Darfur whose establishment is part of the Juba Peace Agreement.
On 15 November, the signatories to the Agreement arrived in Khartoum. Subsequently,
on 21 November, FFC announced that the formation of the Transitional Legislative
Council would not be completed until 31 December so as to take the views of SRF into
consideration and to allow for a comprehensive dialogue with groups that were not
signatories to the Declaration of Freedom and Change about their share in the
legislative structure, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitutional Document.
The Sovereign Council, the Council of Ministers and FFC also resolved to develop a
national security strategy as one of their urgent tasks for the transitional period.
7.
The transitional Government continued its efforts to achieve gender equality and
women’s empowerment. In the Juba Peace Agreement, the signatories reiterate their
commitment to promoting gender equality in line with the Constitutional Document,
in particular the provisions stipulating that women are t o make up at least 40 per cent
of the Transitional Legislative Council. All groups represented in the legislative body
should therefore be required to secure women’s representation in proportion to their
2/17

20-15887

S/2020/1155

membership allocation. In addition, in line with the transitional Government’s
commitments, the Ministry of Labour and Social Development had planned a launch
event for the Sudanese national action plan on women, peace and security (2020 –
2022) for 31 October, but that had to be postponed because of the coro navirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The action plan, which was endorsed by the transitional
Government in March 2020, is aimed, inter alia, at ensuring women’s participation in
peacebuilding and decision-making; recognizing women’s rights before, during a nd
after conflict situations; and ensuring the protection of women against gender-based
violence such as rape and sexual slavery, and putting an end to impunity.
8.
Against that backdrop, the Sudanese political landscape continued to undergo
realignments among political forces. On 5 November, a grouping of nine resistance
committees, and a splinter faction of the Sudanese Professionals Association (SPA)
allied with the Sudanese Communist Party, issued separate statements criticizing
FFC. While the committees rejected the distribution of parliamentary seats among the
signatories of the Juba Peace Agreement that FFC was proposing, the SPA faction
took issue with the composition of the FFC central council, among other issues. On
7 November, the Sudanese Communist Party announced its withdrawal from FFC, the
National Consensus Forces and all their affiliated bodies.
9.
Tensions escalated in Khartoum on 21 October during demonstrations called for
by a group of political parties, members of the FFC and SPA to comm emorate the
1964 revolution. Demonstrators demanded government reform and the reversal of the
amendments to the Constitutional Document. One protester was killed, which
triggered more protests the next day. Another protester died of her injuries on
25 October.
10. Furthermore, the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement has been
challenged in the east of the country. Several groups withdrew their support for the
signing of the eastern track of the Agreement by the United People’s Front for
Liberation and Justice and the opposition Beja Congress, claiming that those two
factions did not represent political forces on the ground. In Sinkat, Red Sea state, the
nazirs (administrators appointed by the states) and independent chiefs of the Beja
community held a three-day conference on peace, development and justice from 27
to 29 September. The participants called for the unification of all three eastern states
into one region, as well as for the formation of a high coordination body composed
of all eastern communities that was to agree, without external interference, on powersharing arrangements and demands for self-determination. Their recommendations
were presented to Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, Deputy Chair of the Sovereign Council,
who attended the conference on its final day. On 8 October, the council of Beja nazirs
reiterated its opposition to the eastern track of the Juba Peace Agreement.
11. Tensions persisted in the region and, in early October, protests led by members
of the Beja community aimed at removing the interim Governor of Kassala, a member
of the Bani Amir community, led to the closure of the port at Port Sudan and of the
main highway to Khartoum. On 11 October, the Chair of the Sovereign Council met
with a senior delegation of the Beja community and pledged to find a way forward
that would satisfy all actors in Eastern Sudan and to reopen the eastern track of the
peace process. Three days later, the Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok, dismissed the
interim Governor. Nonetheless, communal tensions between the Bani Amir and the
Beja escalated and, on 14 October, six members of the Beja tribe were killed and at
least 20 injured in communal clashes in Port Sudan and Sawakin. Authorities in Red
Sea state declared a curfew from 14 to 18 October. In response to t he removal of the
interim Governor, the Bani Amir community called for a protest to denounce the
decision. Although initially peaceful, the protest, which took place on 15 October,
turned violent after demonstrators proceeded towards the premises of the st ate
government of Kassala to hand over a petition. The police reportedly opened fire,
20-15887

3/17

S/2020/1155

killing seven demonstrators. One member of the Rapid Support Forces was also
killed, while 19 people were injured.
12. On 3 September, Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-N) faction that bears his name, and Prime Minister Hamdok,
signed a joint agreement on principles. On 8 October, Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, in
his capacity as Deputy Chair of the Sovereign Council, and Mr. Al-Hilu met in Juba,
where they agreed that workshops would be organized to take stock and share best
practices with participants from both sides, after which the talks would resume to
discuss outstanding issues. This was a step forward, as on 20 August, A l-Hilu had
withdrawn from earlier negotiations in protest against Mr. Dagalo’s involvement in
the peace talks. The first workshop was held in Juba from 29 October to 1 November
with the participation of the transitional Government and the Abdelaziz Al -Hilu
faction. International experts gave presentations about the experiences gained by other
countries in managing religious diversity. The workshop was aimed at developing
mutual understanding on outstanding issues pertinent to the negotiations, such as the
issue of religion and the State, with a view to finalizing the joint agreement on
principles signed on 3 September and allowing formal negotiations to begin.
13. Despite attempts by the transitional Government to engage him in the formal
peace process, the leader of the SLA-Abdul Wahid faction, Abdul Wahid al-Nur,
continued to abstain from participating in formal negotiations. In Darfur, during the
reporting period, there were incidents between nomadic and farmer communities, and
intercommunal fighting broke out in various localities. Details are provided in the
report on UNAMID (see annex).
International relations
14. The period under review saw significant developments regarding the country’s
international relations. On 19 October, President Trump of the United States of
America announced his intention to remove the Sudan from his country’s list of State
sponsors of terrorism. Reportedly, the terms of the agreement reached between the
Sudan and the United States about the removal included the Sudan pay ing
$335 million into an escrow account for families of the victims of the 1998 bombings
of the United States embassies in Nairobi and Dar es-Salaam and the attack on the
USS Cole in 2000. The Sudan is on track to be removed from the list in December
2020, pending a 45-day period for review by the United States Congress.
15. On 23 October, the Sudan agreed to establish ties with Israel in a conference
call between the Chair of the Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General Burhan, Prime
Minister Hamdok, President Trump and Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel. Two
days later, Israel announced a $5 million aid package to the Sudan, while the United
Arab Emirates delivered 67,000 tons of wheat in a move that was coordinated with
the announcement. The Sudanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs subsequently clarified
that the Transitional Legislative Council, once formed, would need to ratify the
decision to normalize relations.
16. The agreement on the establishment of relations with Israel gave rise to some
political debate within the Sudan and some protests in Khartoum. The Sudanese
Congress Party, the Democratic Unionist Party, SRF, the Democratic Forces
Movement and the Republican Party all declared their support for the establishment
of relations, citing long-term and short-term benefits. At the same time, the National
Umma Party, the Sudanese Communist Party and the Nasserist and Baathist parties
expressed their opposition. Some opponents to the move cited solidarity with the
Palestinian people, while others, including FFC, expressed grievances over the
process, citing a lack of consultations on the issue.

4/17

20-15887

S/2020/1155

17. The eruption of armed clashes in the Tigray region of Ethiopia on 3 November
between the Ethiopian National Defence Forces and the Tigray People’s Liberation
Front prompted the transitional Government to announce the closure of the eastern
border with Ethiopia. Despite the closure of the border, the transitional Government
has allowed humanitarian access to all Ethiopian asylum seekers by granting prima
facie recognition while upholding the principle of non-refoulement. As at
23 November, more than 40,000 refugees had arrived in Eastern Sudan from Ethiopia.
Prime Minister Hamdok offered to mediate between the parties in his capacity as
Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Socioeconomic situation
18. The economic situation continued to deteriorate during the reporting period.
Lockdowns due to the pandemic resulted in a severe decline in economic activity, a
lowering of the gross domestic product and the loss of approximately 42 per cent of
fiscal revenue. In urban areas, the pandemic also had a negative impact on the large
informal economic sector, increasing the precarious situation of daily -wage earners,
especially women, who grapple with poverty. Given its payment arrears, the Sudan
has not been able to avail itself of debt relief. Combined with increased spending on
emergency health programmes and a decline in public revenue, this has led to a budget
deficit of approximately $250 million per month. The annual inflation rate reached a
record 212.29 per cent in September, from 166.83 per cent in August, driven by
increased food and transport costs. On 10 September, the deteriorating economic
climate led the authorities to announce a state of economic emergency.
19. Demonstrations against the dire economic situation and related hardships
continued throughout the reporting period. Given continuing queues for bread, fuel
and cooking gas, the resistance committees announced the escalation of mass p rotests.
Demonstrations took place in the states of Khartoum , Red Sea, Al-Gazira, Gedaref,
Southern Kordofan, North Darfur, among others, with protesters demanding the
dismissal of the Minister for Trade, whom they blamed for the shortages.
20. It was in that economic environment that a national economic conference was
held in Khartoum from 26 to 28 September, after repeated postponements related to
pandemic. The conference was originally proposed to facilitate a dialogue between
the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, the Office of the Prime Minister and
FFC on the 2020 budget, given their differing views on issues related to subsidies and
exchange rate policies. During the conference, FFC and the resistance committees
opposed the lifting of subsidies, decided earlier by the transitional Government.
Recommendations made at the conference included the separation of fiscal policy
from monetary policy, granting the Central Bank of the Sudan full autonomy from the
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, and a commitment to combat moneylaundering and terrorist financing. No consensus was found on the issues of subsidies,
reviewing civil service salaries or rationalizing the size of the civil service.
21. In an important development towards debt relief, on 23 September, the
Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund endorsed a staff -monitored
program. Pending arrears clearance with the international financial institutions, the
implementation of the programme will make the Sudan eligible for more than
$1.5 billion per year in direct development grants to stimulate investment and revive
the economy. Demonstrated progress in the implementation of the programme is also
an important requirement for the Sudan to become eligible for bilateral debt reduct ion
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. The 12 -month programme will
serve to support the transitional Government’s home-grown programme of reforms
aimed at stabilizing the economy, improving competitiveness and strengthening
governance. To that end, several key steps have already been undertaken, including
the drafting of a law establishing an anti-corruption commission and another law to
20-15887

5/17

S/2020/1155

reform the governance of State-owned enterprises. The transitional Government is
also rationalizing expenditures in order to improve financial accountability through
major reforms of public financial management.
22. Some of the most critical reforms that the transitional Government agreed to
implement as part of the staff-monitored program relate to the removal of subsidies
and exchange rate reform. These reform measures are expected to impose a significant
economic burden on the public as the fundamental characteristics of the country’s
economy are restructured. On 12 October, the Government announced that it would
liberalize fuel prices and align the domestic price of fuel with international prices; on
28 October, fuel prices approximately doubled.
23. On 8 October, the Board of Executive Directors of the World Bank Group
endorsed a new country engagement note for the Sudan, which was focused on helping
the transitional Government to stabilize the economy and accelerate progress towards
addressing the country’s debt challenges. The Board also approved a $200 million
pre-arrears clearance grant for the Sudan Family Support Programme, a quasiuniversal basic income programme of cash transfers established by the World Bank
and managed by the Government that is intended to mitigate the social impact of the
Government’s economic reform agenda. The grant comes in addition to a previously
approved amount of $170 million provided through trust fund contributions of the
European Union, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands and Sweden that will be managed
through a multi-donor trust fund set up to finance the Programme. This first
disbursement from the World Bank trust fund represents a part of the pledges in
support of the Programme secured at the high-level Sudan Partnership Conference held
online from Berlin in June. On 23 October, the World Bank hosted a round -table
discussion on supporting the country’s transition. The meeting, held online from
Washington, D.C., on the margins of the annual meetings of the World Bank Group,
commenced with the signing of the Programme, which signalled its official launch.
The World Food Programme put in place the necessary support and technical
assistance and started the first pilot phase of the Sudan Family Support Programme at
the end of September, providing support to 20,000 families in and around Khartoum.
Situation regarding human rights and the rule of law
24. The signing of the Juba Peace Agreement was a milestone for human rights and
the rule of law in the Sudan. It reinforced the centrality of justice, accountability and
reconciliation to the country’s transition process. The Agreement provides for
institutional reforms to create more representative and responsive rule of law
institutions in conflict-affected areas. In it, the signatories reaffirm their commitment
to nationally led transitional justice processes and accountabi lity mechanisms,
including through the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission (in
which it is agreed that there should be at least two women) and the Special Court for
Crimes Committed in Darfur, and recognize the important role of the Inte rnational
Criminal Court in that process. In addition, the Agreement creates a comprehensive
regime for the consideration of land ownership and hawakeer (lands traditionally used
by a particular tribal group), with a strong emphasis on issues affecting int ernally
displaced persons and refugees in Darfur. Furthermore, the national Security and
Defence Council is entrusted with devising a plan for the transformation,
development and modernization of the security sector, and the transformation of the
security sector is identified as a priority agenda item for the upcoming constitutional
conference.
25. Faced with persistent demands for reform, the transitional Government
continued its progress towards the ratification of key international human rights
treaties and establishing constitutionally mandated commissions in line with its
commitments under the Constitutional Document. On 6 October, the Council of
6/17

20-15887

S/2020/1155

Ministers approved the ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. In addition to the
establishment of the Commission for Reform of the Legal and Justice System in July,
draft laws to establish the Transitional Justice Commission and reform the National
Human Rights Commission were under consideration. These Commissions, together
with the Peace Commission, the Constitutional Commission and the Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, among others, will be critical to
facilitating national dialogue, fostering reconciliation and implementing the Juba
Peace Agreement and advancing the political transition. On 19 November, the Council
of Ministers decided to remove the country’s previous reservations with regard to the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, thus further strengthening the
protection of children.
26. Notwithstanding these positive developments, communal clashes and violence
continued in Eastern Sudan and Darfur, including conflict-related sexual violence,
particularly against women and girls (see annex for more details related to Darfur).
At the demonstrations in Khartoum of 21 October, renewed demands were voiced for
the transparent and fair investigation of violations and abuses under the former regime
and for the killing of civilian protesters on 3 June 2019. On 11 November, the public
prosecutor announced that mass graves had been discovered and later stated that they
would be exhumed. Meanwhile, the persistent intercommunal clashes in Darfur
highlighted the need to intensify efforts to strengthen protection and build trust
between communities and law enforcement, while also improving rule of law
institutions and systems under the national plan for the protection of civilians (see
S/2020/429, annex) to match the strong commitment of national and local authorities
to ensure basic security and protection across the Sudan. In that regard, the
appointment of new judges and prosecutors following the termination from service of
151 judges and 21 prosecutors on 23 August by the national committee on the
dismantling of the former regime remained pending.
Humanitarian situation
27. Humanitarian needs continued to grow owing to the economic crisis, food
insecurity, severe flooding, outbreaks of disease, intercommunal violence and
prolonged displacement. A record number of people were in need of urgent
humanitarian food and livelihood assistance from June to September 2020; an
estimated 9.6 million people – 21 per cent of the population – were at crisis levels of
acute food insecurity or worse. Humanitarian access continued to improve as the
transitional Government pursued its reform of the humani tarian framework in the
Sudan. Humanitarian workers were able to access previously inaccessible areas under
the control of armed groups in Darfur, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
28. Since the beginning of the year, over eight million people have received some
form of assistance. Across the country, approximately 3.68 million people received
humanitarian assistance between July and September 2020. A total of 2.5 million
people received food and livelihood assistance; 1.44 million people received wa ter,
sanitation and hygiene assistance; 1.13 million people received education assistance;
708,000 people received health-care services; and 29,000 survivors of gender-based
violence were provided with services. Children also received essential nutrition a nd
protection support. Between 7 and 23 November, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the transitional Government’s Commissioner
for Refugees registered 41,193 Ethiopian refugees arriving in Kassala, Gedaref and
Blue Nile states. The United Nations and its partners have provided life-saving
assistance including food, water, sanitation and hygiene services, as well as
psychosocial support.
20-15887

7/17

S/2020/1155

29. Humanitarian assistance does not cover the 15.9 million people who have
minimal adequate food consumption but are unable to afford some essential non -food
expenditures without stress-coping strategies. The situation is likely to be exacerbated
by the persistent macroeconomic crisis and reforms such as the lifting of fuel
subsidies, which occurred at the end of October. On the other hand, the first round of
financing was approved for the Sudan Family Support Programme, targeted at
11,800,000 people in the states of Khartoum, Red Sea, South Darfur and Kassala. The
Programme is expected to provide $5 per person per month for six months. Net
payments, which will be made to beneficiaries in the local currency, will depend on
the exchange rate, which underscores the need for exchange rate reform.
30. At the same time, the Sudan continued to be affected by the worst floods since
1988. At least 16 states experienced water levels unseen in nearly a century. By
October, close to 900,000 people were affected in all 18 states and more than 170,000
houses had been destroyed or damaged, and 559 schools, more than 2,600 health-care
facilities and more than 1,800 water sources had been damaged. Floods affected
2,988,445 people in almost 600,000 farming and pastoral households, of which 42 per
cent were female-headed. About 2.2 million hectares of land were flooded in 15 states,
representing 26.8 per cent of the cultivated areas, and 108,000 head of livestock
belonging to 20,521 households were lost. The states most affected were North
Darfur, Khartoum, Blue Nile, West Darfur and Sennar. The humanitarian commu nity
supported the transitional Government with a flood response effort, reaching close to
400,000 people with assistance. A total of 170,000 people received emergency shelter
and non-food items. Ahead of the rainy season, the United Nations and its partne rs
had prepositioned stocks to facilitate aid delivery for up to 250,000 people. During
the response effort, 43 partners provided food, emergency shelter, non -food items, as
well as water, sanitation and hygiene support to people affected by floods. In
anticipation of potential disease outbreaks, 50 cholera modules were prepositioned in
different states. Vector-control activities and spraying were also carried out following
the increase in the number of malaria cases.
31. The reporting period also saw an increase in the number of suspected viral
haemorrhagic fever cases. As at 25 October, 2,305 cases and 64 deaths had been
recorded by the federal Ministry of Health, almost all in Northern State. 250 cases of
chikungunya had also been reported in West Darfur, South Darfur, East Darfur and
North Darfur. About 78 per cent of those cases occurred in West Darfur. By the end
of October there were 1.5 million malaria cases, breaching the epidemic threshold in
15 of the 18 states. The Sudan was facing a polio outbre ak, the first in more than a
decade, affecting nine states across the country. Nearly 10 million doses of polio
vaccine arrived in Khartoum in October. After delays due to a lack of funding to cover
the rising transportation costs, the vaccination campaign was scheduled to start at the
end of November.

III. Update on the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
32. The UNITAMS start-up team began to deploy in October, following the
completion of the work of the Sudan planning team, which included submitting the
Mission’s first annual budget, for 2021. It is led by an Officer-in-Charge who will
concurrently serve as the Director of the Office of Support to the Political Transition at
UNITAMS. The start-up team also includes the Chief of Staff ad interim, the Chief of
Mission Support ad interim and other priority substantive mission support and security
personnel. Planning for the recruitment of personnel for 2021 and onwards has
commenced so as to ensure that UNITAMS will have an adequate footprint and achieves
both a gender balance and geographic diversity in its staffing, a priority of UNITAMS.
8/17

20-15887

S/2020/1155

33. The start-up team met with the Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister, the Chair
of the Executive Committee for Coordination with UNITAMS, and other cabinet
members, civil society representatives, resident ambassadors, the Head of the African
Union Liaison Office in Khartoum, the Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to Sudan and representatives of armed groups to discuss UNITAMS activities.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2524 (2020), discussions around integration
continued with the United Nations country team, while the Development
Coordination Office started a mapping and gap analysis exercise with the country
team to ensure the complementarity of its work and that of UNITAMS. Discussions
also started on an integrated strategic framework to ensure that the planning processes
of UNITAMS and the country team were synchronized. The Mission continued to
engage with partners on the development of the clear and measurable core and
contextual benchmarks and indicators requested by the Security Council in its
resolution 2524 (2020).
34. As UNAMID prepared to draw down, coordination with UNAMID and the
African Union continued throughout the reporting period to ensure the smoothest
possible transition. Coordination meetings were held at the leadership level on a
regular basis, and a formal coordination mechanism was established between the
UNITAMS start-up team and UNAMID senior leadership as requested by the Security
Council in the resolution. On 5 November, UNITAMS, UNAMID and the United
Nations country team held a workshop to ensure that the efforts of the United Nations
in the Sudan were aligned to support the transitional Government in the area of peace
implementation and the implementation of its national plan for the protection of
civilians. Participants agreed on actions that would guide the two Missions and
relevant United Nations country team partners to mitigate the gaps and challenges
that would remain after the departure of UNAMID and would actively be consulting
relevant partners in the transitional Government to ensure close coordination.
35. Efforts commenced to support the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement.
At the request of the Joint Peacebuilding Steering Committee (in which the
transitional Government is represented by the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning, the national Peace Commission, the Office of the Prime Minister and the
Ministry of Federal Governance), work has begun to develop two programmes to
support the implementation of the Agreement and the ongoing negotia tions.
UNITAMS is in separate consultation with the parties involved to determine the best
way to support the ongoing negotiations in Juba with the SPLM -N Abdelaziz Al-Hilu
faction.
36. Pursuant to the UNITAMS peacebuilding mandate, the start-up team continued
to explore in close coordination with the United Nations country team, the
repurposing of an existing multipartner trust fund to support catalytic priority
peacebuilding activities in Darfur, the Two Areas and Eastern Sudan. In doing so, it
was working closely with the Peacebuilding Support Office, the Peacebuilding Fund
and resident United Nations system agencies, funds and programmes. The trust fund
would support an “all-of-United Nations” programme that responds to critical gap
areas in peacebuilding as the country focuses on medium- and longer-term sustainable
development. The Joint Steering Committee of the Peacebuilding Fund also requested
the development of a programme in 2020 to support the development of a baseline
survey on Sudanese refugees. The survey was initially to be focused on Chad, on
internally displaced persons and on peace advocacy in refugee camps in Chad. Under
the auspices of UNITAMS and the country team, work is currently under way to
develop both programmes.
37. Efforts also continued on operational arrangements for the deployment of
UNITAMS. The lease agreement for the interim UNITAMS headquarters in Khartoum
was finalized and resources are currently being mobilized for the necessary
20-15887

9/17

S/2020/1155

infrastructure, information and communications technology services and security
enhancements. Joint support systems are currently being established with the country
team as a combination of common services agreements, including potential
co-location in El Fasher, Zalingei, Nyala, Kadugli, Kauda, El Damazin, Kassala and
Port Sudan. The existing support capacity of UNAMID is also being leveraged in El
Fasher to support UNITAMS. UNITAMS and UNAMID are synchronizing their
operations to ensure that the anticipated drawdown of UNAMID coincides with the
expansion of UNITAMS, while useful assets, such as vehicles and other equipment,
are transferred to UNITAMS in an organized and timely manner. The United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) will also provide support in Kadugli on
a cost-recovery basis. Several service level agreements are being finalized for
integration and coordination modalities for the provision of logistic support and
transactional services with the country team, UNAMID, UNISFA, the Regional
Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda, and the Global Service Centre in Brindisi, Italy.
Meanwhile, discussions are ongoing with the transitional Government on the status of-mission agreement.

IV. Observations
38. The Sudan continues to make progress in its democratic transition. I commend
the courageous steps the parties have taken by signing the historic Juba Peace
Agreement and committing to its effective implementation. The Agreement is a
milestone for the promotion of human rights and the rule of law in the Sudan. It could
be a major first step in efforts to address the root causes of instability and armed
conflict. The timetable is ambitious and significant challenges lie ahead with regard
to financial resources, outstanding security concerns and continuing trust d eficits,
among others. I encourage all parties to remain steadfast in their commitment to peace
and I call on the country’s partners to provide the necessary support to the
implementation of the Agreement.
39. Peace in the Sudan will not be complete until all conflicts come to an end. I
welcome the engagement between the transitional Government and the SPLM -N
Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction. This is a positive step aimed at addressing historic
grievances for the sake of the future of all Sudanese people, and I encourage the
parties to reach an agreement on outstanding issues without delay. I also call on those
armed movements that remain outside the peace process to join the forces committed
to a successful and peaceful transition in the Sudan.
40. The United Nations reaffirms its strong commitment to supporting the Sudanese
people in the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement. I encourage the
signatories to engage with the United Nations and the international community to
identify the scope of the strategic, technical and planning support they may require in
order to avoid any delays and to ensure coordinated support.
41. Peace needs to be sustained. Therefore, creating the conditions to avoid a relapse
into conflict and supporting peacebuilding will be critical. I call on Sudanese
stakeholders and their international partners to further invest in the stabilization of
former conflict areas. The United Nations will seek contributions to a multi -partner
trust fund to support peacebuilding activities during the transitional period. I
encourage partners to contribute to this trust fund to demonstrate the support of the
international community for this new era in the Sudan.
42. The protection of civilians must continue to be a priority. With the anticipated
end of the UNAMID mandate, the transitional Government must be ready to fill the
gap that the departure of the Operation will create on the ground. While UNITAMS
will be there to assist the authorities, it will not be able to replace UNAMID in
10/17

20-15887

S/2020/1155

providing physical protection. I urge the transitional authorities to expedite its
preparations to protect civilians in line with its own national plan for the protection
of civilians, with the support of the United Nations and the international community.
It will also be critical for the Government and the United Nations to move forward
on the implementation of the framework of cooperation on conflict -related sexual
violence signed in March 2020.
43. I commend the transitional Government for its efforts to undertake leg al reform,
strengthen institutions and ensure the meaningful representation and participation of
women in decision-making structures. I also encourage the transitional Government
to continue its steps to ensure the ratification of the international convent ions for the
protection and promotion of human rights and deliver justice for victims of past
crimes and of the events that occurred in Khartoum on 3 June 2019 . As it proceeds
with the transition, I encourage the transitional Government to continue to hold
inclusive consultations and dialogues with a broad range of stakeholders, including
women and civil society.
44. I commend the transitional Government for the steps it has taken to implement
difficult but critical economic and financial reforms. I urge th e international
community to support the Sudan in its implementation of a social safety net and other
measures for the benefit of the population. In that regard, I welcome the intention of
the United States to remove the Sudan from its list of State sponso rs of terrorism, a
change that will play a significant role in unlocking the country’s access to important
international financial mechanisms and assistance.
45. The humanitarian situation remains extremely concerning, with the country
experiencing worsening food insecurity and historic levels of flooding that have
destroyed people’s homes and livelihoods. In addition to more economic and
development support, which is critical to address the economic crisis that is driving
the population’s needs and to allow durable solutions for those who have been
displaced, additional support is needed for the humanitarian response. I welcome the
improvements in the ability of humanitarian workers to reach more people with
assistance, while noting the importance of continued and sustained access to all
people in need.
46. The planning for the establishment of UNITAMS has been conducted in
unprecedented circumstances and has posed new challenges not seen before in the
deployment of a mission. I would like to express my gratitude to my Special Adviser
on the Sudan for leading this planning process to a successful conclusion and for his
tireless efforts in support of the transition in the Sudan. I am also grateful to the
personnel of UNITAMS who are deploying to the Sudan, as well as to UNAMID for
the support the Operation has provided for the establishment of UNITAMS over the
past months.

20-15887

11/17

S/2020/1155

Annex
Report on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur pursuant to Security Council resolution 2525 (2020)

I. Introduction
1.
The present update is submitted pursuant to paragraph 10 of Security Council
resolution 2525 (2020), by which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
provide an update on the implementation of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) mandate every 90 days as an annex to the regular
report requested on United Nations Integrated Transition Assistanc e Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS). The present annex provides an update on the situation in Darfur
for the period from 1 September to 23 November 2020.

II. Update on the situation in Darfur and implementation of
the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur
A.

Political situation
2.
On 3 October, the transitional Government, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front
and the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi formally signed the Juba
Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, witnessed, among others, by representatives of the
United Nations and concluding 12 months of negotiations. On 8 October, the parties
arrived in Khartoum to discuss the implementation process, and on 12 October, in a
joint meeting, the Sovereign Council and the Council of Ministers endorsed the
Agreement.
3.
On 18 October, the transitional Government approved the incorporation, as an
integral part, of the Juba Peace Agreement into the Constitutional Document of
17 August 2019. However, there have been delays in the implementation of some key
elements of the Agreement, including the appointment of the representatives of the
signatory movements to the Sovereign Council and the Council of Ministers, and the
establishment of critical coordination and implementation mechanisms.
4.
SLA-Abdul Wahid continued to reject the peace process. On 10 November, its
deputy head, Abdalla Haran Adam, arrived in Juba, reportedly to brief President Salva
Kiir of South Sudan on the group’s plan to achieve peace in Darfur while remaining
outside the Juba peace process. On 13 November, the group’s head, Abdul Wahid,
arrived in Kampala to announce the initiative as part of what he referred to as an
African tour to promote an intra-Sudanese dialogue conference.

B.

Security situation
5.
The overall security situation in Darfur was marked by persistent
intercommunal conflict in West, South and Central Darfur, intermittent clashes in the
Jebel Marra area between SLA-Abdul Wahid and forces of the Government, and
infighting between SLA-Abdul Wahid factions. Another source of continued serious
challenges was the civil unrest caused by the deteriorating economic situation and
limited capacity of local authorities to protect internally displaced persons and
farmers, including children, from attacks.

12/17

20-15887

S/2020/1155

Fighting between forces of the transitional Government and armed movements
6.
During the reporting period, 21 incidents of armed conflict were recorded that
resulted in 23 fatalities, compared with 48 incidents of armed conflict and 115
fatalities recorded from 1 June to 31 August 2020. During the reporting period, SLA Abdul Wahid elements attacked the base of the Sudanese Armed Forces in Boulay,
south of Sortony, the observation post of the Sudanese Armed Forces on Arafa t hill,
south of Golo, and Boldong base near Nertiti. The attack against Boldong on
27 September reportedly resulted in three SLA-Abdul Wahid elements being killed
and one soldier of the Sudanese Armed Forces being severely wounded.
7.
Infighting within SLA-Abdul Wahid also continued, with new clashes between
the Mubarak Aldouk and Saleh Borsa factions taking place between 1 and 6 September
in Hussein, Flow, Komy and other villages near Golo, resulting in one civilian fatality
and causing new displacements. Infighting on 30 September and 12 October between
these two factions in Dwo and surrounding villages in East Jebel Marra, South Darfur,
over the control of artisanal gold mines near Kidingir and illegal tax collection in East
Jebel Marra resulted in at least seven civilians being killed and 525 families, mainly
women and children, being displaced. On 16 November, SLA-Abdul Wahid commander
Mubarak Aldouk and 14 other commanders presented a signed statement to UNAMID
in which they announced their split from the group, citing grievances including
discrimination, extortion, the torture of detainees and the murder of dissidents.
Intercommunal conflict and land issues
8.
Intercommunal violence continued across Darfur. UNAMID recorded 15
intercommunal clashes with 29 fatalities, compared with 15 intercommunal clashes
and 126 fatalities in the previous reporting period, from 1 June to 31 August 2020.
Land-related conflicts also persisted, with 57 incidents and 14 fatalities, compared
with 85 land-related conflicts with 17 fatalities in the previous period.
9.
Intercommunal clashes resulted in six fatalities in Central Darfur and three in
West Darfur. In Central Darfur, in particular Nertiti, intercommunal conflicts involved
multiple parties, including young people, internally displaced persons, farmers and
nomadic herders, resulting in a deteriorating security situation. On 10 September,
protests by young internally displaced persons against the perceived lack of action by
security forces led to an attack on the police station in Nertiti during which the police
opened fire, killing two people. The Wali (Governor) of Central Darfur engaged the
local authorities and stakeholders and requested the deployment of additional armed
forces to de-escalate the tensions.
10. During October, in Graida, South Darfur, conflicts between the Fallata and
Masalit communities affected 16 villages and caused the displacement of up to 20,000
people to Goghan al-Zarqa’. Several homes were burned. On 20 October, a group of
Masalit also burned several houses and shops in Dika village, South Darfur, over the
return of a number of Fallata families, with the Fallata retaliating by attacking the
Masalit in Graida East. As a result, seven Masalit were killed, 25 injured, several
Masalit houses were burned and government security forces were deployed.
11. On 20 October, clashes in Saraf Umrah, North Darfur, between the Awlad Janoub
clan of the Northern Rizeigat and the Rapid Support Forces over the accidental killing
of a Rizeigat man protesting the confiscation of firearms led to the partial burning of
the garrison of the Rapid Support Forces in retaliation. The Sudanese Armed Forces
were deployed to de-escalate the tension and prevent further confrontations.
Incidents against United Nations personnel and installations
12. During the reporting period, 12 mostly criminal incidents were recorded in
which United Nations and humanitarian personnel and premises were targeted, a
20-15887

13/17

S/2020/1155

noticeable reduction from the 65 incidents reported from 1 June to 31 August 2020.
The decrease may be due to several factors. One is that demonstrations in June and
July, in Nyala in South Darfur, El Geneina in West Darfur and Ed Daein in East Darfur
by security guards of a private security company contracted by United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes may have contributed to the higher number of
criminal attacks during the previous period. Another may be the positive impact of
the ongoing firearms collection campaign conducted by Sudanese authorities.
13. On 16 November, outside the logistics base in El Fasher, North Darfur, a group
of former members of UNAMID national staff who had been protesting against a
perceived lack of payment of financial entitlements since 10 August 2020 blocked all
entry and exit gates. The following day, protesters attacked UNAMID police
removing vehicles blocking the gates. UNAMID police fired tear gas and six officers
sustained minor injuries.

C.

Protection of civilians
14. During the period under review, the UNAMID military component conducted
4,273 patrols, of which 1,091 were dispatched to protect civilians, and facilitated 39
humanitarian escorts. The police component conducted 607 patrols, comprising 254
confidence-building patrols to camps for internally displaced perso ns, 95 patrols to
protect civilians gathering firewood or grass, 30 market patrols, 116 village patrols,
98 town patrols and 14 migration route patrols to respond to the security needs of
internally displaced persons, particularly those engaged in livelih ood activities outside
their camps, including women and children. Formed police units provided three
humanitarian escorts to personnel of the World Food Programme, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Children’s Fund and
UNAMID. UNAMID police also conducted 87 joint patrols with the Sudan Police
Force in camps for internally displaced persons, gathering areas for internally
displaced persons, villages, farming areas, markets and towns around the 11 team sites.
General explosive hazard assessments were conducted in 230 villages across Darfur
including in the Jebel Marra area, resulting in the clearance of 43 reported dangerous
areas and the safe disposal of 2,144 (1,684 items of unexploded ordnance and 460
items of shelf-life expired ordnance) and 110,377 rounds of small arms ammunition.
15. During the reporting period, UNAMID hosted a meeting attended by the
Government and the United Nations country team to strengthen coordination of the
protection of civilians and develop recommendations to accelerate implementation of
activities hampered by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The
Government agreed to provide armed escorts in locations from which UNAMID had
withdrawn and encouraged implementing partners to conc lude their project
implementation activities in time.
16. The Operation continued to conduct, in collaboration with the United Nations
country team, capacity-building workshops and trainings targeting civil society and
Sudanese authorities, including in West Darfur (150 participants, of whom 64 were
women), East Darfur (105 participants, of whom 87 were women), South Darfur
(70 participants, of whom 36 were women), North Darfur (164 partic ipants, of whom
114 were women) and Central Darfur (160 participants, of whom 25 were women).
The activities were focused on the role of women in reconciliation mechanisms and
decision-making, the protection of women’s and girls’ rights, the promotion of human
rights in camps for internally displaced persons, early warning mechanisms for the
prevention of sexual and gender-based violence, harmful social norms such as those
regarding genital mutilation and child marriage, and accountability and the rule of
law by, among other means, trial monitoring and support to prison administrations.
Activities also included continued advocacy for the inclusion of women in traditional

14/17

20-15887

S/2020/1155

conflict-resolution mechanisms through the training of 20 women among a group of
64 native administration personnel.
17. UNAMID police continued to conduct daily patrols and outreach programmes in
support of the physical protection of civilians and to facilitate humanitarian assistance,
including by following up with the Sudan Police Force about crimes reported and
progress made with investigations. The police component continued training of
trainers on crises and public order management for the Sudan Police Force. In
September, UNAMID police leadership attended a workshop with the Sudan Police
Force on the protection of civilians in Khartoum in support of the national plan for the
protection of civilians of 21 May 2020 (see S/2020/429, annex). UNAMID police, in
collaboration with the Sudan Police Force, also launched a joint patrol strategy to buil d
trust and confidence between internally displaced persons and the Sudan Police Force.

D.

Humanitarian situation
18. In September and October, intercommunal conflict and clashes among SLA Abdul Wahid factions caused the displacement of some 27,445 people in the Jebel
Marra area in Central and South Darfur.
19. On 15 September, some 760 people (152 households) were displ aced from the
Sortony gathering site, in North Darfur, to Toga and 930 people (186 households)
from Sortony to the Savanga site for internally displaced persons in Golo, Central
Darfur. In October, some 1,900 people (392 households) arrived in Toga and Sav anga
from Sortony. An inter-agency team undertook a needs assessment from 11 to
17 October, and a humanitarian response effort in the area is ongoing. During
October, an estimated 3,800 people were also displaced from Daya, Central Darfur,
to Arsheen and Mohamedeen villages in northern Jebel Marra.
20. On 4 October, the Humanitarian Aid Commission reported that some 3,000
people had arrived from Feina village to Kidingir, Keila and Mershing villages in
South Darfur, having fled infighting between factions of SLA-Abdul Wahid that
started in July. An inter-agency needs assessment was conducted from 11 to
16 October. On 20 October, the clashes mentioned earlier between the Fallata and
Massalit in Graida, South Darfur, led to the displacement of 20,000 people t o Goghan
al-Zarqa’. Humanitarian partners undertook an inter-agency mission from 9 to
12 November to assess humanitarian needs.
21. A flood response effort is ongoing, with humanitarian partners reaching 33,350
people (6,670 families) with distributions of non-food items in Kabkabiyah, North
Darfur. In the camp for internally displaced persons in Kass, South Darfur, an inter agency needs assessment team identified 2,405 affected people (481 households). In
the Otash camp for internally displaced persons, 7,685 people (1,537 households) were
affected. In Central Darfur, community leaders reported that some 400 houses had
been damaged by floods in Kwila, Central Darfur. Some 18,000 people (3,600
households) were affected in the Hamidiya camp for internally di splaced persons,
Central Darfur, and 12,500 (2,500 households) were affected in Nertiti, Central Darfur.
Efforts to provide shelter and distribute non-food items are ongoing in those areas.
22. The number of outbreaks of disease has risen after the floodin g season, with the
State Ministry of Health reporting 277 suspected chikungunya cases in West Darfur
since the end of September. Humanitarian partners are supporting case management,
vector control and health promotion activities, and the World Health Orga nization has
provided insecticide and fogging machines. Cases of dengue fever have also increased
in number, reaching 19 in West Darfur and 13 in North Darfur during the reporting
period.

20-15887

15/17

S/2020/1155

E.

Human rights situation
23. While there has been an improvement in the overall human rights situation, the
vulnerability of civilians in Darfur remains a concern. In September and October,
UNAMID documented 47 alleged human rights violations and abuses involving 169
victims, of whom 19 were women and 13 children, compared with 93 cases involving
403 victims, of whom 40 were women and 28 children, documented from 3 June to
8 September 2020. In total, six cases were reported to the Sudanese police, resulting
in seven arrests. The investigation and prosecution of cases continued to be hampered
by capacity challenges of law enforcement and judicial authorities.
24. Women and children continued to be vulnerable to human rights violations and
abuses, particularly sexual violence and conflict-related sexual violence. During the
reporting period, UNAMID documented 21 cases of sexual and gender-based violence
and conflict-related sexual violence affecting 22 survivors, compared with 20 cases
affecting 28 survivors from 1 June to 31 August 2020. Access to comprehensive
services for survivors of sexual violence continues to be challenging owing to stigma,
access constraints for remote areas and reluctance by survivors to report incidents.
UNAMID verified 17 incidents of grave violations affecting 36 children, of whom 14
were girls, which reflected a decrease in the number of children affected by
intercommunal violence compared with the 364 incidents of grave violations affecting
77 children, including 40 girls, during the previous reporting period (1 June –31 August
2020). The documented human rights incidents may not reflect the actual number of
possible cases owing to several factors, including the impact of COVID -19-related
restrictions on fact-finding and community engagement activities.
25. The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Fatou Bensouda, visited the
Sudan from 17 to 20 October, during which time she held consultations with high level government officials and other stakeholders on the prosecution of those
suspected of having committed war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity in
Darfur. During the visit, the transitional Government reiterated its readiness to
cooperate with the Court in connection with cases in Darfur.

III. Coordination with the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan and transition planning
26. In collaboration with the United Nations country team, UNAMID continues to
support the operationalization of the interim Mission headquarters in Khartoum as part
of the start-up of UNITAMS. It is envisaged that UNITAMS will benefit from assets that
can be transferred from UNAMID following its eventual drawdown and closure.
27. On 25 October, the transitional Government, the African Union and the United
Nations held a meeting of the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism in Khartoum. The
meeting was attended by the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Smaїl Chergui, the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, JeanPierre Lacroix, the Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support, Atul Khare,
and the Joint Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and of the Secretary-General of the United Nations for UNAMID,
Jeremiah Nyamane Mamabolo. The participants acknowledged the position of the
transitional Government on the termination of the UNAMID mandate by
31 December 2020 and reaffirmed the commitment to facilitate the Mission’s orderly
drawdown and liquidation.

16/17

20-15887

S/2020/1155

IV. Financial aspects
28. The General Assembly, in its resolution 74/261 C of 30 June 2020, appropriated
the amount of $240.2 million for the Operation for the period from 1 July to
31 December 2020. As at 8 October 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to the
Special Account for UNAMID amounted to $168.7 million. Total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to
$2,723.3 million. Reimbursement of troops and formed police costs has been made
for the period up to 31 December 2019, while reimbursement of the costs of
contingent-owned equipment has also been made for the period up to 31 December
2019, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

V. Observations
29. I congratulate the transitional Government and the signat ory groups on the
signing of the Juba Peace Agreement, which is the culmination of a year of
constructive talks on the country’s future and a testament to the commitment of the
parties to peace. I also commend South Sudan for its mediation effort, which ha s been
critical in facilitating the progress made. To those who remain outside the peace
process I reiterate that now is the time to come together and settle differences through
dialogue in the spirit of compromise and in the interest of their constituenci es. I urge
the transitional Government and the parties to move forward swiftly with the
implementation, including by setting up the critical institutions envisaged in the
Agreement.
30. For the people of Darfur, the signing of the Juba Peace Agreement rep resents
the promise of peace. Nonetheless, much work remains to be done to ensure security
throughout the region. Intercommunal violence continues to be a concern across
Darfur, with internally displaced persons and others voicing legitimate concerns
regarding their safety. Clashes involving SLA-Abdul Wahid with government security
forces, as well as infighting among the group’s factions, are an ongoing source of
suffering for civilians in the Jebel Marra area, causing significant displacement. In
that context, I commend the transitional Government for the commitment it has made
to protecting civilians in Darfur, both through the provisions of the Juba Peace
Agreement and through the implementation of the national plan for the protection of
civilians. Meeting those protection goals will be a vital piece of Agreement’s success.
31. With discussions ongoing on the drawdown and closure of UNAMID, it is
critical that the Operation act quickly in transferring knowledge and other support to
the institutions that will remain to support peace in Darfur. For the remainder of its
mandate, the Operation will continue to support the Sudanese authorities in their
protection and peacebuilding efforts. I am encouraged that engagement between
UNAMID and the transitional Government to that end has continued during the period
covered by the present report. The Operation will also place a major focus on helping
to bring UNITAMS up to full capacity in the region and on continuing its
collaboration with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
32. I wish to express my appreciation to the Joint Special Representative for his
leadership and dedication. I also extend my sincere gratitude to all UNAMID civilian
and uniformed personnel, the troop- and police-contributing countries, the United
Nations country team and the humanitarian community for their invaluable support
to peace in Darfur.

20-15887

17/17
