S/PV.8442

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8442

nd meeting
Thursday, 10 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Clay
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2018/1175)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-00687 (E)
*1900687*

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2018/1175)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1175, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: I am honoured to be here today
to introduce the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2018/1175) on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.8313), further
progress has been made in democratic consolidation in
West Africa and the Sahel, despite persisting security
challenges. In the Lake Chad basin, Boko Haram
attacks over the past months, notably against military
installations, have increased. During the last week of
December alone, Boko Haram launched three separate
attacks on army bases in Borno and Yobe states of
Nigeria, killing numerous soldiers, police personnel
and civilians, and seizing equipment and weapons.
Violent clashes between farmers and herders are also
continuing, although on a lesser scale, thankfully, than
in the first half of 2018.
The security situation also remains volatile in
the Sahel. In Burkina Faso, a state of emergency has
been declared in 7 of the country’s 13 regions in the
north, west and east, against a backdrop of a significant
rise in security incidents. Despite mass mobilization,
defence and security forces in the Niger continue to
face challenges in the west and south. Increased attacks
2/18

10/01/2019

and kidnappings by extremist groups are heightening
security risks in the Niger, Benin and Togo. Rising
insecurity has placed a heavy burden on Governments
of the region against the backdrop of high population
growth and worsening youth unemployment. Economic
austerity measures, including the elimination of
subsidies on basic items in some countries have also
heightened social tensions.
In its efforts to advance the long-term stabilization
goals of the region, UNOWAS continues to work
closely with regional partners, including the Economic
Community of West African States, the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission (LCBC), including within the framework
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
Laudable progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 2349 (2017) to support a
regional response to the crisis in the Lake Chad basin.
On 30 August, the LCBC Council of Ministers adopted
a regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery and
resilience of the Boko Haram-affected areas of the Lake
Chad basin region. The meeting took place before the
high-level conference on the Lake Chad region, which
was held on 3 and 4 September in Berlin, during which
partners pledged over $2 billion to help meet the needs
of the more than 17 million people affected by the crisis.
However, more support is needed to advance
the stabilization efforts in the Sahel, and I commend
partners for the commitment to providing $2.4 billion
to finance the Priority Investment Programme of
the G-5 Sahel, which was presented on 6 December
in Nouakchott. I urge Governments and partners to
ensure the rapid implementation of those much-needed
medium- and long-term stabilization measures, as
well as the speedy disbursement of funds to respond
to the urgent needs on the ground, thereby fostering
stabilization, recovery and development.
I also commend the holding of the joint summit
of Heads of State of the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States, on 30 July 2018 in Lomé, as
an important step towards addressing cross-border
threats facing West and Central Africa. As one of
the key outcomes of the summit, Heads of State and
Government affirmed their readiness to enhance
interregional collaboration to jointly address threats to
peace and security, including from violent extremism.
They also committed to holding regular meetings to
19-00687

10/01/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

identify measures for the prevention and peaceful
management of farmer-herder conflicts.
In the past six months, presidential elections
were successfully organized in Mali; regional and
parliamentary elections in Mauritania and Togo,
respectively; and local elections in Côte d’Ivoire.
However, despite appreciable progress in democratic
consolidation in the region, there is a need for continuous
efforts to address contentious issues around elections in
order to prevent and mitigate election-related violence,
as well as to support inclusive dialogue as a key attribute
of inclusive societies. This is even more important as,
over the next six months, the region will see several
high-stake elections in Nigeria, Senegal, Mauritania
and Benin.

S/PV. 8442

During the event, which took place on 26 November in
Praia, Cabo Verde, it was noted that women comprised
fewer than 15 per cent of parliamentarians, for example,
in several countries of the region. My Office will
continue to work with all regional actors to strengthen
the role of women in the region.
The next cycle of elections in the region will be a
litmus test for the consolidation of democratic gains.
Ensuring an enabling environment for the full respect
of human rights will be key to the success of these
elections and to safeguarding stability in the region.
Furthermore, preparing the ground for elections through
support for inclusive dialogue and national conflictprevention capabilities will continue to constitute a
priority for the region and my Office.

In Nigeria, tensions are high ahead of the
presidential and parliamentary elections of 16 February
and the gubernatorial and state assembly elections
of 2 March. However, the prospects for peaceful and
credible elections have increased following the signing
of the national peace accord in Abuja on 11 December.
Over the coming weeks, I will continue to engage
actively with all stakeholders in Nigeria, in particular
the National Peace Committee, including through the
organization of peace forums in a number of key states,
such as Benue, Rivers, Kaduna and Kano. Indeed, a few
more may be included.

The rising number of attacks and the increasing
sophistication in the tactics deployed by extremist
groups risk undermining our collective efforts in the
region. Military solutions, while necessary, are not
sufficient. I encourage all actors to ensure holistic
responses grounded in respect for human rights and the
socioeconomic needs of the population in the affected
areas. Through inclusive approaches predicated on
national ownership, we must continue to work hard
to address the governance deficits, extreme poverty
and lack of development that feed and sustain armed
violence and extremism.

Several countries of the region also continue to
struggle with justice and human rights challenges. I am
particularly concerned about the allegations of human
rights violations by security forces, as well as the
increasing re-emergence of self-defence groups, whose
actions have been fuelling intercommunal tensions
in some countries. While security operations must
be carried out in full compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law,
non-State actors also need to be held accountable for
any crimes committed.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council of the
continued commitment of UNOWAS to working with
all stakeholders in the region to promote peace and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel. I trust that we
can continue to rely on the support of the Council.

As reaffirmed in the recently concluded joint United
Nations-World Bank study entitled Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict,
women’s marginalization continues to be a cause and
consequence of instability and conflict. During the
annual review of progress made in West Africa and
the Sahel concerning the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, the
discrimination against and marginalization of women
from political processes was once more highlighted.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Chambas for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the organization of this informative
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1175) on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
We commend Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of UNOWAS, for the quality of his briefing, which
enlightened our Council on the regional political and
economic dynamics and the security threats impacting
peace and stability.

19-006873/18

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Côte d’Ivoire notes with great interest the
assessments and recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral with regard to the current situation in West
Africa and the Sahel. We note with satisfaction that
the political situation overall remains stable. The West
African subregion overall is also enjoying a favourable
socioeconomic situation, with an expected economic
growth of 2.9 per cent in 2019.
The current economic and social trends give
reason for hope and are part of an irreversible process
of profound transformation in the societies of West
Africa and the Sahel, despite the ongoing obstacles to
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
My country believes that the dividends of this generally
encouraging subregional economic situation should
lead to a redistribution of the fruits of growth through
the creation of employment for young people, the
promotion of wealth-generating activities and quickimpact projects for women.
With regard to trends in the area of political
governance and democracy, my country is happy to note
political stability in the subregion, which nevertheless
does not obviate the need to strengthen ongoing efforts
to bolster democracy and good governance. In that
regard, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the outstanding work
that has been done by Mr. Chambas as part of his
mediation and good offices mission. Those missions,
which were carried out in perfect cooperation with
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and civil society partners, are fully in
accordance with the principles of preventive diplomacy
advocated by the Council.
With regard to the important electoral dates
planned for 2019 and the ongoing political tensions in
certain countries of the subregion, my country warmly
encourages the Head of UNOWAS to intensify his
mediation and good offices missions in the countries
concerned with regard to ECOWAS. That subregional
institution has fully demonstrated its ability to prevent
and manage internal crises during its successive
interventions in Guinea Bissau, Mali, Burkina Faso
and the Gambia. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls on
UNOWAS to further support the efforts deployed by
ECOWAS, which has a comparative advantage in
monitoring and supporting the political processes
with a view to overcoming crises. We also call on it
to strengthen regional conflict-resilience capacities,
which are indispensable to building peace and stability
in the region.
4/18

10/01/2019

With regard to security, my delegation notes with
concern the ongoing threats to subregional peace and
security caused by the increase in terrorism and violent
extremism. In that regard, the report of the SecretaryGeneral notes an increase in the level of activism by
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin region and the
spike in the number of terrorist attacks in countries,
such as Burkina Faso and the Niger. The terrorist
groups that are active in the region increasingly exploit
local vulnerabilities, in particular tensions among
pastoralists and farmers and intercommunal conflicts,
especially in areas where States find it difficult to fully
exercise their authority. In the light of that situation,
Côte d’Ivoire believes that combating terrorism, violent
extremism and transnational organized crime in
West Africa and the Sahel must be part of a holistic,
coordinated approach that is focused on strengthening
the response to subregional security and support for
development initiatives that allow for the root causes
of instability, such as poverty and unemployment, to
be addressed.
With respect to security responses, Côte d’Ivoire
calls for increased financial and logistical support
from the international community to the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and
the Multinational Joint Task Force, which is a model
that illustrates how countries of the region have taken
ownership of their collective security. In addition, we
recall the need for coordination among the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, the Multinational Joint Task Force and other
missions on the ground, namely, the Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
Operation Barkhane force. Furthermore, Côte d’Ivoire
believes that predictable and sustainable funding from
United Nations mandatory contributions will have a
positive impact on the sustainability and effectiveness
of the forces I mentioned.
For my country, the current security response
should be complemented by development strategies
aimed at determining the structural causes of conflict
and at responding to the pressing social needs of
the people. In that regard, my country calls on the
international community to support inclusive economic
and social development programmes, in particular in
the region of the Sahel, where young people who have
fallen prey to poverty and unemployment are becoming
increasingly vulnerable to the radical rhetoric of and
recruitment offers from armed groups. Côte d’Ivoire
underscores its support for the Alliance for the Sahel
19-00687

10/01/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

and the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme for
the period 2019 to 2021, for which a total of €2.4 billion
was raised during the round table held in Nouakchott
on 6 December 2018. My country also welcomes the
implementation of the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel, whose aim is to better support States of the
region in their efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development to ensure shared prosperity
and a secure environment in the Sahel.
At this stage, let me underscore that Côte d’Ivoire
and Equatorial Guinea are working to organize a
possible visit of the Security Council to Guinea-Bissau
and Côte d’Ivoire in order to look into the situation in
the region and support UNOWAS efforts. My country
remains convinced that, despite the complexity of the
challenge, UNOWAS remains an important conflict
prevention tool in West Africa and the Sahel.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire encourages the Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel to continue his efforts to promote peace, stability
and development in West Africa and the Sahel.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Chambas for his excellent briefing.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1175)
covers a broad and impressive array of issues. We
would like to comment on a few that are of particular
importance from our point of view.
First, we need sound international coordination as a
key element of success. As the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General pointed out, cooperation among
actors in the United Nations system, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
subregional organizations is key to success. Wherever
we can, Germany contributes to reaching that objective
through our own initiative. Special Representative
Chambas mentioned the High-level Conference on
the Lake Chad Region, held in Berlin in September
2018, which we organized together with Nigeria,
Norway and the United Nations and at which $2 billion
was pledged. The conference showed the relevance
of the humanitarian, development and peace nexus
and contributed to the implementation of resolution
2349 (2017). Regional cross-border cooperation is
also key to success. We welcome the adoption of
regional stabilization strategy of the Lake Chad Basin

S/PV. 8442

Commission and the African Union (AU). The strategy
will be essential for future cooperation.
Secondly, there needs to be a strategic focus on
crisis prevention across the board. We need long-term
sustainable development — economically, socially and
environmentally and after transitions and mission exits.
That also means effectively using the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) as an advisory body to the Council.
I would like to share a few thoughts on those issues.
Germany is one of the largest contributors to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding and development
activities within the United Nations system. We
strongly support the efforts of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Chambas to support African initiatives for sustaining
regional peace. In particular, we appreciate the holistic
approach that has been chosen, which is a combination
of various instruments in our toolbox — mediation,
reform processes, human rights and support to
transparent, credible and peaceful elections, while
urging States to ensure that basic democratic principles
and preconditions are fulfilled.
Small arms and light weapons are another concern
and are all too widespread in the region. We need to
effectively counter the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons in the region. We support regional
initiatives that aim to reach that very objective. That is
why we provide comprehensive support for the control
of small arms and light weapons in West Africa, as
part of our strategic cooperation with ECOWAS and in
building local capacity in Mali, the Niger and Nigeria.
With regard to the successful closures of the
missions in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, to which Special
Representative Chambas referred, we feel that they
are possible models for future transitions and exits
but, at the same time, we must consider long-term
sustainable development, respect for human rights and
stabilization. The peace dividends we gained by closing
United Nations missions of that kind should be used to
strengthen crisis prevention measures at the same time.
In that regard, we advocate for the effective use of the
Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory body to the
Council. One example is the joint mission conducted
by UNOWAS and the PBC to Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire and the Gambia in October 2018. Germany is
one of the largest donors to the Peacebuilding Fund and
encourages member States to contribute to its budget.

19-006875/18

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

My last point on crisis prevention is that, as
the Special Representative pointed out, we are also
concerned about the lack of effective participation by
civil society and opposition in democratic processes, in
some instances. We are also concerned about the arrest
of human rights defenders and the violations of freedom
of expression and assembly in a number of Western and
Central African countries. We would be very interested
to hear from the Special Representative about how he
will address those issues in his future work.
Thirdly, the promotion and protection of human
rights is an integral part of the overall prevention effort.
Counter-terrorism operations must also comply with
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We strongly condemn all attacks carried out
by terrorist organizations, especially by Boko Haram,
and we are concerned about the increasingly complex
and coordinated attacks in the region, as outlined by
the Special Representative. Any security initiatives
must comply with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. As the study by
the United Nations Development Programme entitled
Journey to Extremism in Africa has shown, one driver
of extremism is human rights violations by security
forces, which is of particular concern. Let me provide
some concrete examples in that connection.
We launched a United States-German initiative
within the Global Counterterrorism Forum against the
use of unmanned aerial systems by terrorists. West
Africa is one of the focus regions of that initiative. We
very much welcome regional initiatives to respond to
the terrorist threat and overcome the challenges. The
last example is the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the Lake Chad area, the Group of Five for the Sahel
regional cell for the prevention of radicalization and
violent extremism or the Joint Summit of ECOWAS
and ECCAS Heads of State and Government on Peace,
Security, Stability and the Fight Against Terrorism
and Violent Extremism, held in Lomé in July 2018.
Those are very good examples that show steps in the
right direction.
For our fourth point, we would also like to highlight
what the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral mentioned, namely, the adverse effects of
climate change and the ecological impact on the stability
of West Africa, the Sahel and the Lake Chad region.
Therefore, we need to intensify our activities and
welcome the ongoing work of UNOWAS on the analysis
of climate-related security risks in West Africa and the
6/18

10/01/2019

Sahel. We also feel that the Council needs to take the
latter into account and conduct the appropriate followup. We commend UNOWAS on its completion of the
first stage of an analysis of climate-related risks in line
with last year’s presidential statement S/PRST/2018/16.
There is a strong link between climate change and
security. There is competition over scarce resources,
water and land. That clearly underlines the need for
the Council to consider the effects of climate change
on security in a much more structured way. One such
example involving the upsurge in, and spread of, violent
conflict between herders and farmers due particularly
to the adverse effects of climate change was brought up
at as a source of concern at the joint ECOWAS-ECCAS
summit held last year in Lomé. Germany has been very
active in providing support for the Lake Chad Basin
Commission since 2005 in the areas of organizational
development and transboundary water management.
My final point involves the particularly worrisome
situation of women and girls, as well as young people.
They are exposed to abductions, detention and sexual
violence by extremist groups, as outlined in the report
of the Secretary-General and the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Women and
girls face threats particularly by extremist groups.
One good example of how to counter that was, from
our point of view, the joint United Nations-African
Union mission led by Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and AU Special Envoy Bineta Diop to the
Sahel, South Sudan, Nigeria and Chad in July 2018, with
a focus on women and peace and security. We would be
interested to hear from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General if he could provide us with some
of his reflections on the follow-up to that visit. Women
need to participate in all kinds of conflict resolution
and mediation phases and activities. That holds
particularly true for local mechanisms, and we would
very much welcome any further activity by UNOWAS
in that regard.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for his briefing, which, as
always, was very enlightening.
UNOWAS is a valuable tool that enables the United
Nations to play a role not only in conflict prevention
but also in peacebuilding, in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s vision for sustainable effective action that
must cover the entire peace continuum. We hope that
19-00687

10/01/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the strategic review to be undertaken in the coming
months will provide an opportunity to ensure that
UNOWAS is provided with all the resources needed to
accomplish its mission. Preventing crises rather than
resolving them after the fact is, of course, the best way
to avoid suffering, as well as to achieve shared savings.
I will make several remarks with regard to
responding to the crisis at hand. The deterioration of the
security situation in a number of regions of West Africa
is an alarming development that requires our continued
action. That is especially the case in the Sahel, where
the terrorist threat is spreading geographically together
with a dangerous increase in intercommunal tensions
not only in central Mali but also, as of now, in the northwestern part of Burkina Faso. The same holds true
for the area surrounding the Lake Chad basin, where
the increase in attacks by Boko Haram is threatening
once again territories that were only recently liberated
from its control. As always, a response to those crises
and threats depends on a comprehensive approach
encompassing political, security and development
aspects, which is a point that we have often insisted
upon given its importance.
In the Sahel, France is committed to supporting
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali by the Malian parties, which,
in the short term, will require the priority measures
identified in resolution 2423 (2018) to be implemented
by next March. France is engaged in combating
terrorist groups through Operation Barkhane, as well
as its support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel and for the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel through the
mobilization of the Alliance for the Sahel to provide
faster, better coordinated and more targeted assistance
to the most vulnerable populations. In the Lake Chad
basin, more must be done to support the continued
action of the States of the Multinational Joint Task Force
and ensure that its work is conducted in a manner that
ensures the people’s full support. The United Nations
has a central role to play in helping the States of the
region identify appropriate and coherent responses in
all its aspects. Work must be carried out in the short
term to ensure that the resources implemented by the
United Nations system on the ground correspond to
the needs of the countries most affected by the current
violence. We believe that such work is particularly
urgent and critical in the case of Burkina Faso.

S/PV. 8442

In addition to the steps that we have taken in those
crisis areas, it is more important than ever to preserve
the fundamental elements needed to ensure regional
stability in West Africa and the Sahel. In that regard, I
will underline three key points.
First of all, as the Special Representative just
reminded us, credible, transparent and inclusive
electoral processes are required. In Nigeria, we
welcome the commitment of all actors to respect the
outcome of the elections and refrain from violence,
as part of the prevention work by actors in the region
and UNOWAS. In Guinea-Bissau, it is necessary that,
this time, the authorities respect their commitment to
the holding of legislative elections on 10 March, as
was requested by the Economic Community of West
African States and the Security Council. In other
countries, such as Togo and Guinea, it is important to
continue consultations among all stakeholders so as
to strengthen the inclusiveness and acceptability of
future electoral processes. Focus must be placed on
strengthening the representation of women in areas of
responsibility, which is hardly the case in the countries
of the region at the present time.
Respect for the rights of all and the fight against
impunity are also key factors for achieving stability. The
many abuses committed against civilian populations
in the various conflict areas of the region must not
go unanswered, no matter who committed them. The
transitional justice processes under way, in particular
in Mali and the Gambia, must be seen to fruition in
order to create the conditions necessary for sustainable
reconciliation. The protection of children in conflict
must be the focus of our attention, and UNOWAS has a
clear role to play in following up that issue. Stability also
goes hand in hand with long-term support for countries
emerging from crises. The continued involvement of
the international community in supporting Liberia,
following the closure of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, is particularly critical for ensuring the success
of the remarkable democratic transition that took place
just a year ago in that country.
I will conclude my statement in the same way
that the representative of Germany concluded his, by
stressing that the link between climate and security
is becoming increasingly clear in the countries of
the Sahel. The effects of climate change are creating
tensions over resources with a direct impact on
populations in the region. Accordingly, the sustainable
management of those resources, such as water and

19-006877/18

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

arable land, constitutes one of the conditions necessary
for maintaining stability in an area like the Sahel,
characterized by political and social vulnerabilities. The
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
and the Paris Agreement, as well as the establishment
of a regional dialogue on climate and environmental
issues, are essential in that regard. That will be the
main focus of the meeting of the Climate Commission
for the Sahel Region to be held in early February in
Niamey. UNOWAS has a strong role to play in actively
supporting that dynamic.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Chambas for his briefing here
today, which clearly outlined areas of progress as well
as the immense challenges that remain in West Africa.
We appreciate the work that the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
does in support of international peace and security in
fostering freedom and good governance across West
Africa and the Sahel. We also recognize and pay tribute
to the sacrifices that thousands of security forces
members and peacekeepers make every day to create a
more prosperous and stable region. To those ends, I will
highlight a few core priorities that we believe merit the
attention of UNOWAS and the Security Council in the
coming months.
In the Sahel, we share Mr. Chambas’ concerns
about the increasing intercommunal violence, the rise
in insecurity along the borders of Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger, the continued prevalence of terrorist and
criminal activity throughout the region and allegations
of human rights abuses by non-State armed groups and
security forces.
We share the concern expressed by the SecretaryGeneral regarding the growing sophistication and reach
of violent extremist organizations in parts of the Sahel.
Only by promoting good governance, addressing the root
causes of instability, creating economic opportunity,
respecting human rights and enhancing security can
the region make sustained progress towards addressing
those challenges. We are particularly concerned by
the increasing unrest in the central Sahel, which is at
least partly driven by the scarcity of resources. We
are concerned that over time, local communities may
begin seeing these disputes through an ethnic lens. In
that connection, we are pleased that UNOWAS recently
completed its study on pastoralism and security in West
Africa and the Sahel and look forward to coordinating
8/18

10/01/2019

with it as it seeks to incorporate the findings into the
work that the United Nations is doing in the region.
Mali is at the centre of the region, with its own unique
political and security challenges and its Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from
the Algiers process. We call once again on the parties
to that Agreement to make significant progress over
the next few months. In particular, we hope that they
implement the measures laid out in resolution 2423
(2018). Going forward, we cannot and should not
accept the unwillingness that we have seen in the past
by the parties to fully and rapidly implement the Mali
Agreement. The stakes are too high, both for the people
of Mali and for the region, and the Security Council
should consider using all available tools, including
sanctions, against those who obstruct implementation.
In the Lake Chad basin, the security and
humanitarian situations remain a concern. The lack
of humanitarian access to large parts of the region
continues to take a heavy toll on populations in need
of assistance, in particular women and children. While
the region has made progress in coordinating efforts
against Boko Haram and the Islamic State West
Africa Province, it is clear that those violent extremist
organizations remain dangerous threats.
Finally, we remain focused on Nigeria’s February
national elections as a critical test of democracy in
both Nigeria and the wider region. The United States
continues to support the Nigerian goal of free and
fair elections, held in a peaceful and appropriately
transparent manner, that reflect the will of the Nigerian
people. Through diplomacy; robust public engagement,
including with youth and civil society; and democracy
and governance programmes, we are helping the country
to strengthen its democratic institutions and processes.
In advance of February’s elections, we share many
of the concerns expressed by Nigerian observers and our
international partners regarding the political climate in
key areas of risk. Specifically, we are concerned about
reports of intimidation and partisanship by security
forces, heightened insecurity, the inability of internally
displaced persons or persons with disabilities to
vote, and the risk that widespread vote-buying could
challenge the integrity of the electoral process. We
urge the Nigerian authorities and political parties, civil
society and community leaders to address those risks in
the run-up to February’s election and to ensure that the
19-00687

10/01/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

election is genuinely free and fair and held in a peaceful
and appropriately transparent manner.
Twenty years after the country’s return to
democratic rule, the upcoming elections provide
Nigerians with an opportunity to shape the future
of their country and further solidify its place as a
democratic leader in Africa.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
valuable briefing by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, on the important work
that is being carried out by the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
As the Special Representative has stated, despite
the fact that some progress has been made in the
consolidation of democracy and the rule of law, the
continuing insecurity and political tensions in the
region are deplorable, as is the tragic humanitarian
situation, particularly in the Sahel region and the Lake
Chad basin, which is the result of the actions of terrorist
groups, transnational crime, clashes over the control of
natural resources and a limited State presence, among
other factors.
Peru is convinced that those challenges require a
multidimensional, long-term and integrated approach
that addresses the root causes of the conflict. In that
context, we would like to highlight three areas in which
UNOWAS is called upon to play a central role in the
coming months.
First, with respect to electoral monitoring and
preventive action, we emphasize the functions of
monitoring and early warning with respect to the political
situation in the region, which are complemented by
mediation and good offices, capacities that we believe
must continue to be strengthened and enhanced. In that
context, we look forward to the role that UNOWAS
will be playing in the upcoming elections in Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Benin, Nigeria and Senegal, based on
the model of transparent and inclusive processes with
the full participation of women and young people.
Secondly, with regard to regional cooperation,
we would highlight the comparative advantage that
UNOWAS has to articulate a regional vision and
action to combat common scourges such as terrorism,
violent extremism and organized crime. We welcome
the fact that such action is complemented by effective

S/PV. 8442

coordination with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other
subregional organizations and United Nations offices.
We would underline also the advisory function provided
by UNOWAS concerning the necessary reforms in
the security sector, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for ex-combatants, and the
promotion of local dialogue.
Thirdly, with respect to the field of development
promotion, we know that building a sustainable
peace implies a synergy among peace, justice and
development that allows for the construction of robust,
transparent institutions. Only in that way can the deep
causes of the conflict be effectively addressed in line
with the Sustainable Development Goals. From that
perspective, we welcome the priority that UNOWAS
attaches to the promotion of sustainable and safe
development in the region. We highlight its particular
interest in intercommunal conflicts arising as a result
of climate change and the preparation of intersectoral
studies on this subject. We also highlight its leadership
in the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2391 (2017).
I would like to conclude by expressing our strong
support for the role of UNOWAS and by encouraging
the international community to continue to cooperate
closely with the regional Office and the Special
Representative in their efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in West Africa and the Sahel.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
for his very informative briefing on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) as well as on current developments in
the region.
Allow me to share a few observations.
Significant security challenges, including an
increase in the cross-border activities of terrorist
groups and a retreat of State authorities from peripheral
zones, continues to affect a number of countries in
the region. The deteriorating security situation in
Burkina Faso requires a strong reaction on the part
of the international community and the provision of
support to the local authorities in combating terrorist
groups, whose activities in the Sahel region continue
to increase.

19-006879/18

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

We strongly condemn the violent terrorist attacks
as well as the intercommunal clashes in northern
regions of Burkina Faso. We also call on all inhabitants
of the region to make joint efforts to fight terrorism and
to promote national reconciliation. We encourage the
local authorities to sustain its security-sector reforms
consistently and to create conditions conducive to
sustainable peace and development.
We commend the generally peaceful elections
conducted in the region. However, pre- and postelectoral periods are often characterized by antagonistic
contestations and disputes. Therefore, we call on the
authorities and national stakeholders to work together
to create an environment conducive to the holding of
peaceful, inclusive and credible elections in 2019 in
Benin, Chad, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania,
Nigeria and Senegal.
The continuing underrepresentation of women
in senior Government positions in West Africa and
the Sahel is a matter of concern. We therefore call on
Governments in the region to redouble their efforts, in
accordance with national and regional commitments,
to enhance the empowerment and political inclusion of
women in decision-making and leadership roles, and to
promote inclusive, gender-responsive development.
Poland supports countries in the Sahel region in
their efforts to address security challenges. Last month
my country therefore handed over its first batch of
ammunition to the Chadian armed forces as a support
to Chad’s contribution to the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
As the Special Representative mentioned, climate
change has had a serious impact on the dynamics
of conflict in the Lake Chad basin and parts of the
Sahel. In that regard, we call on national, regional and
international partners to develop a regional framework,
in line with the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, to respond proactively to the current
and projected threats posed by climate change. Poland
would also like to express its deep appreciation for all
parties’ engagement both in the run-up to and during
the twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in Katowice. We believe that multilateralism
and cooperation will enable us to address problems
together, find solutions and build consensus for the
common good.
10/18

10/01/2019

The challenges in West Africa and the Sahel are
complex and multidimensional and require a sustained
and holistic approach on the part of all stakeholders.
In that regard, we commend the engagement of the
Governments of West Africa and the Sahel, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the G-5 Sahel, the Mano River Union, the
Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, in cooperation with UNOWAS. We also
commend the efforts of Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, the Special
Adviser for the Sahel, to foster the implementation of
United Nations Integrated Strategy through the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. Last but not least,
I want to express my gratitude to Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the staff of UNOWAS, for their
continued efforts to advance peace and security in West
Africa and the Sahel.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like to welcome and
thank the Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his
extensive and informative presentation.
On behalf of my country, I would like to commend
the progress and positive results that we are seeing
in West Africa. We appreciate the continued support
and efforts of UNOWAS and other regional and
international entities in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacebuilding, democratic transfers of power, respect
for human rights, inclusivity, women’s participation
in political, social and economic processes and
constitutional order in the region. The challenges
facing the region are significant, but the serious
political commitment and great desire on the part of
national and regional actors to overcome them, with the
support of the international community, give us reason
to believe that in the long run, all of us who fight for
peace will prevail.
We are going through a very difficult and critical
time, owing to the precarious security situation and
instability in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria.
Terrorist groups, and Boko Haram in particular, are still
in that area and continuing their indiscriminate attacks
on civilians and the military. Despite the increase in
military operations in the north and east of the Niger,
there are daily incidents of violence that pose ongoing
challenges to the defence and security forces. Conflicts
between farmers and shepherds are getting worse,
19-00687

10/01/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

despite the continued calls for collaboration between
UNOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States and officials responsible for agriculture,
livestock and security in the regions concerned,
with a view to establishing effective mechanisms for
preventing, mediating and resolving conflicts, which
could bring a new dimension of peace and security to
the region.
It is important to stress that the humanitarian
situation in West Africa and the Sahel remains
worrying, especially with regard to food security
and forced displacements in the Lake Chad basin,
where many people live in subhuman conditions. The
international community must redouble its efforts to
contribute to the 2019 humanitarian response plan for
the Lake Chad basin in order to help the people in the
area who are most vulnerable and defuse the cholera
epidemic, which has been claiming lives since 2010. As
we might expect, terrorist activity is both a cause and
consequence of that desperate situation.
Equatorial Guinea strongly supports the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its
Support Plan, and welcomes the link it establishes
between the political, security and humanitarian fronts.
We therefore consider very important the progress
of regional initiatives, such as the official launch of
disarmament, demobilization and socioeconomic
reinsertion programmes, as well as the signing in
Niamey on 30 October of a partnership protocol between
the Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Sahel Alliance that provides a framework
for collaboration and operational mobilization aimed at
implementing joint projects quickly and flexibly.
The fight against piracy and maritime crime is one
of my country’s regional security policy priorities. That
is why during our presidency of the Security Council
next month we will hold a debate on transnational
organized crime at sea. However, we would like to take
this opportunity to commend the effective work that
UNOWAS is doing in the Gulf of Guinea in that area,
in collaboration with other specialized agencies such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In
that regard, together with Côte d’Ivoire, my country is
intending to lead an official Security Council mission
to West Africa very soon to support UNOWAS’s efforts
for conflict resolution and peacebuilding in the region.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General

S/PV. 8442

Chambas for his briefing. Recently the situation in
West Africa and the Sahel has been largely stable, and
a number of countries in the region have registered
positive progress with their political processes. At the
same time, the countries of the region are still dealing
with threats such as the activities of violent extremist
and terrorist groups, cross-border organized crime and
natural disasters. China hopes that the international
community will strengthen its cooperation and respond
jointly to the region’s security challenges. I would like
to make the following four points.
First, the international community should provide
strong support to the countries of the region in fighting
cross-border organized crime and the activities of
terrorist organizations. The Multinational Joint Task
Force formed by countries in the Lake Chad basin, and
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), represent the region’s independent responses
to those challenges and its joint efforts to maintain
collective security, and an important contribution by
African States to peace and security in the region.
China supports the provision of the necessary financial
support by the United Nations to the G-5 Sahel for
operationalizing the Joint Force.
Secondly, the international community should
support the efforts of regional and subregional
organizations to play their unique roles. Countries in
West Africa and the Sahel are dealing with difficulties
such as cross-border security challenges and
humanitarian needs that require a joint response on the
part of the countries in the region. The international
community should respect African aspirations, respond
to African needs and support the efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission to properly
handle and resolve regional and subregional problems.
Thirdly, the international community should
address the root causes of conflicts when assisting the
countries of the region in handling hotspot issues. The
international community should focus on building the
capacities of the countries of the region, support the
countries concerned in implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union
Agenda 2063, and assist the countries of the region
in eliminating, as soon as possible, the root causes of
conflict so as to achieve sustainable development.
Fourthly, the various United Nations agencies
should enhance their coordination and create synergies.

19-0068711/18

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

UNOWAS should continue to work in accordance with
its mandate, enhance collaboration with all actors
concerned and promote regional peace and stability. The
United Nations country team and the United Nations
Development Programme, as well as other agencies,
should fully leverage their respective advantages,
enhance coordination and cooperation with UNOWAS
and play a constructive role for regional peace, stability
and development. China will continue to support the
work of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Chambas and UNOWAS going forward.
Strengthening cooperation with African countries
as well as other developing States has always been
a priority of Chinese diplomacy. Last September,
during the Beijing Summit of the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation, peace, security and economic
development, inter alia, were identified as the priority
areas of China-Africa cooperation going forward. The
China-Africa Peace and Security Fund and the ChinaAfrica Security Forum, which were created by the
Forum on Africa-China Cooperation, have provided
active support to the efforts of the countries of West
Africa and the Sahel in maintaining regional security
and combating terrorism, and they serve as important
platforms for the enhanced exchanges between China
and Africa in the area of peace and security.
Since its inception, the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund has provided financial
support to a number of African projects for building
peacekeeping and counter-terrorism capacities. The
successful visit by China’s State Councilor and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Wang Yi, earlier this month
served to further consolidate the friendly relations
between China and Africa and deepen the resultsoriented cooperation between the two sides. China
will work together with the international community
in providing continued support to Africa to facilitate
capacity-building for peace and security as well as
socioeconomic development, with a view to achieving
peace, stability and prosperity in the region at an
early date.

10/01/2019

this morning but remains concerned by the security
and political situation in large parts of the region.
Many of our concerns are reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1175), including the threats
from terrorist groups such as Boko Haram in countries
including Nigeria and other groups operating in the
Sahel that wreak havoc on vulnerable populations and
systematically violate women’s rights.
As we have discussed many times before in the
Council, both military and non-military action is
required to address these threats. We must understand
their root causes and the political, security, development
and humanitarian needs of the population. It is essential
that we adopt a coherent, whole-of-United Nations
approach to tackle existing problems and prevent
further deterioration in the region.
I would like to begin by addressing the situation
in the Lake Chad basin. The magnitude of this crisis
is profound; the combination of terrorism, extreme
poverty and climate change has rendered some
10 million people dependent on humanitarian aid. More
than 2.4 million people have been forced to abandon
their homes, and the cholera epidemic is the worst in
nearly a decade. A regional response to the crisis in
the Lake Chad basin is critical. We therefore welcome
the collaboration between the United Nations Office
for West Africa (UNOWAS) and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, as well as the joint
summit of the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) held in July, which demonstrated
the commitment of both organizations to strengthening
their cooperation.
Leaders of the States members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission also met in December to reinforce
the region’s approach to tackling Boko Haram. Regional
counter-terrorism cooperation is vital to addressing
a threat that does not respect borders. The SecretaryGeneral reminds us in his report that cooperation
between terrorist groups is growing in the Sahel region.

Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas for
his briefing and for his team’s work in West Africa
and the Sahel. His efforts continue to be an invaluable
bulwark against the forces of instability in the region.

But the region cannot be left to manage this
crisis alone. That is why the United Kingdom led the
drafting of resolution 2349 (2017), in 2017, and why,
at last September’s high-level conference in Berlin, the
United Kingdom committed $186 million to supporting
an integrated response to the crisis.

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress set out
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General

It is vital that we follow up the success of the
Berlin Conference and ensure that the international

12/18

19-00687

10/01/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

community strengthens its commitment to tackling the
problems of the region, including through supporting
the implementation of the United Nations support plan
for the Sahel.
In the light of the importance of the Sahel, the
United Kingdom is in the process of scaling up our
diplomatic, defence and development assistance in the
region. We are opening new embassies in the Niger and
Chad and increasing our presence in Mali. We have
deployed Chinook helicopters to provide logistical
support to the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force
through Operation Barkhane and will be significantly
increasing our development assistance to the region in
the coming years.
At last month’s Council briefing on the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel (see S/PV.8435), we called on
international actors to ensure that organizational
responsibilities were clearly delineated and that strong
lines of communication were set up between them. I
am encouraged in this respect by the close cooperation
between UNOWAS, the Office of the United Nations
Special Adviser for the Sahel, ECOWAS and others. We
also recognize the efforts made by UNOWAS elsewhere
in the region and the close engagement of the Special
Representative with national efforts to sustain peace, as
in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
UNOWAS has a crucial role in supporting the States
of the subregion in the holding of timely, transparent
and inclusive elections and in supporting the efforts
of ECOWAS and others to lay the groundwork for the
structural prevention of election-related violence. With
elections scheduled in several countries in the region
in 2019, this will be an important theme of the year
to come.
One of the strengths of UNOWAS has been to
act as a bridge between national players and regional
and international actors. We would encourage this
to continue. In Burkina Faso, for example, regional
cooperation and international support will be vital to
tackling instability and the risks to the wider region,
and UNOWAS has the credentials to leverage and
facilitate such cooperation.
The United Kingdom also welcomes the role that
the Peacebuilding Fund and its implementing partners
are playing in supporting reconciliation in Burkina
Faso and hopes that United Nations will maintain its

S/PV. 8442

commitment to using the resources of the Fund to
support reconciliation activities across the region.
UNOWAS has demonstrated that it can be a valuable
partner for regional Governments and organizations.
We look forward to engaging with the strategic review
process later this year to ensure that UNOWAS is best
equipped to fulfil its mandate.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is a pleasure for me to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, and to thank him
for his useful briefing on the most recent developments
in the Sahel region. We also commend the efforts made
by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) in a number of areas, as well as the
efforts of all the staff of the regional Office to provide
technical and electoral assistance to the States that
hold elections in the region, while exercising good
offices so as to reduce tensions. The role of the Office
in strengthening Government sectors to confront the
various challenges of the region is also important.
I should like to focus on three key aspects: first,
the elections in the Sahel region; secondly, the security
situation in the region; and, thirdly, the humanitarian
and development situations.
Concerning the elections in the Sahel region, we
would like to refer to the elections held in a number of
countries in the region and to welcome the efforts of
the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire, Mauritania and Mali
to hold transparent and successful elections. Those
positive developments will undoubtedly contribute to
achieving development and stability and have a positive
impact on the regional security situation in general.
We commend the vital and central role of UNOWAS
and the Economic Community of West African
States, as well as that of the African Union and other
international, regional and national organizations, in
contributing to the success of the electoral processes
and providing the necessary assistance to States of
the region.
We hope that the upcoming elections in Nigeria,
Senegal and Guinea-Bissau will be held in conditions of
transparency and with the participation of all segments
of society. We call on the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to continue the efforts that he
has undertaken, in the midst of the challenges facing
certain States of the region, to avert tensions during

19-0068713/18

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

preparations for the holding of elections. UNOWAS and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
play a pivotal role in implementing the SecretaryGeneral’s strategy for preventive diplomacy and
avoiding conflicts.
Concerning the security situation in West Africa
and the Sahel region, it remains unstable due to
armed conflicts and terrorist operations in general.
Such actions have now gone beyond their traditional
nature and have extended to maritime piracy, leading
to revenue losses and the deterioration of economies
in a number of States in the region. In addition, a
key problem in the region is drug trafficking, which
is a topic that was addressed by the Security Council
last month (see S/PV.8433). During that meeting, the
important role of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) was highlighted. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1175) on the
roles of UNOWAS and UNODC in supporting regional
States to address that challenge.
The unstable security situation in the Republic of
Mali has a negative impact on the entire region, since it
facilitates transnational terrorist acts and affects many
regional States, claiming the lives of many innocent
civilians. We call on all relevant stakeholders in Mali
to abide by the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
of 2015. We also appreciate the role and efforts of
the Multinational Joint Task Force in combating the
terrorist group of Boko Haram, and the role of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel in combating
terrorist groups as well.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, we are
deeply concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the region, especially in the Lake Chad
basin, where 1 million people suffered food insecurity
in the first half of 2018. Nevertheless, we welcome the
efforts of the Governments and active humanitarian
organizations, which contributed to the decline of the
cholera epidemic since 2010. However, more funding
is required by the region in order to ensure the
implementation of the response plan. Only 50 per cent
of the pledges made have been fulfilled so far. We call
on all relevant parties in the region to provide access to
all humanitarian assistance for all those in need in the
Lake Chad basin, particularly the elderly and children.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
the efforts of UNOWAS to prevent conflicts and to
strengthen the capacities of the national authorities
14/18

10/01/2019

in the States of the region in order to achieve all the
objectives in West Africa. That would ensure a better
future for the region and its populations. We welcome
the cooperation of States in the region with UNOWAS
to date and call on them to continue their cooperation
with the United Nations Office in the upcoming period.
We also underscore the support of the State of Kuwait
for achieving stability in the region.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation would
like to express its gratitude to you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. I also thank
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), for
his briefing.
South Africa supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative in engaging
in preventive diplomacy, good offices and political
mediation and facilitation in the countries of West Africa
and the Sahel. We welcome the positive developments
in the region, as noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/1175). However, we are concerned that
the instability and insecurity are spreading to other
countries in the region. That would adversely affect
the progress that has been made in recent years to seek
stability in the region.
That concern is equally shared by the African
Union, particularly with regard to the continued terrorist
attacks in northern and central Mali, Burkina Faso, the
Niger and Nigeria. Moreover, the intensification of
coordination among terrorist groups and the growing
transnational organized crime are a cause for great
concern for South Africa, since that will heighten the
insecurity in the region. It is important that we also
address the root causes of terrorism in order to curb its
spread throughout the continent.
South Africa believes that UNOWAS is positioned
to play an important role in overcoming the challenges
faced by the region, particularly with regard to tackling
the insecurity, instability and terrorism, through its
support of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel and by addressing the root causes of conflict.
Furthermore, the full implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is vital.
We are of the firm view that the work of the
Security Council should aim to support subregional
and regional multilateral frameworks and the use of
political dialogue in resolving the challenges faced
19-00687

10/01/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

by the region. Furthermore, coordination among the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Group of Five for the Sahel, the African Union and
United Nations structures is crucial. That is key to
providing a comprehensive approach in promoting
peace and security in the Sahel region, where terrorism,
extremist activities and violent extremism pose a
serious threat to its socioeconomic development.
The international community’s ongoing support
for the funding of investment projects in the Sahel in
particular remains a priority. The building of schools
and health centres and improving access to water, for
example, would positively contribute to preventing
communities from falling under the influence
of extremists.
Lastly, South Africa condemns in the strongest
possible terms the attempted coup to overthrow the
democratically elected Government in the Republic
of Gabon. In that regard, we reaffirm the principle
of the African Union, which rejects the notion of an
unconstitutional change of power. We pledge our
solidarity with the region, and we stand by it as it deals
with the many challenges in improving the lives of
its people.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2018/1175), which underlines
the activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the progress of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and provides an update on the situation on the ground.
I would also like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mohamed Ibn Chambas for his
insightful briefing to the Council.

S/PV. 8442

pertinent points with regard to ensuring stability and
sustained peace in West Africa and the Sahel.
First, Indonesia welcomes the positive developments
in West Africa and the Sahel, including elections,
progress on national reconciliation and political dialogue
in many parts of the region. We cannot overemphasize
the importance of peaceful and transparent elections in
laying the ground for the consolidation of democracy,
good governance and Government effectiveness in
delivering public services.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned about the
continued threat posed by terrorist groups and criminal
networks to security in West Africa and the Sahel,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report. As
the report suggests, the organizational capacities and
reach of violent extremist groups are increasingly
sophisticated. There has also been an increase in the
casualties inflicted on civilians and the military. It
is therefore important that we further strengthen the
collective response to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. The threat posed by Boko Haram is still
evident, as Mr. Chambas reports. Terrorism and violent
extremism have affected the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to people in dire need of help. We also note
the increase in maritime threats and piracy off the
coast of West Africa, which continue to pose a threat to
peace, security and development in the region.

Indonesia supports and commends the work
of UNOWAS in its good offices and preventive
diplomacy in West Africa and the Sahel. We are of the
view that, albeit relatively underpublicized, conflict
prevention remains a central responsibility for the
whole Organization, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

Indonesia welcomes the leadership of the countries
of West Africa and the Sahel in spearheading initiatives
to address security challenges through the Multinational
Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Indonesia sees the
need for continued support, particularly in capacitybuilding and predictable financing for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. Yet as we have so often heard, a militaryfocused solution alone is not sufficient to address
the deeper drivers of insecurity across the region.
Security initiatives must be complemented by efforts
to address the root causes of instability. State presence
and governance, development and social inclusion,
employment and livelihoods, as well as environmental
pressures, desertification and climate change, are areas
that should be focused on.

We believe that engagement by UNOWAS
with Governments, civil societies and regional and
subregional organizations is crucial to addressing both
the immediate and the deeper causes of conflicts in the
region. Having said that, allow me to highlight three

We are of the view that a holistic approach that
encompasses the dimensions of peace and security,
development and human rights is essential. In that
regard, we underline the importance of economic
development and call on the international community

19-0068715/18

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

to support efforts in that area aimed at helping to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. We also
acknowledge the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in sustaining peace and peacebuilding efforts. Its
focus on reconstruction and institution-building is very
important for laying the foundations for sustainable
development in the region. We also look forward to
greater cooperation between the PBC and the Security
Council in that regard.
This brings me to my third and last point. Many
of the security challenges in West Africa and the
Sahel are cross-border and intertwined in nature.
There is a pressing need for enhanced cooperation
in the regional context. We should also work to forge
greater cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. We view the
role of UNOWAS in partnership with Governments,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as other
international organizations, as crucial in supporting
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. I was also glad to hear in the
Special Representative’s briefing just now that his
Office is working closely with regional actors to
strengthen the role of women in the region. We look
forward to that. We also look forward the strategic
review of UNOWAS in 2019 and hope that it will result
in enhancing the Office’s capacity to carry out its
important mandate.
In conclusion, I would also like to pay tribute to the
many United Nations peacekeepers, Blue Helmets and
personnel on the ground who have done a remarkable
job and played an important role in fostering peace
and stability in the region. We are also honoured that
Indonesian peacekeepers are involved in that regard.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Chambas for his very comprehensive
briefing. Belgium salutes his daily work on behalf
of prevention, reconciliation, lasting peace and the
promotion of the rule of law in West Africa.
The precarious security situation continues to worry
us. I am thinking in particular of the intensification
of intercommunal violence in several countries in the
region, such as the Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali. In
Burkina Faso, the increasing and spreading terrorist
attacks on the people and the Government of Burkina
Faso in the north, east and even south of the country are
a particularly alarming development. In that regard, we
16/18

10/01/2019

note President Kaboré’s declaration on 31 December of
a state of emergency in the 14 provinces affected. These
terrorist attacks jeopardize development and threaten
regional stability. In Nigeria, the resurgence of violent
attacks by Boko Haram is also very worrisome.
Belgium commends the courage and sacrifices of
the security forces in their fight against terrorists. At
the same time, we will not be able to end this conflict
by ignoring human rights. If we do, the successes of
the security forces will be merely ephemeral and will
jeopardize reconciliation and a lasting end to the crisis.
Moreover, as the report emphasizes, the response
to the challenges facing West Africa cannot focus
exclusively on security. A holistic approach is needed
to deal with violent extremism, with an emphasis on
good governance, dialogue and mediation, as well as
sustainable and inclusive development.
Finally, the proliferation of conflicts between
pastoralists and farmers, which Mr Chambas has
reported on to the Council in the past, deserves special
attention because these tensions are currently a major
factor for insecurity in the subregion and even beyond. I
commend the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) for its recent launch of a study of
the causes of these conflicts. I encourage UNOWAS to
ensure the implementation of its recommendations and
thank it in advance for continuing to keep the Council
informed in the future.
The efforts of the Gambia, Liberia and Sierra
Leone deserve our support. National reconciliation,
post-conflict reconstruction and security-sector reform
are major challenges for those States, which are in the
process of strengthening their democratic institutions.
The political will to entrench good governance,
democracy and human rights will be decisive if they are
to make their gains last and participate in sustainable
development. I want to underline the important role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting
these countries by maintaining a dialogue among all
parties concerned. And the activities of the Peacebuilding
Fund remain crucial to addressing specific needs.
Belgium welcomes its prevention-focused approach.
These efforts should build on the new structure of
Resident Coordinators in a delivering-as-one approach.
UNOWAS also has another pioneering role to play.
While everyone agrees that a changing climate is one
of the causes of conflicts in the Sahel, UNOWAS is
implementing the will of the Council by studying the
19-00687

10/01/2019

Peace consolidation in West Africa

impact of climate change in the context of a conflictprevention approach. That is critical work and I
encourage the Special Representative to continue it.
In conclusion, I would also like to stress the
primary role played by regional and subregional
organizations. I encourage them to maintain their close
coordination with UNOWAS. Experience and history
show us that it is by joining forces that we obtain the
most convincing results.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel, for the information he has
provided. We would like to assure him once again that
Russia supports his personal efforts and the activities
of his Office in resolving regional crises and issues of
political mediation and assistance in improving State
and human rights institutions, the quest for ways to
achieve economic development and the fight against
extremism and terrorism.
It is encouraging that in the second half of 2018,
elections took place in a number of the countries in
the region in a generally calm atmosphere. We hope
that the new electoral cycle beginning this year, which
includes an even greater number of countries, will also
take place in lawful and orderly conditions.
We have to agree with Mr. Chambas that, despite
the efforts that have been made, extremism, terrorism
and organized crime, unfortunately, continue to gather
strength in the region. As an epicentre of this kind of
lawless activity, the States of the Sahel, to a significant
extent, have become victims of the rogue actions of
some countries that led to regime change in Libya. If
the situation there is not stabilized, it will not be easy
to achieve peace and stability in the Sahel, as many
regional stakeholders have rightly pointed out.
Eradicating terrorism is one of the top priorities
on the African agenda. In that regard, the efforts of
States in the region to combat the growing challenges
are extremely timely, and that is all the more important
in the current circumstances, when terrorist groups
are increasingly actively coordinating their actions.
We support the operations of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint
Task Force aimed at fighting Boko Haram, and we are
providing assistance to African Governments through
bilateral channels. We do not believe in the possibility
of dialogue with terrorists, including Boko Haram.

S/PV. 8442

Unfortunately, security threats affect States’ ability
to deal with their socioeconomic problems, which is
why efforts to ensure security and stability efforts have
to be implemented as part of a comprehensive approach.
Military and counter-terrorism measures must be
combined with efforts to strengthen State institutions,
undertake systemic economic and social development,
promote a culture of respect for human rights and the
rule of law and provide jobs for young people. We greatly
appreciate the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the Organization’s
specialized agencies in providing a broad range of
assistance to the countries of the region. It is crucial to
ensure that those efforts are closely coordinated with
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and other organizations.
We consider it important to increase the
effectiveness of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, since we feel that its potential has not
yet been fully realized. The views of the countries
for which it was developed are crucial to achieving
that. It will also be impossible to get anything done
without properly coordinating the numerous assistance
programmes for the region. Their effectiveness also
depends on whether the entities that are present in the
region — and I particularly have in mind those that
are part of the United Nations system — are operating
within their area of responsibility and taking into
account the principle of division of labour. It seems to
us that only through purposeful collective action that is
carried out in appropriate formats and does not create
conflicting areas of competence can we achieve the
results we seek.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Dominican Republic.
The Dominican Republic would like to thank
Mr. Mohamed Chambas, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel and
Head of United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS), for his excellent briefing. We are
grateful for the important work that UNOWAS is doing
to support the consolidation of peace and democratic
governance in the region.
With regard to the political situation, we want to
commend the peoples of West Africa and the Sahel
for their conduct of free and democratic electoral
processes that have enabled stability to be maintained

19-0068717/18

S/PV.8442

Peace consolidation in West Africa

in the region despite the difficulties arising from its
complex security and political challenges. We urge the
countries that will be participating in the next cycle
of elections to work to minimize tensions and manage
their differences with a view to ensuring peaceful
elections. In that context, we commend UNOWAS
efforts to promote dialogue between the parties so as to
fulfil their political agreements.
We are concerned about the security problems in
the region, especially the growing numbers of attacks on
civilians and soldiers by extremist groups, relapses into
violence between communities and piracy, among other
things, all of which lead to the loss of lives, violations
and abuses of human rights, displaced populations and
the destruction of property, as has already been pointed
out today. This situation, which is exacerbated by
external factors, has meant that some 24 million people
in the region are in need of humanitarian aid. We urge
the international community to redouble its efforts to
implement the necessary mechanisms for protecting
those who are most vulnerable. The Dominican
Republic firmly condemns the sexual violence,
corporal punishment and arbitrary detention to which
women are subjected by terrorist groups, and we urge
that efforts continue to be made to adopt appropriate
legislative frameworks to eradicate and prevent such
abuses. We deplore the fact that despite the progress
that has been made, the representation of women in
high-level public positions in the region is minimal. We
believe that the launch of the Women’s Platform of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and the adoption of a road
map for the Platform’s activities represent a positive
step in this direction. However, we should continue to
redouble efforts to increase women’s empowerment and
political inclusion.
We also urge UNOWAS to continue supporting
processes for security-sector reform, and we call
on the region to maintain an integrated approach
to combating insecurity. Controlling the spread of
conflicts to neighbouring countries and ensuring that
the perpetrators of crimes are brought to justice is

18/18

10/01/2019

crucial to achieving lasting peace in the region. The
quest for solutions to cross-cutting threats to peace and
security in West Africa and the Sahel should focus on
joint initiatives such as the operationalization of the
Mano River Union cross-border security strategy and
other related projects. In that regard, we commend
the meeting of the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Economic Community of West
African States for its contribution to reaffirming their
commitments to cooperating on efforts to deal with
their regions’ shared challenges.
The Dominican Republic is concerned about the
effects of natural disasters and extreme conditions
related to climate change in West Africa and the Sahel,
including floods, droughts and prolonged periods
of famine, which is to a great extent responsible for
undermining the means of subsistence available to
the people of the region, and which leads to a struggle
for survival and mass population displacements. In
that regard, in its presidential statement of 10 August
(S/PRST/2018/16), the Security Council acknowledged
the adverse effects of climate change, environmental
change and natural disasters in the region of West
Africa and the Sahel. We encourage UNOWAS and
the international community to continue their efforts
to overcome this great challenge at a time when we
are welcoming the conclusion of the first stage of the
analysis of the options available for tackling it from a
conflict-prevention perspective.
In conclusion, despite the great challenges facing
this region, we urge UNOWAS to continue working
together with regional and international partners to
implement joint solutions to ensure peace and stability,
stimulate sustainable and inclusive economic growth
and establish the conditions necessary for a better life.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

19-00687
