United Nations

S/PV.6197

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6197th meeting
Thursday, 8 October 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1872 (2009) (S/2009/503)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-54835 (E)

*0954835*

S/PV.6197

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1872
(2009) (S/2009/503)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Omaar
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Mr. Craig Boyd, Director of the United Nations
Support Office for the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/503, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1872 (2009).
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Mr. Craig Boyd. I now give
the floor to Mr. Pascoe.

2

Mr. Pascoe: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to introduce the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/503).
As we all know, after almost two decades of
armed confrontation, violence and upheavals, stability
will not come overnight to Somalia. However, we
have, in the Djibouti Agreement, a structure that
provides a path to follow, as the Government,
supported by the international community, moves
towards restoring peace and security.
In the report under consideration, the SecretaryGeneral emphasizes that the key priority of the
international community should remain to support the
Government in the areas of security, political dialogue,
piracy, development and humanitarian assistance. I will
now briefly touch on progress in those areas.
First, on security, our focus has been to enable
the Government to strengthen its security measures and
structures. The past few months have not been easy. No
one could have expected that they would be. The
Government has overcome repeated attacks by foreignfunded, heavily armed groups. Police and troops loyal
to the Government are being trained, thanks to the
international community’s commitment and support.
There is slow but notable progress towards stability.
The determined commitment of the African Union and
its Mission in Somalia to remain fully focused on the
country has been crucial. It is all the more impressive
given the suicide bombing last month at the Mission’s
headquarters in Mogadishu.
A top priority at the present time is to support the
Government’s efforts to maintain security. There must
be financial support for the Government through the
Joint Security Committee. Training initiatives by
Member States are, of course, welcome, but they must
be well coordinated. I therefore request that all donors
work thorough the Joint Security Committee and with
the United Nations in order to ensure that the efforts of
all contribute to our shared goals. In that regard, we
should recognize the significant strides now being
made by the Government itself towards managing its
resources.
Speed is the most critical element with regard to
the international community’s assistance in the area of
security. Money received today in Somalia will have a
far greater impact on stability than that which arrives
in three months’ time. Extremely generous pledges
were made at the summit in Brussels in April. They
09-54835

S/PV.6197

need to be fulfilled immediately. Under-SecretaryGeneral Malcorra and I will host a meeting tomorrow
with key donors to assess the situation regarding the
fulfilment of pledges that were made in Brussels.
In order to speed up the process, I would like to
suggest that, in addition to contributing to the trust
funds, some development partners could start
implementing direct bilateral economic and financial
cooperation with Somalia. We expect some countries to
begin to implement such bilateral cooperation in the
near future. The contract signed by the Somali
Government with an internationally recognized
auditing firm should be fully used to increase the
transparency and confidence in the use of such
funding.
There is also an urgent need to mobilize and
deliver additional resources to the African Union and
its Mission in Somalia. The Department of Field
Support is doing an excellent job in providing
equipment and other logistical support through the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
(UNSOA). The representative of that Department will
give the Council more details on that following my
briefing.
On the political level, the Government continues
its openness to dialogue in Somalia with all parties
ready to commit themselves to peace. The United
Nations and members of the international community
support that approach and have encouraged internal
political dialogue. Meanwhile, Somaliland has again
demonstrated its long tradition of resolving peacefully
its internal political disputes.
To enable us to support the Government’s efforts
at political dialogue, we are increasing the number of
visits to Mogadishu by senior staff of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS). We
must also continue to work towards a significant
presence on the ground. Establishing a secure facility
for the international community’s representatives in
Mogadishu remains one of our top priorities. Moving
part of our operations from Nairobi to Mogadishu will
greatly add to our effectiveness and credibility, as we
join representatives of the African Union, the League
of Arab States, Libya and Yemen, who are already in
Mogadishu.
We also continue to work closely with, and
provide assistance to, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, which is the African organization for

09-54835

the region and can wield considerable influence on
local and regional actors, thus performing an essential
role in increasing stability in Somalia.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia worsened
dramatically in the reporting period due to intensified
fighting in Mogadishu, growing insecurity in much of
southern and central Somalia, and a deepening drought.
In August 2009, the latest United Nations food security
assessment calculated that some 3.7 million people, or
50 per cent of the population of Somalia, are in need of
livelihood and humanitarian support, up from
3.2 million in January 2009.
The World Food Programme (WFP) urgently
requires $217 million to cover the shortfalls of 216,000
metric tons of food from September 2009 through
March 2010. WFP is running out of food to feed its
3.3 million planned beneficiaries, with limited shortfalls
having begun in September. Water, sanitation and
health activities also remain seriously underfunded at
only 19 per cent.
In addition to humanitarian assistance, there is a
need for development assistance to begin the
reconstruction of Somalia. The efforts of the
international community should be focused on building
institutions that can deliver goods and services to the
Somali people and begin the process of weaning
Somalia off reliance on humanitarian assistance. With
improved security and political dialogue, the
entrepreneurship of many Somalis will be fully
exploited for the success of the country.
On piracy, we would like to praise once again the
critical role played by the international maritime
presence off Somalia’s coast. We thank the
Government of Japan for facilitating the fourth meeting
of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which was held in New York on 10 September. During
that meeting, it was again recognized that the core of
the problem is the lack of security on land.
In this regard, it is critical that we strengthen the
central Government and the regional authorities and
help to provide economic opportunities for fishing
communities and other rural populations. Assisting
Somalia to establish and train a coast guard and rebuild
its navy will, of course, be essential over the long run.
The recent agreement between the Transitional Federal
Government and the Puntland authorities is a step in
the right direction and deserves our assistance. We

3

S/PV.6197

continue to support efforts to prosecute suspected
pirates by regional countries.
The United Nations is in the process of
establishing a trust fund for anti-piracy activities, the
terms of reference of which were approved by the
Contact Group. I urge all Member States, organizations
and the private sector to contribute to the trust fund. In
the meantime, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the International Maritime Organization, the
Office of Legal Affairs and UNPOS continue to work
closely with the international community and the
Somali Government in the fight against piracy off the
coast of Somalia. In addition to capacity-building, our
work includes developing guidance circulars for
Governments and ship owners, ship operators and
masters; providing an intergovernmental forum for
discussions and negotiations on issues relating to the
safety and security of international navigation; and
reporting on incidents of piracy and armed robbery
against ships.
After years of conflict, peace will not come to
Somalia overnight. Stability must be promoted,
national and external spoilers must be neutralized.
Targeted sanctions can be one effective way to deal
with the spoilers. Our approach must be flexible to
support the process and to be able to include people on
and remove them from the list as appropriate, so that
the list can fulfil its political role.

be provided in an integrated manner, which combines
voluntary contributions to United Nations trust funds,
ongoing direct bilateral support to AMISOM and the
Government of Somalia, and the implementation of the
United Nations support package to AMISOM that is
funded through assessed contributions.
Building on the success of the Somalia donors
conference held in Brussels in April, steps are being
taken to finalize all of the confirmed pledges, which in
total amount to approximately $200 million. As
previously reported, a critical gap remains between the
confirmed pledges and the actual donor disbursements.
Therefore, a follow-up meeting to the donors
conference will be organized for tomorrow, 9 October,
to finalize contributions against the pledges made in
Brussels in April.
Regarding the Trust Fund for AMISOM, we are
pleased to advise that contributions now stand at
almost $25 million, up from the $15 million dollars
reported to the Council in July. This represents 80 per
cent of total pledges, and discussions are under way to
finalize the remainder of the pending contributions.

Mr. Boyd: I have the honour to brief the Council
on behalf of Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra, who is regrettably unable to participate, due
to illness. Please accept her sincerest apologies.

Furthermore, the African Union and AMISOM
have in recent days finalized the strategic governance
mechanism that is necessary to ensure the adequate
management and assignment of the available funds to
designated priorities. Consequently, we anticipate that
expenditure from the Trust Fund will commence
shortly. AMISOM has determined that the initial
priorities will focus on reimbursement for contingentowned equipment that is of a non-lethal nature,
implementation of a public information and radio
broadcasting capability in Mogadishu, and the payment
of medical services costs that were incurred prior to the
delivery of the United Nations logistics support
package. We wish to thank the donors for their
valuable contributions and also to state that we would
greatly welcome any additional pledges that would
ensure the sustainability of this support.

Resolution 1863 (2009), adopted in January,
endorsed the Secretary-General’s proposed strategy for
Somalia, including the provision of a United Nations
support package for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the strengthening of
Somalia’s security sector. The need for the
continuation of this approach and the provision of
logistics support was further reinforced by this Council
in its resolution 1872 (2009). This support continues to

The current military strength of AMISOM in
Mogadishu stands at about 5,200 troops, or 65 per cent
of the full mandated force of 8,000 soldiers. Burundi
and Uganda have each deployed three battalions, and
both countries have also offered to provide an
additional — or fourth — battalion. These increases,
together with the offer of Djibouti to contribute a
special forces unit of 4,000, will bring AMISOM very
close to its full mandated strength.

Once again, I want to thank the Council for
turning its attention to the critical topic of Somalia. It
is crucial that we help this country succeed, and the
Council’s role is of course essential to that success.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing. I now give the floor to Mr. Boyd.

4

09-54835

S/PV.6197

I would like to take this opportunity to brief the
Council on the key achievements and the progress in
the provision of the United Nations support package.
The General Assembly approved funding of
$139 million in June 2009 and the Department of Field
Support, through the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM (UNSOA), has now initiated the delivery of
the support package.
In late August, AMISOM troops in Mogadishu
commenced consuming United Nations-provided fresh
food. The contractor provides the food in Mombasa,
Kenya, and UNSOA then arranges for the regular
shipment of the consignments to Mogadishu, where it
is stored in a centralized refrigerated facility before
being issued to the contingent kitchens on a once- or
twice-daily basis. A fuel contract has been awarded and
the Somalia-based vendor will commence delivery
shortly.
Procurement action for aero-medical evacuation
services is almost complete and the contract will be
awarded by the end of October. United Nations
contracts are already in place with various hospitals in
Nairobi. Construction services contracts for mission
headquarters, a level II medical facility and the
erection of prefabricated structures for offices,
accommodations and ablutions and sanitation systems
should be approved shortly.
Members of the Council will recall that the
interim life-support supplies for AMISOM were
originally supplied by a Member State and its vendor.
Much of that effort was focused on providing the
services I have just mentioned — food, fuel and
medical services. As the United Nations support
arrangements come into effect, we are progressively
phasing down the support being received from the
Member State and its vendor.
In addition to transferring the life-support
supplies to United Nations arrangements, we have
made some progress in establishing other United
Nations-provided services. A strategic communications
network has been established that now links the
AMISOM Force Headquarters in Mogadishu with
AMISOM Mission Headquarters and the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA) in
Nairobi. This network provides AMISOM with a
relatively secure communications link, which for the
first time since the Force was deployed to Mogadishu

09-54835

is no longer reliant on Somali-based commercial
providers.
Maritime vessels have been contracted to provide
sea freight services between Mombasa and Mogadishu,
with four voyages having been successfully completed
in the last two months. I wish to acknowledge and
extend our appreciation to the international Maritime
Task Force, especially Operation Atalanta, for the escort
and security assistance offered to those activities. Since
mid-August, United Nations-owned equipment worth
$7 million has been consigned to Mogadishu on those
vessels. Those consignments included communications
and radio broadcast equipment, field defence stores,
critical medical equipment and pharmaceuticals,
airport fire-fighting capacities, prefabricated buildings,
generators, armoured vehicles and a range of
engineering equipment intended to assist AMISOM in
improving its security and living conditions.
Each of these consignments has been conducted
in a scheduled manner so as to ensure that valuable
equipment is not merely stockpiled in Mogadishu but
has a planned and immediate use. In addition, most
consignments are normally preceded by training, in
Entebbe or Mombasa, to prepare AMISOM troops to
operate and maintain the United Nations-owned
equipment, as well as to instruct the troops on United
Nations accountability and stock-control procedures.
To implement those supply arrangements in a timely
manner, UNSOA has leased a commercial property in
Mombasa to function as a temporary logistics depot,
while work is proceeding to prepare the site that the
Government of Kenya has kindly granted for United
Nations use.
In the immediate aftermath of the 17 September
suicide attacks, UNSOA was well placed to respond
rapidly to the call for assistance. Through the prompt
arrangement of flights, ambulances and hospitalization
it was possible to evacuate most of the critically
injured to higher-level medical facilities in Nairobi
within less than eight hours of the attacks. The
remaining seriously injured and the deceased were
transported promptly the next morning to Nairobi and
their respective home countries. On this tragic subject,
I would like to acknowledge and extend our
appreciation for the assistance that France provided by
assigning an aircraft to assist with the medical
evacuation operation. Allow me also to express my
sincere condolences to the families of the AMISOM
soldiers who lost their lives during these attacks.

5

S/PV.6197

Further to the signature of the Memorandum of
Understanding with the African Union on 12 July,
support implementation agreements are being finalized
with AMISOM to formally specify and define the
support arrangements and mutual responsibilities for
the delivery of the United Nations package.
Arrangements with the United Nations Office in
Nairobi for the provision of office accommodation are
now complete, and UNSOA has recently occupied
offices in a new, prefabricated complex within the
United Nations compound. By the end of October, the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS)
will co-locate in buildings adjoining UNSOA. Finally,
an agreement with the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia has also been developed to
allow both UNSOA and UNPOS to conduct their work
in the country, and that document is awaiting final
approval and signature.
Each of the four maritime vessels that have
transported UNSOA consignments to AMISOM has
been attacked. Three were subjected to mortar attacks
in Mogadishu harbour, and one was the target of an
unsuccessful pirate attack. In addition, on 17 September
and immediately following the two vehicle-borne
suicide attacks, four AMISOM soldiers from Uganda
lost their lives during a mortar attack on the UNSOAestablished centralized food-handling setup.
The Department of Field Support is fully
committed to supporting AMISOM, but Mogadishu is a
particularly challenging environment, and continued
attacks against AMISOM facilities and United Nationscontracted ships will impact and potentially slow our
capacity to deliver the mandated support package. In
recent months, limited numbers of UNSOA
international staff have visited most of the AMISOM
sites for short periods. UNSOA will maximize the use
of AMISOM military personnel to assist in delivering
essential United Nations support services, until the
security situation allows more effective use of United
Nations contractors and civilian staff.
In conclusion, I would like to salute AMISOM
for the commitment and resilience of its personnel,
particularly the troops from Burundi and Uganda.
Despite constant and extreme threats, they continue to
resolutely perform their mandated tasks. Again, I
express my condolences to the families of the
deceased, and note that the supreme sacrifice made by
those 17 soldiers reminds us of the very real urgency of

6

providing timely and adequate support to the AMISOM
forces in Mogadishu.
I would also like to report that, in providing the
support to AMISOM as mandated by this Council,
UNSOA maintains very close working relationships
with the AMISOM Mission and Force Headquarters.
The tragic attacks of 17 September demonstrated that
UNSOA and AMISOM are now better coordinated and
are working increasingly well together. I would also
like to express appreciation to the Government of
Kenya for the full support and cooperation it has
extended to UNSOA. In addition to the support
provided by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
customs authorities and other Government agencies,
the Kenyan Government recently made available
10 acres of land adjacent to Mombasa airport for the
establishment of a logistics support base. Work is
under way to conclude the agreement with the Kenyan
Government and begin work at the new site.
Finally, I would like to express my appreciation
to the Council for its support of UNSOA. Its continued
support and understanding, particularly in view of the
difficult situation in Somalia, is highly appreciated.
The President: I thank Mr. Boyd for his briefing.
I will now give the floor to members of the Council
who wish to make statements. I give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I start
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of this Council, my first chance to do so. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
and Mr. Boyd for their briefings, and the SecretaryGeneral for his latest comprehensive report
(S/2009/503).
We are very grateful for the hard work of the
United Nations Secretariat, the Special Representative
and his team, in very difficult circumstances, because
Somalia has been one of the most difficult issues on
the Council’s agenda during my two-and-a-bit years
here. The Council has taken some significant steps in
the past few months towards a more stable Somalia,
and we welcome Under-Secretary-General Pascoe’s
judgement that, however slowly, Somalia is moving in
the right direction. Particularly notable is the
programme support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and the work of the Department
of Field Support in delivering that package is
admirable and especially welcome.

09-54835

S/PV.6197

I believe that we have the right strategy in place
now — the Djibouti Agreement, the presence of
AMISOM supported by the United Nations,
international support for the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and its security forces, and the
engagement of the United Nations on the political and
humanitarian aspects. It is now a question of seeing
that strategy through. However, as we all know, the
situation in Somalia remains extremely fragile. As the
Secretary-General’s report sets out, we have to
intensify implementation on all strands of our strategy.
First, on the humanitarian side, the situation
remains deeply disturbing. As Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe reported, over 50 per cent of the population
now needs assistance. The United Kingdom has
committed a further £2 million to addressing urgent
humanitarian needs there, on top of our previous
commitments, and the Council needs to continue to
support the TFG and the United Nations agencies able
to operate in Somalia in delivering basic security, food
and health care to the Somali people.
Secondly, we need to sustain international
support for the TFG and its efforts to engage in
dialogue and reconciliation. The Transitional Federal
Government needs to extend its influence through
reconciliation with groups still outside the broad
coalition that is now backing it. This means inclusive
politics at the national, regional and local levels, and
the international community must play its part by
disbursing the funds pledged in Brussels in April.
In line with resolution 1844 (2008), it is
important that all States support the Djibouti process
and the TFG as the legitimate Government of Somalia.
The United Kingdom is concerned at the evidence in
the latest report from the Somalia Monitoring Group
that Eritrea has provided support to those opposing the
TFG in Somalia, in breach of United Nations
resolutions and the United Nations arms embargo.
Leaders of the African Union have requested the
Security Council to impose sanctions on Eritrea in
response. The United Kingdom stands ready to support
such action. The Council will need to give serious
consideration to the African Union’s request over the
coming weeks. The Council’s resolutions, including
resolution 1862 (2009) on Djibouti, must be upheld
and the stability of Somalia must be promoted.
Thirdly, we believe that the Council should
maintain its support for AMISOM, which is playing a

09-54835

critical role in supporting the TFG. The United
Kingdom also urges Member States to provide further
contributions to the AMISOM Trust Fund. The United
Nations Political Office for Somalia should continue to
increase its presence in that country as the security
situation allows. We welcome the further details that
the Under-Secretary-General has given us today on that.
I pay tribute to the role that Uganda and Burundi
are playing in AMISOM, a difficult operation under
difficult circumstances. We condemn the recent attacks
in Mogadishu and join others in offering our sympathy
to the Governments and condolences to the families of
those killed and injured.
Lastly, the Council must continue to play its part
in addressing the threat from piracy, including by
renewing the legal authority for operations against
pirates later this year. The long-term solution to piracy
can come only by re-establishing the rule of law in
Somalia, but in the short term active counter-piracy
operations are essential to deterring and containing the
problem and to protecting the sea lanes around the
Horn of Africa.
The Council has taken significant steps over the
past few months to improve the prospects for a more
stable Somalia. The coming months now need to be
used to make sure that these actions are translated into
tangible improvements in the lives of the people of the
country. The conflict in Somalia remains one of the
most troubling in Africa; resolving it and maintaining
stability will remain among the biggest challenges to
the Security Council over the coming months and years.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I should
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for their briefings. Let me also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Somalia to
the Council today.
The United States continues to watch events in
Somalia with concern. We believe that the key to longterm peace and stability lies in the establishment of
effective governance based on the process of inclusive
political dialogue and reconciliation among those
committed to peace. As such, the United States
applauds the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
for its recent efforts, including new Cabinet
appointments that bring greater experience and
expertise into key ministries. We see the TFG’s
continuing work to reach out to armed elements in
order to bring them into the Djibouti peace process as

7

S/PV.6197

another sign of progress. We also welcome other recent
developments, including the creation of a commission
for security and pacification to reform the TFG’s
security forces and law enforcement agencies, and the
designation of the Minister of Women’s Development
as the TFG’s focal point for human rights.
Unfortunately, this is only part of the picture. As
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/503) shows,
Somalia still endures persistent insecurity. The United
States, along with others, condemns in the strongest
terms the continuing military offensives against the
TFG and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), including the 17 September attacks by
Al-Shabaab against AMISOM headquarters that killed
21 people. We express our sincere condolences to the
Ugandan and Burundian people for those who were
lost, and our hopes for a full and swift recovery for
those who were wounded.
Al-Shabaab and other extremist groups fuelled by
outside actors have caused numerous deaths and
violated the rights of Somali citizens with impunity,
including by assaulting, detaining and illegally
arresting civilians. The issue of outside actors is a
serious one. The Somalia sanctions Committee’s
Monitoring Group has reported that Eritrea has
provided political, financial and military support to
armed opposition groups in Somalia. The efforts of the
international community to engage the Eritrean
Government on its regional relations have been
rebuffed. It is time for the international community to
consider ways to address Eritrea’s destabilizing impact
on Somalia and the region.

security and police forces in order to ensure stronger,
more effective forces.
The devastating humanitarian situation in
Somalia caused by violence is now being worsened by
the deepening drought in the country’s central and
northern regions. Ongoing fighting endangers the
delivery of food and other humanitarian aid to some
3.7 million Somalis in need of assistance. With dismay,
we note that in July supplies to treat and prevent
malnutrition in 85,000 children Somali children were
delayed due to security concerns. Aid workers have
also found themselves in danger. The United States
denounces the violence against humanitarian agencies
and their staff. We call for the immediate and
unconditional release of those aid workers still held by
armed groups in Somalia.
Piracy continues to be an obstacle to the delivery
of assistance. International efforts to prosecute
suspected pirates should be strengthened and
broadened to ensure an environment in which aid and
supplies can be transported safely.
The United States remains the largest bilateral
donor of humanitarian assistance to Somalia, having
provided more than $150 million in food and non-food
emergency assistance in the past fiscal year. We are
concerned, however, about reports of diversions of
humanitarian assistance by Al-Shabaab — diversions
that hurt the people of Somalia but strengthen
Al-Shabaab in its war against the TFG. We have
therefore reviewed our emergency programmes to
ensure that we are doing all that we can to help the
people of Somalia, and have asked our implementing
partners to exercise increased diligence to avoid such
diversions.

Against that backdrop, support for the TFG and
AMISOM should be central to our support for the
Somali peace process. AMISOM has demonstrated an
impressive ability to protect strategic positions under
sustained attack by insurgents, and we commend its
personnel for their heroism. The United States strongly
supports funding a logistical support package for
AMISOM, and my Government will continue to
provide equipment and training to AMISOM troopcontributing countries.

Mr. Apakan (Turkey): We thank UnderSecretary-General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for their
comprehensive briefings. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/503).

At the same time, we must work to improve
Somalia’s domestic security sector. The SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights the need to harmonize the
content and duration of training for TFG troops. With
this in mind, we recommend greater coordination of
international efforts to train and equip the TFG’s

As we indicated during our deliberations in July,
Somalia is passing through a very delicate period.
Developments on the ground have not yet reached an
irreversible point at which we can say that the
authority of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in and around the capital has been consolidated.

8

The United States looks forward to continuing to
work with the United Nations and all Member States to
forge a stable, secure and more prosperous Somalia.

09-54835

S/PV.6197

Turkey fully supports the Transitional Federal
Government as the only legitimate authority in
Somalia. We welcome the outreach policy pursued by
the Government vis-à-vis the opposition groups. We
believe that it is incumbent on us to continuously
appeal to all groups within and outside Somalia and
convince them that there is no military solution to the
Somali question and that the only road towards a
peaceful future is through the Djibouti peace process.
We commend the crucial role played by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
strongly condemn the attack perpetrated on
17 September against AMISOM soldiers. We express
once again our condolences to the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi. We encourage African Union
member States to join Uganda and Burundi in
strengthening AMISOM’s presence on the ground by
deploying troops. That would undoubtedly help to
extend AMISOM’s presence to key areas beyond
Mogadishu.
We also encourage the Department of Field
Support to continue its support for AMISOM, so that it
can effectively implement its mandate. To that end, the
expeditious deployment of the logistical support
package will be vital. We welcome the fact that it is a
high priority for the United Nations to improve the
living conditions of AMISOM personnel.
Likewise, it is imperative that the funds pledged
to AMISOM at the Brussels donors conference last
April be transferred without delay. In that context, we
welcome the convening of a follow-up conference
tomorrow. I can say that we have already transferred
half of the funds that we have pledged to AMISOM.
We have also made available part of our other pledge,
for the restructuring of the transitional security
institutions in Somalia. As we have indicated on
several previous occasions, we are prepared to train
AMISOM peacekeepers and Somali police officers in
Turkey, in cooperation with the United Nations.
Undoubtedly, it is of crucial importance that the
Somali security institutions be strengthened. In that
regard, we welcome the fact that Somalia’s Joint
Security Committee has held various meetings since
July. We encourage all Member States to interact with
the Committee with a view to supporting its efforts to
coordinate financial assistance for the private sector,
policy development and the reorganization of Somalia’s
security forces.

09-54835

We are concerned about the deterioration of the
security situation in and beyond Mogadishu, owing to
the continued fighting between the Government and the
insurgents. We would also like to join other members
of the Council in expressing our concern at the
worsening of the humanitarian situation in the country.
The fact that 50 per cent of the population is in need of
humanitarian support makes even more difficult the
work of the Government to consolidate its authority,
restore law and order, deliver administrative and other
basic services, and effectively manage the transition.
The sustained support of the international community
will be essential in that regard.
We are closely following the Secretariat’s work
on the plan for a future United Nations peacekeeping
operation to follow AMISOM, subject to a new
decision to be taken by the Security Council. Turkey
fully supports the three-phased approach of the
Secretary-General, as endorsed in Security Council
resolution 1872 (2009). We welcome the United
Nations efforts towards the implementation of that
incremental approach, the second stage of which calls
for the development of a light-footprint United Nations
presence in Mogadishu. We certainly understand the
prudent approach advised by the Secretary-General in
his report as regards the implementation of this phase,
especially when one considers that the security risk
assessed for Mogadishu continues to be high.
Finally, I have to say that we fully agree with our
British and American colleagues on the importance of
fighting against piracy off the coast of Somalia. Turkey
remains committed to contributing to the ongoing
international efforts in that direction.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for their informative
briefings this morning.
We are seriously concerned about the security
situation in Somalia. The continuing attacks against the
Transitional Federal Government by opposition groups
are worsening security and the humanitarian situation.
Japan condemns the attack on the headquarters of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in
Mogadishu on 17 September and expresses its heartfelt
sympathy to the victims and their families. We also pay
tribute to AMISOM for its dedicated efforts under very
difficult conditions.
We support the Secretary-General’s incremental
approach to the implementation of Security Council

9

S/PV.6197

resolution 1872 (2009) on the basis of a three-stage
approach. The first stage is the reinforcement of
AMISOM and the provision of the requisite field
support. We are very pleased that this effort is being
made to reach the authorized strength of the Mission
and achieve stability, and we commend in particular
the recent deployment of an additional battalion by
Burundi. We also welcome the pledges of additional
troops made by Burundi and Uganda, as well as the
new pledge by Djibouti. We hope that those pledges
will be fulfilled. The African Union has a key role in
coordination, including logistical support, for countries
that have pledged to deploy troops on the ground.
We appreciate the Secretariat’s efforts, as
described by Mr. Boyd, in steadily implementing the
AMISOM logistical support package. We welcome in
particular the establishment of a secure strategic
communications network with Headquarters, as well as
the deployment of various types of support.
As for the second stage, we note that the
Secretariat has begun its preparations for the
establishment of a “light footprint” in Mogadishu.
However, it should be stressed that, for the actual
implementation of the second stage, essential
measures — namely, security facilities and antiterrorism measures — must be taken to ensure the
security of staff, which is key.
Insecurity remains the most critical challenge for
Somalia, so enhancing security is a matter of the
highest priority. Bilateral and multilateral support has
been provided to strengthen the Somali National
Security Forces and the Somali Police Force, and a
meeting has been convened between the Joint Security
Committee, the United Nations and the African Union.
It is important that this support will be provided in a
coordinated manner.
Japan commends the Government for its efforts to
promote the Djibouti process and reach out to
opposition groups. At the same time, we condemn the
continuing flow of external support to opposition
groups and criminal activities. We are ready to
participate in the work of the Somalia Sanctions
Committee to effectively implement Security Council
resolution 1844 (2008).
Together with strengthening security institutions,
it is necessary to support the capacity-building of the
Government and regional authorities. Japan welcomes
the signing of the agreement between the Government

10

and Puntland to strengthen cooperation in such fields
as institution-building, security and anti-piracy
operations.
At the same time, we are concerned about the
political instability in Somaliland created by the
election process. We hope that the tension among
parties will be contained. The political and economic
situations in these areas are, of course, divergent from
those in south-central Somalia, but the international
community should continue to support the stability of
Somalia as a whole by providing assistance that
corresponds to the needs in its various areas.
Japan welcomes the commendable efforts of
many countries to address the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. The Security Council has adopted
relevant resolutions, and the maritime operations
conducted by various countries and organizations has
made indispensable contributions.
As part of its efforts, Japan chaired the fourth
plenary meeting of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, as referred to by the UnderSecretary-General.
The
number
of
countries
participating in the Contact Group has increased
significantly, which is a clear sign that the engagement
of the international community is expanding. The
Contact Group agreed to establish a trust fund for the
prosecution of piracy and confirmed the need to
strengthen international organizations, such as the
International Maritime Organization, and the capacity
of States in the region. Such an effort would contribute
to the strengthening of regional and international
partnerships.
In conclusion, it is clear that the stability of
Somalia is essential to address the root causes of the
piracy issue. To that end, it is our hope that the Contact
Group on Piracy and the International Contact Group
on Somalia will promote information-sharing and
synergy for outreach activities.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We, too, are grateful to Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for their briefings.
We are seriously concerned by the acuteness of
the armed confrontation in Somalia and the general
security situation. The death on 17 September of 21
peacekeepers of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) gives rise to feelings of deep regret and
outrage. We express our sincere condolences in that

09-54835

S/PV.6197

regard. The combativeness of the unreconciled
opposition and the relentless attacks on Government
and AMISOM positions clearly lead to an atmosphere
of lawlessness, fear, and insecurity in the country, and
significantly complicate the actions of the Transitional
Federal Government to establish effective governance
throughout the country.
We believe that, despite the positive signs of the
temporary success in combating the insurgents and the
factional clashes within their ranks, unfortunately,
these trends do not seem to be irreversible. Armed
groups making their living from crime operate on the
majority of the national territory and many civilians as
well as United Nations and humanitarian personnel
suffer as a result. We are again forced to note that,
without serious and sustainable stabilization in the
field of security, it will be essentially impossible to
move significantly forward with the tasks of
normalizing the situation, State-building and resolving
issues in the economic and humanitarian fields.
Combating piracy off the coast of Somalia
remains a pressing task, and Russia is actively
participating in the efforts of the international
community in this area. Unfortunately, the ongoing
instability throughout the country significantly
contributes to the problem of piracy in the region. We
continue to believe that these issues must be resolved
in a comprehensive way. The international community
should expand its participation through agreed action
in the security field, including efforts on the part of the
European Union, African Union and other relevant
organizations focused on building the capacity of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia. Of
course, of equal importance are efforts to alleviate the
consequences of the humanitarian crisis, which only
contributes to the difficulties on the path to national
reconciliation.
Under the current conditions, it is clear that the
leading role in tackling the issue of strengthening
security falls to the African Union. We welcome the
decision of the leadership of Burundi to remain within
AMISOM, despite the losses that country sustained as
a result of the attack on Burundian peacekeepers.
Bringing the Mission rapidly up to strength, including
by ensuring sufficient logistical supplies, is of critical
importance to the effectiveness of this operation. At the
same time, we also believe that the AMISOM mandate
enshrined in resolution 1744 (2007) is sufficient to

09-54835

assist the Government of Somalia to resolve the
situation in the country.
One cannot but agree with the conclusion that the
conditions for a fully fledged United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia are regrettably not
yet present. There is not yet any peace to keep.
Nonetheless, we believe that it is necessary to continue
to work on the question of the possible deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation, as well as on
the modalities of integrating AMISOM into such an
operation.
Russia is a consistent advocate of achieving
sustainable peace and national reconciliation in
Somalia on the basis of the Djibouti Agreement in the
interest of strengthening stability and security
throughout the region. The peace process requires the
mobilization of efforts first and foremost by the
Somalis themselves and the involvement of all main
political forces that are not tainted by having
conducted terrorist crimes. We support the efforts of
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and the national
Government of Somalia in this area. We expect these
efforts to be stepped up to provide sustainability to the
political process.
An important precondition for the success of a
settlement in Somalia and the normalization of the
situation in the country as a whole is broad support for
the Somali Government, first and foremost from
neighbouring countries. We call upon the States of the
region not to allow the flow of foreign mercenaries and
arms into Somalia in violation of the relevant sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council. We believe
that there is a need to take additional steps to
strengthen that regime.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s meeting.
We welcome the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral on recent developments in the situation in
Somalia (S/2009/503). We also thank Mr. Pascoe and
Mr. Boyd for their briefings. We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia.
The report of the Secretary-General and the
briefings by the Secretariat indicate that the current
situation in Somalia remains grave, the security
situation is deteriorating, the political process lacks
momentum and the humanitarian crises is worsening.

11

S/PV.6197

After 18 years of civil war, peacebuilding in Somalia
remains an arduous and difficult task. This is
unfortunate both for Somalia and for the international
community. We are seriously concerned by the current
situation in Somalia. We believe that halting violent
conflicts and ethnic disputes, achieving national
reconciliation
and
embarking
upon
national
reconstruction is a political choice that must be made
by all political forces in Somalia.
We hope that neighbouring countries, regional
organizations and the international community will act
immediately and use their influence and leverage to
avert the further deterioration of the situation in
Somalia. We call on all parties in Somalia to pursue the
national reconciliation dialogue. We support the
consolidation of the Djibouti peace process and call on
all parties concerned to join it. We condemn the recent
attacks on the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, civilians and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We urge the armed factions in
Somalia to lay down their weapons immediately and
seek to settle the issue by political means.
The question of Somalia has already posed
serious challenges to the Horn of Africa, as well as to
international peace and security. We call on all parties
to use their influence fully and to focus on persuasion
and the promotion of dialogue so as to make timely and
substantive progress in the Somali peace process.
We greatly appreciate the positive role played by
AMISOM in stabilizing the situation in Somalia and
protecting its people in difficult and complex
circumstances. We especially appreciate the contribution
of troop-contributing countries such as Uganda and
Burundi. We condemn all violent activity against
AMISOM forces.
China has always maintained that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be deployed in
Somalia. We understand that the implementation of this
task still faces some obstacles. However, the
international community should not wait passively for
right conditions to arise. To achieve peace in Somalia,
the United Nations should play a greater role. We are
concerned by the serious difficulties raised for
AMISOM by the insufficient level of troops and
shortage of resources. We call on the Secretariat to
strengthen consultations with the African Union
Commission and to further explore ways to strengthen
AMISOM.

12

China has always maintained that the United
Nations and the Security Council in particular should
play a more positive role in the question of Somalia.
We call on the international community to step up the
implementation of commitments of assistance made to
the Government of Somalia and AMISOM.
On numerous occasions the Chinese Government
has made contributions to the African Union to support
peacekeeping operations in Somalia. We have also
provided logistical assistance to major troopcontributing
countries.
Recently
the Chinese
Government also provided the Government of Somalia
with $500,000 in cash and with malaria medication
valued at 1 million yuan. We have also agreed to cancel
large amounts of the debt owed by the Somali
Government.
The Chinese delegation is ready to join with other
members of the Council to continue to play a
constructive role in resolving the question of Somalia.
Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Pascoe and
Mr. Boyd for their briefings. We also welcome the
presence among us of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia.
Burkina Faso remains very concerned by the
security situation in Somalia, which is marked by
continued clashes between illegal armed groups and
Government forces. The violence has claimed many
lives — especially of civilians and political leaders.
Unfortunately, the 17 September attack against
AMISOM force headquarters, which claimed the lives
of a number of Burundian and Ugandan soldiers, has
just added to that list. We take this opportunity to
extend our heartfelt condolences to the Governments of
those two States and to AMISOM. We again condemn
this attack, which was carried out by the Al-Shabaab
Islamist rebels. Any form of violence directed against
peacekeeping
and
humanitarian
personnel
is
unacceptable. We await the results of the United
Nations investigation with great interest and hope that
the perpetrators will be found and made to pay for their
actions.
As my delegation noted during our previous
consideration of the situation in Somalia (see
S/PV.6173), the scale of the attacks and the intensity of
the clashes give credibility to the involvement of
foreign forces backing the insurgents with weapons,

09-54835

S/PV.6197

combatants and logistics. This is also confirmed by the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/503).
We recall that the African Union expressed its
serious concern regarding the growing presence of
foreign elements in Mogadishu and other areas of
Somalia and requested that the Security Council
impose sanctions against those opposing the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia. We hope that the
Council will follow up accordingly, including within
the framework of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia.
The already deplorable humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate as a result of the growing
insecurity, with the killing of humanitarian personnel
and ongoing threats of hostage-taking. Here, we pay
tribute to humanitarian and associated personnel for
their courage and resolve and again appeal to the
belligerents to guarantee their security. While we
understand the difficult situation facing their personnel
on the ground, we urge the humanitarian agencies to
remain present among the local populations to the
extent possible.
As concerns the political situation, Burkina Faso
reiterates its full support to the Transitional Federal
Government and welcomes its continuing presence in
Mogadishu and its efforts aimed at consolidating its
authority, especially in the security sphere. We are also
encouraged by the fact that the parliament continues to
meet in Mogadishu despite the heightened security
risks.
Burkina Faso welcomes President Sharif’s
renewed commitment to comprehensive implementation
of the Djibouti Agreement, which remains the only
relevant framework for a political settlement of the
Somali crisis. We encourage the country’s authorities
to continue their policy of dialogue and openness vis-àvis the rebel groups, with the aim of involving them in
the process of pacifying the country. The cooperation
agreement signed in June by Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a is
an important step forward, and we invite the other
armed groups to follow that example.
We take note of the efforts under way to
revitalize the High Level Committee responsible for
the coordination and application of the Djibouti
Agreement. Within this framework, it is urgent that the
pledges made by donors at the Brussels Conference be
fulfilled to ensure the strengthening of the Somali

09-54835

security forces, extension of State authority, promotion
of national reconciliation and management of the
transition process.
On the implementation of the three-phase
incremental approach for United Nations support for
Somalia, we congratulate the Secretariat for having
continued its cycle of missions despite very difficult
security conditions in the field. We encourage the
Secretariat to spare no effort to move as rapidly as
possible to the second phase. In our view, the rapid
provision by the United Nations of its support package
to AMISOM is the most urgent element, alongside
development of the national security strategy and
strengthening the security services. Again we pay
tribute to the Secretariat for its efforts and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, and his team for their
resolve alongside the Somali people despite the
difficulties they are experiencing.
We reiterate our gratitude to Uganda and to
Burundi for their invaluable contributions in the quest
for peace in Somalia. Given the severity of the
situation, we encourage the countries which have
already pledged troops to AMISOM to honour their
commitments in order to contribute to strengthening
the mission.
Burkina Faso continues to believe in a future of
peace, stability and prosperity for Somalia. This will
require continued commitment by all Somali actors and
the continued support of the international community,
in particular that of the Security Council.
Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for this morning’s briefings by UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe and by Mr. Craig Boyd,
as well as for the presence among us of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.
My delegation would like to begin by
acknowledging the intensive work of the Transitional
Federal Government in reaching out to opposition
groups, forging national reconciliation and ensuring the
security of the Somali population. The development of
a strategy of negotiation, persuasion and inclusion of
those groups in dialogue has borne fruit with the
agreement reached with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a. We
hope that in the future we will see more members of
the insurgency joining this process in order to achieve
a lasting political solution in Somalia.

13

S/PV.6197

In that context, we welcome the fact that the
pledges made in Brussels by the international
community are being disbursed, and we hope that very
soon the various financial mechanisms established for
cooperation with Somalia will receive the promised
funds. We believe that the Somaliland and Puntland
communities should also receive funds to enable them
to safeguard stability in their regions.

We also believe that, in addition to ensuring the
strengthening of the Government’s security institutions,
it is also urgent that we strengthen AMISOM. In that
regard, we would like to reiterate our gratitude to the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda for their
contributions to the Mission. We deeply regret the loss
of life resulting from recent attacks on AMISOM
facilities.

Likewise, we acknowledge the improved
administrative capacity of the Transitional Federal
Government. The establishment of effective governance
in Somalia is an essential basis for ensuring public
order. We believe that the international community and
institutions of the United Nations system should
continue to provide Somalia with the support necessary
for institutional-building, enhancing Government
capacity and improving infrastructure with a view to
ensuring a comprehensive approach to deal with the
humanitarian, political, security and development
issues at the root of the current crisis.

The impact of the unstable security situation on
the provision of humanitarian assistance within and
outside Mogadishu is a source of concern for my
delegation. The systematic looting of the compounds of
personnel providing humanitarian assistance coupled
with the ever-lengthening drought are worsening the
living conditions of more than 50 per cent of Somalia’s
population, which currently needs humanitarian
assistance and support to survive. We are especially
concerned about the increase in child malnutrition,
which today affects one in five children. It is therefore
urgent to ensure that there is adequate financing for
humanitarian and recovery programmes, as well as free
access for humanitarian assistance and an improvement
in the security conditions of humanitarian personnel in
Somalia.

These positive developments, however, cannot
lead us to ignore the escalating violence in Somalia and
the alarming decline in the humanitarian situation
during the period under review.
There have been attacks against the Transitional
Federal Government and AMISOM personnel, thefts at
United Nations facilities and widespread violence
against civilians by armed groups. We have also noted
the existence of criminal activities on the part of
domestic and foreign saboteurs, who take advantage of
the fragility in the country to further their smuggling
and trafficking in human beings and illegal drugs. All
those activities pose an ongoing threat to the Djibouti
peace process.
Against that backdrop, efforts should be stepped
up to continue to make progress in the parallel
equipping and training of Somali security forces to
enable them to take on responsibility for security in
their country, thereby contributing to finding a solution
to the fundamental problem in Somalia. In that regard,
we acknowledge the work done by the Transitional
Federal Government and AMISOM in setting up
transitional security institutions, developing the
national security strategy and improving the capacity
of other legal, judicial and public administration
institutions. In particular, we hope that work of the
Joint Security Committee will yield greater concrete
results in the future.

14

We condemn forced displacements and acts of
violence against civilians, whether due to or as a result
of clashes between Government forces and insurgent
groups. In that regard, we remind all the parties to the
conflict that they have an obligation to observe the
norms of international law, and especially those of
international humanitarian law. Given that combating
impunity should continue to be a priority for the
international community and for the authorities in
Somalia, we welcome the Government’s establishment
of a ministerial-level post for the coordination of
human rights.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our
support for the strategy drawn up by the SecretaryGeneral to address the crisis in Somalia. We would also
like to acknowledge the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, to further strengthen the political
process in especially difficult circumstances.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for
their respective briefings.
Austria reiterates its full support for the Djibouti
peace process and the Transitional Federal Government

09-54835

S/PV.6197

(TFG). Further efforts by the TFG to reach out to
opposition groups and to enhance its delivery of
governance are essential for progress in that process.
We urge all parties in Somalia to join the Djibouti
process and its structures. The Djibouti Peace
Agreement constitutes the only viable and legitimate
framework for achieving lasting peace in Somalia.
Austria condemns the attempts of extremists to
overthrow the TFG, as well as the terrorist attacks
against the TFG and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We are deeply worried about the
spoilers of the peace process and about foreign support
to the insurgents. We are ready to support measures
that effectively prevent support to insurgent groups. We
are equally concerned about continued criminal
activities, such as drug trafficking and arms smuggling,
which threaten peace in Somalia and the wider region.
We would like to express our appreciation to
Uganda and Burundi as troop-contributing countries to
AMISOM. The Mission remains a crucial factor for
stability in Somalia. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that it reach its mandated strength and that
it have the capabilities necessary to fulfil its mission.
We very much welcome recent pledges of additional
troops and the delivery of the support package by the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
(UNSOA). With a view to the efficient implementation
of international support to Somalia and AMISOM, we
would like to stress the importance of close
cooperation and coordination between UNSOA and the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS).
On behalf of my Government, I would like to
covey our condolences to the families, contingents and
Governments of those who have lost their lives in
terrorist attacks. The suicide attack against the
AMISOM force headquarters on 17 September was
especially heinous and vicious.
The development of Somali security forces is
another important contribution to stabilizing the
country. There needs to be an effective mechanism for
coordination between the TFG and the international
community. The Joint Security Committee and the
High Level Committee should serve as forums for
coordination based on a national strategy for the
reconstruction of Somalia.
We condemn the widespread human rights
violations and abuses by insurgents. Extrajudicial and
arbitrary executions, arrests and torture, as practiced by

09-54835

Al-Shabaab, must stop immediately, and those
responsible must be held accountable. We also reiterate
our condemnation of the recruitment of children by
armed groups, as well as our request to release them
immediately.
We warmly welcome the TFG’s decision to focus
on the protection of human rights as an essential
element for the process. In particular, we welcome the
designation of the Minister for Women’s Development
as the TFG’s focal point on human rights, as well as
the draft framework for technical cooperation in the
area of human rights with UNPOS and the continued
efforts to address impunity.
We are very concerned about the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Somalia, where 3.7 million
people now depend upon food aid. The situation of
1.5 million internally displaced persons is exacerbated
by a worsening security situation, on the one hand, and
the drought in some parts of the country, on the other.
In addition, humanitarian workers are increasingly the
target of insurgents, making it more difficult for them
to deliver much-needed help.
The European Union (EU) is engaged in Somalia
through its institutions and its member States. The EU
is currently developing a comprehensive strategy on
how to step up that engagement. An exploratory
mission visited the region in early September and has
provided parameters for a coherent strategic framework
linking reconciliation, security and development.
With regard to piracy off the coast of Somalia,
Austria would like to underscore that the efforts of a
great number of international actors, including the EU
through its Operation Atalanta, to curb piracy off the
Horn of Africa cannot meet with lasting success
without addressing its root causes and establishing the
rule of law in Somalia.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the valuable information provided by
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn
Pascoe and by Mr. Craig Boyd, Director of United
Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). We also commend the valuable
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, Ambassador Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah. Similarly, we welcome the presence among
us at today’s meeting of Ambassador Elmi Ahmed
Duale, Permanent Representative of Somalia.

15

S/PV.6197

Given the alarming situation of insecurity in
Somalia — and indeed the region — Mexico would
like to acknowledge the valuable contributions of the
United Nations and the African Union, through
AMISON, aimed at ensuring stability on the ground
and the basic conditions necessary to strengthen the
Government in Somalia. We also acknowledge the
efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to
promote national reconciliation and dialogue with
opposition groups in accordance with the principles of
the Djibouti Peace Agreement, as well as to improve
the Government’s capacities and lay the foundations
for a national security mechanism.
However, we are concerned mainly by the
following aspects: the increasing insecurity in the
entire territory, including the country’s coasts; the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and of
human rights; and growing organized crime. It is clear
that the lack of security is the most serious problem
that Somalia faces. It is having a constant impact on
the Government’s capacity and its prospect for future
viability. Likewise, the number of victims among the
civilian population, including women and children,
continues to grow day by day.
We are particularly concerned about the
vulnerability of the forces of the Transitional Federal
Government and of AMISOM in the face of terrorist
attacks, such as the attack of 17 September against
AMISOM headquarters, which left 21 people dead and
40 wounded. We extend our acknowledgement to the
troops of Burundi and Uganda and to their
Governments for their steadfast commitment. But we
should also be very clear: the incident of 17 September
should not have happened. It concerns us that security
is not guaranteed, even in the area under AMISOM’s
control, which portends extremely badly for the future.

Mexico recently took part in the fourth meeting of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
where the large number of the participating countries
became aware of the impact of piracy on the arms
embargo and on access for humanitarian aid.
My delegation expresses its deep concern
regarding the alarming humanitarian situation in
Somalia, which has drastically worsened. The lack of
security that affects the humanitarian operations
throughout the country is unacceptable. The upsurge in
looting and attacks on humanitarian missions, and in
killings, abductions and threats against humanitarian
personnel, together with scant progress on the ground,
mean that almost 50 per cent of Somalia’s population
remains dependent on humanitarian assistance, which
it is increasingly difficult to deliver.
We urgently call for all parties to the conflict to
comply with international human rights standards and
with international humanitarian law and to protect the
civilian population, including aid personnel. We also
underscore the vital importance of ensuring secure and
unrestricted access to humanitarian assistance. In that
regard, we commend all efforts on the part of the
Transitional Federal Government to ensure that the
civilian population, in particular the most vulnerable,
receive the inputs and services most essential to their
survival, such as those provided by the World Food
Programme. Press reports that such provisions have at
times been traded illegally for commercial ends are of
great concern. Moreover, we are equally concerned by
the human rights situation in the southern and central
areas, the continuing impunity in that regard in the
entire country, and the recruitment of children by
armed groups.

We consider it of the greatest importance that the
Government of Somalia make strengthening the
National Security Forces and planning for
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
operations of former insurgents a priority. In that
regard, we commend the work of the recently
established Joint Security Committee given its
importance as a political forum to foster the
development of the national security strategy.

My delegation is aware that the lack of stability
hinders the progress needed in the economic and social
spheres. The piracy and the organized crime activities
in the Horn of Africa, in particular the trafficking of
drugs and persons and the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, are severe obstacles to improving
security in the country. We believe it necessary to seek
cooperation mechanisms to strengthen the ability of the
region’s authorities to tackle such threats and to regain
control of strategic points, such as the sea ports and
airports.

Turning to the fight against piracy, we
acknowledge the international efforts to counter that
threat to the security and the economy of the region.

Mexico backs the importance of the continuing
focus on deployment of the United Nations presence in
Mogadishu, particularly in the light of the ongoing lack

16

09-54835

S/PV.6197

of security in that capital. We commend the work of all
the Organization’s agencies involved in that task, and
we trust that the efforts on the political and security
fronts will produce the necessary results to advance
that phase.
Lastly, Mexico, as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
751 (1992) concerning Somalia, believes it important
to reiterate its appeal to the international community, in
particular the countries of the region, to support the
independent work of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and to cooperate in the implementation of its mandate.
We are aware that the arms embargo and the
targeted sanctions regime are key instruments in the
peace process in Somalia, which, given their technical
nature, have a political impact that can benefit the
peace process as a whole. On 21 October, the
Committee will receive the Monitoring Group’s midterm report, which the members of the Committee will
analyse and report on to the Council, together with the
other developments in the Committee’s work.
Lastly, in our delegation’s view, the possible
implementation of the sanctions by the Security
Council should be consistent with the approach that we
wish to pursue not only in Somalia but also in the
subregion, taking into account the complexity of the
situation and its many different political actors.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by conveying my gratitude to Mr. Lynn
Pascoe and Mr. Craig Boyd for their briefings. The
Transitional Federal Government has held fast in the
face of the attacks against it and has even retaken land,
in particular in Mogadishu. It has the full support of
the French authorities.
However, the situation remains very unstable.
The deadly attack on 17 September against the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) reminded us
that the insurgent forces still have strength. Moreover,
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, and
now 3.7 million people, or half of the Somali
population, depend on international humanitarian aid.
At the same time, repeated attacks against the United
Nations and the non-governmental organizations make
humanitarian work increasingly difficult and dangerous.
Nine humanitarian workers have lost their lives
working alongside the Somali population in 2009.
Thirteen others are being held against their will.

09-54835

This difficult situation requires a renewed
commitment by the international community. In his
most recent report (S/2009/503), the Secretary-General
recalls his incremental approach, which focuses first on
support for the Transitional Federal Government and
AMISOM. That strategy, which the Security Council
backed in resolutions 1863 (2009) and 1872 (2009), is
not in question. It is clear that neither security
conditions in the field nor positions held by various
stakeholders make it possible to deploy a United
Nations force. But the international community must
act with greater resolve within this framework.
Here, I shall touch on four issues. First, full
support is urgently needed for the Transitional Federal
Government. In April, during the Brussels Conference
we collectively committed ourselves to provide such
support. That support must be political and financial,
but also operational and specific. That is why France,
within the framework of resolution 1872 (2009), is
training a Somali battalion in Djibouti: 150 soldiers
have already been trained and have returned to
Somalia, and a further 350 have just begun the training
programme. On 29 September, as noted by my Austrian
colleague, European Union Defence Ministers stated
their interest in a European training mission to take
place in a third country. France welcomes the interest
recently shown by Germany and the Russian
Federation with respect to initiatives of that kind.
The Republic of Djibouti, for its part, is carrying
out similar training activities. Here, I play tribute to
Djibouti for its endeavours with respect to Somalia.
There is a need to help the Transitional Federal
Government strengthen the cohesiveness, discipline
and effectiveness of its forces, which, as my colleague
from Burkina Faso has stressed, are facing foreign
fighters who are among the most extreme. By restoring
basic public services in areas where it can ensure
security, the Transitional Federal Government will be
able to retain positive momentum. AMISOM, to be
sure, has an essential role to play in training troops in
Somalia and in helping ensure that troops trained
abroad get the follow-up they need and that they are
used in the optimal way.
It is absolutely necessary to back the Transitional
Federal Government, in spite of the risks involved. In
that context, my thoughts are with the French official
who was kidnapped in Mogadishu on 14 July, and who
is still being held in Somalia.

17

S/PV.6197

Secondly, we must, in parallel, continue to
support AMISOM. Like some of the colleagues who
have spoken before me, I pay tribute to bravery of the
troops from Burundi and Uganda, who every day carry
out dangerous work in an outstanding manner. France
once again extends its condolences to the Governments
of Uganda and Burundi on the losses they suffered as a
result of the heinous attack on 17 September against
the AMISOM force headquarters.
International assistance must continue, to ensure
that the African Union can achieve its objective of
deploying 8,000 troops. The European Union — the
largest financial partner of the African Union — is
playing an active role. France has done significant
work in the area of training AMISOM contingents and
it evacuated to Nairobi soldiers injured in the
17 September attack. I thank Mr. Boyd and his team for
having set up the logistical support package.
I wish, thirdly, to speak of the political aspect.
France welcomes the untiring efforts of President
Sharif in reaching out to groups not yet involved in the
reconciliation process. It is important for the Somali
Government to take every opportunity to continue to
expand the political space in Somalia. Only a political
solution will ultimately enable it to guarantee security
and stability there. Here, we note with satisfaction the
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ould Abdallah, to develop missions to
Mogadishu, carried out by the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia.
With respect to those who reject all dialogue,
France echoes the Secretary-General’s appeal to States,
organizations and individuals in a position to do so to
encourage them to join the peace process.
Finally, like most of my colleagues, I have
already stressed how difficult it is to deliver
international assistance to Somalia. In that context, it is
important that the international community remain
mobilized to combat the piracy that poses a threat to,
inter alia, vessels of the World Food Programme. Naval
assets have been deployed by many States and
organizations, including, first and foremost, the
European Union with its Operation Atalanta. In
addition, as my Japanese colleague mentioned, the
members of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia are working to complement military action
with civilian action, in order to help countries in the
region bring arrested pirates to justice. France

18

welcomes the Contact Group’s decision to ask the
Secretary-General to establish a trust fund for such
purposes.
In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah, and his team and to assure them of the
full support of France.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Mr. Craig Boyd, Director of United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), for their briefings. I also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/503) and the
participation in this meeting of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.
On 17 September we witnessed yet another
cowardly attack on AMISOM troops by those opposed
to a negotiated political process and a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Somalia. The attack
claimed the lives of 24 people, including peacekeepers
and civilians. Many more were injured.
Apart from this senseless killing of peacekeepers
and civilians, and as pointed out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the conflict continues to destroy lives.
Between 20 and 50 lives are lost every week as a result
of almost daily fighting, and thousands of people have
been displaced, thus worsening the humanitarian
situation. Furthermore, the conflict continues to have a
negative impact on the whole region, owing to the
proliferation of small arms and the disruption of
international trade as a result of piracy, and to pose a
threat to international peace and security.
Uganda reaffirms its support for the Djibouti
peace process, as it represents the best opportunity for
lasting peace in Somalia. We commend the efforts
made by the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to
advance the political process in the country, and we
support the continued commitment and efforts of
President Ahmed in reaching out to opposition groups
in the search for lasting peace. We welcome the
humanitarian assistance given to the country and the
support that has been extended to AMISOM. We call
upon the United Nations and other partners to enhance
their support to enable AMISOM to effectively
implement its mandate. We also call upon African
Union member States to provide additional personnel
to enable AMISOM to reach its authorized capacity of
8,000 troops.

09-54835

S/PV.6197

While we commend the progress made by the
TFG in the political process and the support extended
to the Government and to AMISOM, the recent attack
on peacekeepers and the continued killing and
displacement of civilians are reminders that the
international community needs to do more. Al-Shabaab
and other extremist groups continue to control parts of
Mogadishu and the countryside, wreak havoc on
society and hold the people of Somalia hostage to their
extremist views.
In view of the magnitude of the challenges in
Somalia, we need to ask ourselves if the present
strategy of adopting an incremental approach is solving
the problem in the country. Is the current approach
commensurate with the gravity of the situation on the
ground? The primary responsibility for maintaining
peace and stability in Somalia ultimately lies with the
TFG and the people of Somalia. However, the
commitment and support of the United Nations, the
African Union and subregional actors such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development are
essential to supporting the TFG in assuming its role
effectively.

all the spoilers in Somalia who continue to flout the
resolutions and decisions of the Council, to destabilize
the country and the region and to pose a threat to
international peace and security.
Lastly, we thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, and the staff of
the United Nations agencies and humanitarian agencies
for the support they have extended to the Somali
people in the current circumstances.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd
for their remarks and introduction of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on Somalia (S/2009/503).
I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ould Abdallah for his dedication and
commitment in Somalia, as well as the tireless efforts
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nations
country team and other organizations operating in the
country under extremely harsh circumstances.

We believe that more resources and faster
deployment are needed in order to strengthen the TFG
and rein in the extremists. A lot more needs to be done
in addressing the urgent issues of peace, security and
reconstruction of the country. The efforts of the TFG
require additional support from the international
community if the country is to quickly recover from
the devastation of war. The TFG should be supported
in its efforts to re-establish key national institutions.
Critical areas such as security, health, education,
energy and infrastructure need to be addressed in order
to radically change the situation on the ground. This
will give the people of Somalia a greater sense of hope.

Croatia notes the progress made in some key
areas identified in the Secretary-General’s report,
especially in the field of national reconciliation,
drafting a constitution, capacity-building and the
building of national security forces. In that context, we
further welcome the establishment of the commission
for security and pacification, which is tasked with
reforming Somali security forces, as well as the major
reshuffling of the Cabinet, including the appointment
of the new Minister of Defence. We hope that this
change will contribute to the Government’s capacity to
consolidate its authority and restore order in the
country.

The success of the commendable efforts of the
TFG in unifying and reconstructing the country will
depend significantly on the availability of adequate and
predictable resources. We therefore call upon the
international community to support the TFG vigorously
in national institution-building.

Croatia reiterates its strong support to the
Djibouti peace process and calls upon all relevant
actors to fully implement the commitments undertaken,
including the creation of an inclusive administration in
Somalia. We urge all those groups still outside this
process to join it as soon as possible. We therefore
welcome attempts to revitalize the work of the
High-level Committee, the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General aimed at
engaging autonomous regions, and the continued
support of regional organizations to the Djibouti peace
process.

As provided for resolution 1863 (2009), the
presence of AMISOM in Somalia is a transitional step
towards the envisaged United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Therefore, the Council should hasten the
necessary preparations towards re-hatting AMISOM.
Furthermore, the Council should deal decisively with

09-54835

19

S/PV.6197

We are deeply concerned by the marked
deterioration of the security situation in southern and
central Somalia and we condemn the continuing
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population.
We urge all parties to the conflict to fully comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and in this regard we express our sincere condolences
to the families of those killed and injured during the
attacks of 17 September in Mogadishu.
Croatia expresses its concern regarding the
looming humanitarian crisis in Somalia, which is
exacerbated by the severe difficulties experienced in
the delivery of humanitarian assistance caused by
increased violence against humanitarian workers,
ongoing fighting and drought. We hope that adequate
funding of the consolidated appeals process and the
United Nations Transition Plan for Somalia will allow
for the continuation of critical humanitarian activities.
On piracy, my delegation shares the position
expressed by other Council members that long-term
solutions will come about only through the rule of law
and the establishment of security on the ground.
Croatia supports the incremental approach, as set
out by the Secretary-General. We welcome preparations
for a shift to the second, “light footprint” phase and
further consultations between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the African Union on a
possible future peacekeeping operation in Somalia. We
commend the African Union and AMISOM for their
unfaltering attempts to stabilize the situation in
Somalia and the crucial role AMISOM plays in
repelling insurgents and protecting vital infrastructure
in Mogadishu. In that context, we would also like to
use this opportunity to pay special tribute to Uganda
and Burundi for the vitally important contribution they
are making to AMISOM.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe and
Mr. Craig Boyd for their briefings and to welcome the
Permanent Representative of Somalia in our midst.
Despite the numerous challenges faced by the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia, in
the past few months it has managed to achieve some
progress towards attaining its political and security
objectives by pursuing dialogue with opposition
groups, building local governance, preparing a draft
constitution and strengthening security institutions. We
welcome the commitment shown by President Sheikh

20

Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and his Government to setting up
an all-inclusive Somali Government.
We urge the opposition groups that have not yet
joined the Djibouti process to participate in the
reconciliation process and to eschew violence. By the
same token, we urge capable States and organizations
to convince all Somali factions outside the peace
process to lay down their arms, stop fighting and
participate in political dialogue and the reconciliation
process.
We invite the TFG to continue its efforts with a
view to achieving national reconciliation. In this
regard, we appeal to the international community to
redouble its support for the Government.
We felt shocked by the attack that targeted the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) on
17 September, and we strongly condemned it. We
renew our condolences to the Governments of Burundi
and Uganda, as well as to the families of the victims
who lost their lives in that attack. We also wish to
voice our sympathy with the wounded.
By the same token, we wish to commend the role
undertaken by AMISOM in an environment fraught
with risks. We urge the international community to
complete the disbursement of the funds it has pledged
in support of the Mission and rapidly transform it into
a United Nations mission, in accordance with
resolution 1863 (2009).
We welcome the generous contributions made by
States of the region and the international community to
support and strengthen the Somali police and security
forces. We urge donors to fulfil the pledges they made
in Brussels and cooperate closely with the Joint
Security Committee, with a view to coordinating their
contributions and supporting the Committee as a
political forum able to facilitate the preparation of a
national security strategy in accordance with resolution
1872 (2009).
We believe that there is a need for the
simultaneous implementation of a package of capacitybuilding programmes in various Government bodies,
such as the judiciary, the parliament and the
Government administration. We urge the TFG to take
decisive steps to extend and entrench its authority,
restore the rule of law and meet the basic needs of the
population.

09-54835

S/PV.6197

We express our concern at the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation as a result of violent acts of
abduction and killing and other threats to humanitarian
workers, as well as the drought that hit the country.
This has increased the number of those in need of
humanitarian assistance from 3.5 million to 3.7 million,
approximately 50 per cent of the total population.
In this regard, we applaud the sacrifices of and
the courage shown by humanitarian workers and
denounce the recent attacks against them, including the
looting of their compounds. We urge all parties to
abide by human rights law and international
humanitarian law and to take steps to protect civilians,
including humanitarian workers.
We also call upon all parties to pave the way for
unfettered delivery of humanitarian aid and
cooperation with humanitarian organizations on that
score. Moreover, we urge all States to support the
consolidated appeal and the United Nations approach
regarding Somalia.
We express our concern over persistent criminal
activity, including the smuggling of drugs and arms
and trafficking in weapons. We call upon the
international community to find appropriate means to
grapple with illegal activities that threaten peace in
Somalia and the region as a whole.
With regard to piracy, once again we emphasize
that the problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia is a
natural result of the unstable situation in Somalia, the
overall deterioration in the security situation and the
absence of State authority. In order to resolve this
problem in a definitive manner, there must be a
complete and comprehensive solution to the question
of Somalia.
Although we support the international efforts
deployed to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia, we
warn against the use of an international maritime
presence in the region to protect illegal fishing
activities in Somalia’s territorial waters and exclusive
economic zone. We urge States with a maritime
presence off the Somali coast to try to protect
Somalia’s maritime wealth. We are duty-bound not to
turn the international maritime presence into a tool
protecting breaches of the principles of international
maritime law and preventing the Somali people from
enjoying its riches.

09-54835

In conclusion, we commend the efforts made by
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and his team, and we express
our support for him.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as representative of Viet Nam.
I join the others who spoke before me in thanking
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, and Mr. Craig Boyd, Director of
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), for their insightful
briefings and for sharing their perspectives on the
situation in Somalia.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
situation in Somalia is at a turning point. The
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) has made
significant progress in fostering national reconciliation,
sustaining dialogue with opposition groups, building
capacity for local governance, integrating human rights
into various aspects of the peace process and building a
national security apparatus. My delegation commends
and supports President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed’s
initiative to launch a commission for security and
pacification, which is tasked with reforming Somalia’s
security forces and all law enforcement agencies. We
welcome his commitment to fully implement the
Djibouti Agreement in order to find lasting peace in
this war-torn country.
The main challenge facing Somalia is to maintain
the political momentum that started a few months ago.
We are encouraged to note that the cooperation
agreement signed between the TFG and Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama’a in June has already shown results. We call
upon the opposition groups which remain outside the
Djibouti Agreement to lay down their arms, renounce
violence and join the reconciliation process.
While long-term security rests with the TFG and
the Somalis themselves, the United Nations, the
international community and regional organizations
should redouble their efforts to assist the TFG to repel
the onslaught of extremist forces that are intent on
destroying the Djibouti peace process, and enable the
Government to exercise its authority countrywide for
the sake of the Somali people.
We remain troubled by reports that the
humanitarian situation in Somalia continues to
deteriorate dramatically, with more than 250,000 people

21

S/PV.6197

being displaced and some 3.7 million people in dire
need of humanitarian support due to intensified
fighting in Mogadishu, growing insecurity in much of
southern and central Somalia and drought.
The current alarming security and humanitarian
situation in Somalia requires immediate and concrete
international support, both political and financial, to
enable the TFG to accelerate the development of the
Somali National Security Force and the Somali Police
Force in the framework of the Djibouti Agreement and
in line with a national security strategy. We welcome
the efforts of donors to disburse pledges made in
Brussels last April.
Viet Nam supports the efforts of the African
Union and AMISOM troop-contributing countries to
maintain stability and security in and around Mogadishu
under hazardous circumstances. We welcome and
support the decision of the African Union to increase
AMISOM’s strength to its mandated troop levels and
its call for the international community to continue its
support of AMISOM’s deployment and operations.
We also support the incremental approach set out
in the Secretary-General’s April report, which requests
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in
consultation with the African Union, to continue its
effort to develop and refine existing contingency plans
that will allow for an eventual transition from
AMISOM to a United Nations peacekeeping operation
if security conditions on the ground permit. To ensure
that this effort succeeds, we call for close cooperation
and effective partnership between the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
League of Arab States in dealing with the situation in
Somalia with a view to bringing about lasting peace
and security in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. I also wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd
from the Department of Field Support, and express my
appreciation for their briefings. We also appreciate the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/503) and thank
all those who contributed to it. In particular, we thank

22

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah; the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); and all the international
and other organizations that contributed, in very
difficult circumstances, to the drafting of the report.
We have passed through a long and painful
struggle in Somalia over the past 18 years. It is very
heartening now to note the conviction, expressed both
in the report of the Secretary-General and in the
statements made by most Security Council members,
that progress has indeed been achieved through the
Djibouti peace process, and that the Government,
despite all the problems — especially with the security
situation — has done a lot. We therefore hope and pray
that the United Nations, the international community
and especially the Security Council will now really try
to take the necessary steps as quickly as possible to
ensure that the security situation is further improved.
That is the only way it can be done.
Our President, in his statement at the general
debate of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session, mentioned the problems that face the
Government and our priorities. He stated that the
priorities are strengthening sufficiently the Somali
national security and police forces and other security
and law enforcement organs; adequately strengthening
AMISOM in all aspects and achieving the agreed
strength of 8,000 peacekeepers; and the deployment of
an adequate United Nations peace operation in
Somalia, the sooner the better. It is also very
heartening to note that a number of Security Council
members seem to agree that it is now time to look into
the issue of how fast an adequate peacekeeping force
can be deployed in Somalia.
I shall try to address the question raised by my
colleague from Uganda. As we know, Uganda and
Burundi are also suffering alongside the Somalis. In
fact, they have lost a number of their soldiers in trying
to help Somalia. I therefore stress the need as soon as
possible to accelerate the incremental process, as stated
in the report, to establish a security situation that will
allow all United Nations and international agencies to
operate in Somalia and open the door to the adequate
and timely supply of assistance to the 3.7 million
people who need it now.

09-54835

S/PV.6197

I do not wish to make a long speech because all
the points that I could have raised have been raised
either in the report itself or by the members of the
Security Council.
I turn now to the issue of piracy. It has been
mentioned and underlined by a number of Security
Council members that the root causes of piracy are the
problems on land in Somalia, and not on the high seas.
We therefore also need support for the struggling
security forces that have already been created if we are
to be able to stop the pirates from embarking from
Somalia’s ports.
As has been noted by some members, the
Security Council may apply and enforce sanctions
against all spoilers, be they individuals, entities, a
country or countries. That, too, is needed now.
Furthermore, our Government and the African Union
have requested the blockade, if possible, of the ports
through which Al-Shabaab and its associate, Al-Qaida,
receive not only supplies but personnel to train
operatives and to ensure that their training camps are
well equipped and supplied. The purpose of these
training camps is not only to destabilize the Somali
Government, but also and mainly to serve as stepping
stones to neighbouring countries and to produce

09-54835

international terrorists. We also seek to monitor
overflights of some airports that are now controlled by
Al-Shabaab and its allies.
Finally, I wish wholeheartedly to thank Uganda
and Burundi and other countries that have promised to
supply personnel and training. We also thank the
international community and the countries that have
already given us assistance in training our security
forces. We are glad that, as has been mentioned by
many, pledges have been made for support to
AMISOM and the Somali security forces. The
disbursement of these pledges, however, has to be
made as quickly as possible, and we are very glad that
there will be a meeting on this issue tomorrow.
I wish to reiterate once more the urgency of the
security situation in Somalia, which also involves the
humanitarian situation and all other human rights
aspects, and the urgent need for the Security Council to
take action in the security sector.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

23
