United Nations

S/PV.6203

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6203rd meeting
Friday, 16 October 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Twenty-ninth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2009/472)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-56206 (E)

*0956206*

S/PV.6203

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

Expression of farewell to Sir John Sawers, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
The President: I have been informed that our
respected colleague Sir John Sawers, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, is today
attending a meeting of the Security Council for the last
time before he leaves for a new assignment. I want to
take this opportunity to express to him, on behalf of the
members of the Council, our appreciation of him both
as a colleague and as a friend.
From the time Ambassador Sawers took up his
present position in the summer of 2007, he has made a
valuable contribution to the work of the Council. His
vast diplomatic skill, demure manner and sense of
collegiality have made him a highly effective and
valued representative of his country. He will be
remembered for many of his astute interventions and
his willingness to rally the Council to consensus when
it was most needed, as well as for his leadership of
various segments of the Council’s missions to Africa.
In bidding Sir John a fond farewell, Council members
and I wish him great success and fulfilment in his
future endeavours. We are certain that he will keep an
eye on the activities of the Council.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Twenty-ninth report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2009/472)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

2

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alan Doss,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Doss to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
twenty-ninth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is contained
in document S/2009/472.
At this meeting, members of the Council will
hear a briefing by Mr. Alan Doss. I now give him the
floor.
Mr. Doss (spoke in French): The report
(S/2009/472) of the Secretary-General before the
Security Council provides an assessment of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the activities of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). Overall, the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) have
made progress in their operations against foreign
armed groups, and especially against the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), which
have been pushed out of most populated areas and now
find themselves dispersed and weakened. The
integration of Congolese armed groups is continuing.
Displaced persons and refugees are in the process of
returning to their homes. Nevertheless, serious risks
and threats persist. We must not allow ourselves to
become complacent.

09-56206

S/PV.6203

The FDLR have been scattered, but they are not
yet neutralized. Armed attacks are continuing in both
Kivus and in Orientale province, where residual
elements of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) are
carrying out sporadic raids. The return of displaced
persons and refugees after many years has led to ethnic
tension and land disputes. Ongoing sexual violence
poses an enormous challenge. The return of security
has raised the hopes of the population, who now want
to see a real peace dividend.
(spoke in English)
When I spoke to the Council a year ago, the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
increasingly grave. We faced a security crisis of
enormous dimensions following the resumption of
hostilities with the Congrès national pour la défense du
people (CNDP). A year on, there is now a real prospect
that the conflicts that have for so long blighted the
eastern Congo can be ended. There has been progress
on a number of fronts.
FARDC operations in the Kivus and in Orientale
province have significantly eroded the strike capacity
and domination of the FDLR and the LRA. Since the
beginning of the year, 1,126 FDLR combatants and
1,622 of their dependents have been repatriated by the
MONUC team for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation. That is
more than double the repatriation rate for the same
period last year. An additional 11,383 Rwandan
civilians, many of whom had been held hostage by the
FDLR, have returned to Rwanda with the assistance of
MONUC and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
Two major figures wanted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for their involvement in
the Rwanda genocide have been arrested and
transferred to Arusha. I do not believe that would have
happened without the military pressure that we have
brought to bear on the FDLR.
Most of the internally displaced persons who had
been regrouped in camps on the outskirts of Goma as a
consequence of the earlier conflict with the CNDP have
returned home, although there is still a very high
number of displaced people in North and South Kivu
who are waiting for further improvements in the
security situation before they go back to their villages.
Significantly, more than 2,000 children have been
separated from armed groups and the FARDC since the

09-56206

beginning of the year, with the help of MONUC and
UNICEF.
The integration of the CNDP and other Congolese
armed groups is approaching completion. Over 120
political prisoners were recently released and returned
to the East, with MONUC’s assistance. The
stabilization programme is now moving into areas
freed from the control of armed groups, opening the
way for the return of State authority.
Despite those positive developments, I do not
want to imply that the troubles of eastern Congo are a
thing of the past. The fast-track integration of up to
20,000 elements of former armed groups, some with
very bad human rights records, into the FARDC has
aggravated existing problems of indiscipline. Civilians
in remote areas continue to suffer reprisals from the
FDLR. There have been new population displacements
and human rights violations. There is still an
appallingly high level of violence against women.
Large numbers of people remain displaced and difficult
to access, especially during periods of combat. The
implementation of the 23 March agreements with the
armed groups has been slower than we would have
wished.
Looking ahead, we see several issues that must be
addressed if the momentum generated by the
agreements reached between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda in December 2008 and the
23 March agreements with the armed groups is to be
maintained.
First, the areas cleared of FDLR presence by the
FARDC must be fully secured to ensure continuing
protection for the population and to allow internally
displaced persons to return home.
Secondly, major operations against the remaining
FDLR strongholds should be completed as soon as
possible, with proper regard for the protection of
civilians.
Thirdly, in areas that have been secured, the
stabilization effort must be accelerated, giving priority
to the control of mining sites to deprive armed
elements of revenue, and backed up by the deployment
of armed police and the reconstruction of roads and
administrative infrastructure.
Fourthly, non-military initiatives designed to
encourage defections and surrenders among the

3

S/PV.6203

remaining FDLR
intensified.

combatants

must

be

further

Finally, but most importantly, the discipline of
the FARDC and the national police, which itself is a
vital dimension of protection, requires constant
attention to signal and ensure that impunity will not be
accepted.
How will MONUC help to address these
concerns? The Council has directed us to focus our
attention on protection. We have identified protection
hotspots. Last year, we launched mobile operating
bases so that we could respond more flexibly to the
rapidly changing military environment. MONUC
military is now present in more than 50 different
locations throughout the Kivus and in five locations in
areas LRA-affected in North-East Democratic Republic
of the Congo, principally in Orientale province.
The Council is aware that we have created joint
protection teams, which have deployed into securitysensitive areas to assist the military and local
authorities to analyse, anticipate and respond to
specific threats against civilians. More than 50 joint
protection missions have been launched in North and
South Kivu, and we have started expanding this
practice to the remaining areas of instability and
vulnerability in Orientale province. Deployment of
these missions is guided by a rapid response and early
warning cell that draws on information from a variety
of sources, including civil society and surveillance
networks established by the military at the provincial
level. I believe we have circulated a map to the
members of the Council showing the dispersion of all
of those mission bases throughout the two Kivus.
We are also using these mechanisms to monitor
the performance of individual FARDC battalions and,
as necessary, asking the military leadership of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to take corrective
action when we see disciplinary problems. This will be
the basis for any decision we may make on the
necessity of withdrawing support if we see a blatant
disregard for international humanitarian law.
President Kabila himself has now declared a
zero-tolerance policy for acts of sexual and genderbased violence, and the Government is acting against
looting, corruption and other undisciplined behaviour
in the armed forces. The five commanders who were
identified by the Security Council have all been
removed from command and, we are assured, will be

4

prosecuted. Two are already under arrest, two more
have been put under house surveillance or arrest in
Kinshasa, and the last one has absconded. The FARDC
has established a military court for the Kivus, which
has handed down more than 30 sentences to soldiers
found guilty of serious crimes. High-level commanders
have been relieved of their duties for misconduct.
The refurbishment of Ndolo military prison in
Kinshasa is nearly complete and will enable us to
transfer military prisoners — serious offenders — from
the East to secure facilities in Kinshasa. MONUC itself
is helping to establish prosecution support cells and
joint investigation teams within the military to assist
them to act more speedily in investigating and
prosecuting serious crimes, including rape. Partner
assistance in this initiative is critical.
I would like to underscore that we cannot make
significant progress if we do not work on all of these
areas simultaneously. We can arrest people and we can
try them, but if they are not in secure facilities they can
escape and return to do what they did before. So it is
very important that we have this joint approach as we
try to tackle the problem of impunity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
To underscore MONUC’s full support for the
President’s zero-tolerance policy and to reinforce that
policy, MONUC has told the Government that it will
withdraw support from battalions that show a blatant
disregard for international humanitarian law.
MONUC is the first mission in which the Force
Commander has issued a specific directive on civilian
protection to all contingents. Under that directive,
MONUC Blue Helmets provide protection against
attacks by the FDLR and other armed elements, patrol
key routes to facilitate the safe delivery of
humanitarian assistance, and indeed go well beyond
those responsibilities. For example, on market days we
provide armed escorts for thousands of villagers, in
particular women, who wish to travel to market in
safety, free of harassment and illegal taxation by armed
groups.
All of these activities have been integrated into a
comprehensive civilian protection strategy developed
by MONUC, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the protection cluster.
Our protection efforts, however, are a daily
exercise in managing scarce resources and, I must say,

09-56206

S/PV.6203

making hard choices. The Council is well aware of the
strain on MONUC’s military and logistical assets. I
therefore want to pay tribute to the contingents and
civilian personnel who are working to project
MONUC’s presence into very demanding areas
throughout the East.
In the past few weeks, the first elements of the
additional 3,000 uniformed personnel authorized by the
Council last year have begun to arrive in theatre and
are being deployed exclusively in the East to further
extend and reinforce our protection capacity. Another
battalion is also being transferred from Kinshasa to
Orientale province to backstop the operations against
the LRA. With this transfer, only 500 United Nations
troops will be left in the entire western area of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Unfortunately, the limited helicopter and fixedwing aircraft capacity is still a huge constraint on our
ability to quickly deploy and sustain MONUC forces in
places where they are most needed. This is
compounded, I might add, by our lack of tactical
intelligence. We have yet to receive any support in that
area, even though it was authorized by the Council a
year ago.
Despite the efforts made by the FARDC and
MONUC to improve and extend protection, it is
obviously not possible to protect everyone, everywhere,
all of the time in the Kivus, an area the size of
California with a population of almost 10 million. So
inevitably the question arises: Should Kimia II be
halted?
Some observers have suggested that Kimia II
operations should be suspended in order to give the
FARDC time to get its house in order and improve
discipline. We believe, however, that reducing the
pressure now would give the FDLR time to regroup
and rearm. It would also send an ambiguous message
to some elements of the FARDC who have in the past
cooperated with the FDLR. Suspension would
therefore undermine the FARDC’s resolve and
paradoxically, in our view, further weaken discipline
by removing the immediate pressure for reform created
by Kimia II. Rwanda might also see this as a step
backwards from the rapprochement that has opened up
an entirely new perspective for the Kivus since the
agreement with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
A suspension would also make it more difficult
for the Government to impose State authority and

09-56206

prevent the re-emergence of other armed groups that
might well draw the conclusion that attacks against
civilians will force the Government to give in to their
demands. Above all, a suspension of operation Kimia II
would be celebrated as a victory by the FDLR. It
would strengthen the ties between the leadership
abroad and the combatants on the ground, thus
obviating years of efforts at sensitization aimed at
weakening these links.
We do, however, agree that military pressure
alone is not enough and should be part of a
multifaceted approach to the FDLR problem that
recognizes the need for enhanced measures to protect
civilians and other action designed to encourage FDLR
defections and the weakening of FDLR support outside
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Council will recall my earlier appeal for
countries hosting FDLR leaders abroad to take legal
action to neutralize their influence on the conflict. The
Council’s commitment and cooperation in this regard
are particularly important. FDLR leaders abroad have
sustained a propaganda campaign against operation
Kimia II, discouraging rank-and-file combatants from
surrendering. Additional pressure must be brought to
bear on exiled leaders to change their attitude or sever
their communications with combatants on the ground.
MONUC has proposed that the Congolese
Government and host countries of FDLR leaders in
exile explore the possibility of criminalizing the FDLR
under the United Nations Convention against
Transnational
Organized
Crime.
There
is
overwhelming evidence of crimes in the Kivus, and if
this initiative gained international support it would also
serve as a powerful disincentive to those involved in
illegal trading networks with the FDLR.
Allow me now to report briefly on the integration
of Congolese armed groups into the national army.
More and more remnant groups are joining this
process. They have been motivated by a combination
of military pressure and dialogue. Although the official
integration process is over, the FARDC continues to
receive and to integrate those who surrender. At the
same time, the army hierarchy is endeavouring to
improve the conditions of service for newly integrated
soldiers, although the timely payment of salaries is still
a major problem that needs to be resolved urgently. We
find that when salaries are not paid on time, discipline
deteriorates, looting begins and other kinds of violence

5

S/PV.6203

follow, especially violence against women. So it is
absolutely essential that the problem of timely pay be
resolved.
In the framework of the stabilization programme,
barracks are being constructed for these troops, with
the assistance of the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands. A MONUC training programme for newly
integrated troops will start in January at two or three
planned training centres, with the support of training
specialists from the Tanzanian army, who will join
MONUC as a formed contingent.
These activities are intended to consolidate
military integration and improve the discipline and
efficiency of the FARDC. They are the first steps
towards army reform, which in itself is an important
long-term project that will require substantial
international support. The Conseil supérieur de la
défense has endorsed an army reform plan that has
been submitted to Parliament for review. The Minister
of Defence will discuss its implementation with
international partners once parliamentary approval has
been obtained.
MONUC has worked with the mediation, led by
Presidents Obasanjo and Mkapa, to follow up on the
23 March agreements. As I have already mentioned, we
have assisted with the release of former CNDP
prisoners. We are mobilizing resources for warwounded and for a training programme for the
integrated police units. We shall also continue to press
for a solution to the territorial administration in areas
where ex-CNDP cadres still retain control on the
ground. We will work with all concerned to ensure that
the commitment to the 23 March agreements does not
falter.
Because of time constraints, I will not discuss a
number of other areas of concern and activity of
MONUC. Let me mention, however, the local
elections. Despite assurances from the Government
that the local elections will be held before the general
elections currently planned or scheduled for mid-2011,
the timetable and dates for those local elections have
not yet been announced and may well be pushed back
again until late 2010. Also, the necessary enabling
legislation has yet to be adopted by the legislature. We
have informed the Congolese authorities that when
they are ready we will be ready, but obviously the
initiative lies with them and not with us.

6

The report of the Secretary-General also mentions
the dismissal of a large number of magistrates. There is
concern regarding the establishment of mechanisms to
ensure judicial independence and accountability,
including the Conseil supérieur de la magistrature.
Current tensions regarding the respective roles of the
Conseil and the Ministry of Justice, and the paucity of
budgetary resources, are impediments to progress in
establishing an effective justice sector, which is a key
pillar of security sector reform.
As grave as the problem is with regard to the
courts, the situation of prisons in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is even more critical. As the
current level of national funding renders significant
progress impossible, donor resources are urgently
required to help us maintain the minimum
humanitarian standards expected of a national prison
system.
In closing, I want to make some observations, if I
may be allowed, about MONUC’s mandate, which will
be reviewed by this Council at the end of the year.
Resolution 1856 (2008) lists 41 tasks, which have
given us considerable flexibility in a rapidly changing
environment. However, it has also generated many
demands and high expectations that perhaps need to be
rationalized. The preparation of an integrated strategic
framework, as requested by the Secretary-General’s
Policy Committee, provides us with an opportunity to
reflect on how this might be done.
The framework, which is a joint undertaking of
MONUC and the United Nations country team, will
outline the key challenges facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It will indicate how the United
Nations might assist the country and respond in a
cohesive manner, taking full account of the
Government’s own stated priorities and the directives
of this Council as regards the focus and deployment of
MONUC’s resources.
The integrated strategic framework builds on
other initiatives developed by the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, notably the United
Nations strategy to combat sexual violence, the
strategy on protection of civilians, the stabilization
programme for the East, and the multidimensional
approach to dealing with the FDLR. The framework
will consider challenges that do not fall directly under
the mandate of MONUC but are of direct concern to
the wider United Nations system. Nevertheless, we

09-56206

S/PV.6203

anticipate that the strategic framework will highlight
issues that should be part of the MONUC mandate
review. These will include the progress of the peace
process, security sector reform, protection and the rule
of law, conflict prevention and resolution, stabilization
in the East and the democratic process and elections.
We shall also consider the possible structural
arrangements required to implement such a strategic
framework. In line with the Security Council’s
directives, MONUC has already deployed 95 per cent of
the Mission’s military resources to the East and, outside
of the headquarters establishment, almost 90 per cent of
the international civilian staff, drawn from all
substantive sections, are also in eastern areas. We have
conducted a review of ongoing United Nations
operations in the western provinces and identified areas
of responsibility that could be progressively transferred
to the United Nations country team with minimal
continued support from MONUC.
In October 2008, the Council approved a surge
capacity for MONUC, which is under deployment.
Assuming that the surge is successful and that major
military operations against foreign armed groups can
be concluded in 2010, MONUC could then begin a
phased troop drawdown at a pace consonant with the
security situation on the ground. Should the Council so
wish, this would permit the United Nations to
reallocate, within a declining overall budget, additional
resources to an intensified programme of security
sector reform and, more broadly, to the strengthening
of the rule of law as a prelude to the eventual departure
of the United Nations peacekeeping presence.
In the next report of the Secretary-General to the
Council, we shall present the key elements of the
integrated strategic framework as a contribution to the
Council’s review of MONUC’s mandate and the
possible reconfiguration of the Mission structure.
In all of the activities, I want to add, MONUC
works closely with Congolese authorities at the
national and provincial levels. We also work with the
special envoys of the Secretary-General, the African
Union, the European Union and representatives of
individual Member States. We value in particular the
contribution of the European Union security sector
reform and police missions to security sector reform, as
well as the support of several Member States to the
United Nations Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy for the East.

09-56206

(spoke in French)
In November, MONUC will have been present in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for 10 years.
Beginning as a small observer mission, it grew to
become the largest United Nations mission in the
world. Over the course of the decade, it has overseen
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of foreign troops,
stabilized the security situation, accompanied the interCongolese
dialogue
and
the
transfer
and
demobilization of armed groups in Kivu and elsewhere,
facilitated the first free and transparent elections in 40
years, and helped the Government to manage the crisis
in the Kivus and to combat armed forces.
We are proud to have worked with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its peace process,
which has seen many reversals and developments, but
certain essential objectives set out in the Sun City
Agreement and that underpin MONUC’s presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain to be
achieved. These include the training of a professional
republican army, the restoration of State authority
throughout the national territory, reconciliation and the
effective reconstruction of the country. I believe that
the simultaneous tasks of stabilization and pacification
must continue, with the support of MONUC and the
material and diplomatic support of the Security
Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Doss for his briefing.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): I wish to reassure you, Sir, that I
will be brief. At the outset I would like to express my
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, preside over the Council
during this month of October. I also take the
opportunity to associate myself with the unanimous
congratulations addressed to the United States
delegation for last month’s presidency. Finally, I note
the importance of the Secretary-General’s twenty-ninth
report on the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
(S/2009/472) and thank him. I also welcome the
presentation and briefing just made by his Special
Representative.
I will limit my comments to two aspects of
importance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The first is MONUC.

7

S/PV.6203

For all things, there is a beginning and there is an
end. We human beings are born and we die. That is
God’s will and nature’s law, but the important thing is
to succeed in life. It is the duty of MONUC to succeed
in Congo. Our future generations must remember this
as having been, at a specific moment in history, the
largest United Nations peacekeeping operation, which
by its deployment made it possible to end the first
African world war and which successfully oversaw a
lengthy disengagement process, managed a difficult
political transition, assisted in organizing free and
democratic elections and, finally, laid the foundations
for renewal of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That means that to be a complete success, it is
imperative that MONUC succeed in its exit.
We are thankful that the international community
has finally deigned — even one year late — to follow
through on the request of the Secretary-General for a
temporary increase in the number of MONUC military
and police unit personnel. This was important in order
to strengthen MONUC’s capacity to truly protect the
Congolese civilian population and for MONUC to
commit itself more firmly than it has to date, alongside
the Congolese army, in the fight against the residual
armed groups that still abound in the eastern part of my
country. It is necessary to significantly reduce, even
annihilate, the capacity of those armed groups to harm
in order to make peace a reality. Restoring peace,
which the people of Congo yearn for, will promote
healthy, calm consideration of the future of the United
Nations presence in the Congo.
Here I wish to be clear. The Congolese people do
not wish for a hasty withdrawal of MONUC. At the
same time, the Congolese people do not want MONUC
to remain forever. It thus behooves my country to take
with the Council the multidimensional strategic
decisions — including military and non-military
measures — aimed, inter alia, at enabling the
Congolese Government to fully take on and ensure
security, State authority throughout the national
territory, good governance, strengthening the rule of
law and the economic development of the country.
In order to do this we must work together, both at
Headquarters and in the field, to define the parameters
for drawing up not only a timetable for the
disengagement of United Nations troops in parallel
with the setting up of the Congolese army, but also,
more generally, a road map which would sanction the
transition from a peacekeeping operation to a

8

peacebuilding operation, an operation to bolster
stability in an area which could transcend Congo’s
borders. On that subject, I have already exchanged
letters with the Secretariat on setting up a United
Nations office for Central Africa. Once that has been
established, simple logic would dictate that this office
be located in the country which symbolizes Central
Africa and whose capital is Kinshasa.
My second point is sexual violence, a topic I hold
close to my heart. On 10 January 2000, I addressed the
Security Council as the embassy counselor I was then
on the topic of the impact of AIDS on peace and
security in Africa. (S/PV.4087 (Resumption 1)). I
seized that opportunity to draw the Council’s attention
to the inhuman and degrading treatment and violence
suffered by Congolese heads of households — mainly
men who were victims of the war. I also drew the
attention of the international community to the very
heavy toll paid by women, children and especially
young girls in the eastern provinces, victims of
systematic rape by the occupiers, and highlighted the
use of seropositive soldiers. Still today, the prevalence
rate of AIDS in Orientale province and in North and
South Kivu is four times the national average.
I remain convinced that if at that time the Council
had deigned to take on its responsibility, this virus of
sexual violence that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo inherited would not have spread. It would not
have contaminated on such a scale the various armed
groups, Congolese armed forces and peacekeeping
contingents. I feel no pride, I feel no honour to find
myself 10 years later before the Council addressing
virtually the same issue and continuing to report on
these massive violations of human rights, especially
violence against women and children.
With the passage of time, the vast majority of
those who committed atrocities at the beginning of
hostilities will slip through the net of justice. However,
their bosses and masterminds are well known. It is
important that those soldiers and others convicted of
crimes of sexual violence be brought to justice in their
respective States. In fact, one could come up with and
develop a mechanism by which international justice
could be correctly rendered.
Turning to the actions of my Government, all
Council members heard the head of my delegation
affirm, during the general debate in the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly, that

09-56206

S/PV.6203

“The sexual violence perpetrated against
women and girls in the eastern part of Democratic
Republic of the Congo is, in our view, the most
shameful and gravest crime witnessed by
humankind in the twenty-first century.” (see
A/64/PV.11)

because they were dealing with a presumed
streetwalker, did these United Nations Blue Helmets
have the right to turn N’Djili International Airport into
a sex pad, without any reprimand or sanction? This is
shocking. I ask, what happened to the zero-tolerance
policy declared in 2005?

The Minister for Foreign Affairs assured Member
States of the firm resolve of His Excellency President
Joseph Kabila Kabange to put an end to impunity for
the perpetrators of these heinous acts. He informed
Member States that a number of officers of the
Congolese armed forces and a good many civilians
who had committed such hateful crimes have been
brought before the national courts.

On the matter of sexual violence, it is important
that all of us together send the right message. Maybe
the creation of the post of special representative of the
Secretary-General on sexual violence in armed conflict
will be a sufficient response. However, to be frank and
candid, I must say that people would find it difficult to
understand if the post were not filled by a woman,
especially a woman from a region affected by the
plague of sexual violence.

The international community represented in the
Congo should also show itself above reproach, as
sometimes its behaviour leaves something to be
desired. By way of example, I can cite the umpteenth
case of a sexual offence committed by Blue Helmets,
which occurred during the night of 31 July/1 August at
N’Djili International Airport. While all the parties
involved do not deny the commission of an act that I
consider reprehensible, the MONUC spokesperson
deemed it correct to declare, with regard to the
complaint lodged by an 18-year-old woman of gang
rape that night, that there was insufficient evidence to
continue the investigation.
If the decision not to press charges had come
from Congolese justice I would not have commented.
But as a Congolese citizen, I believe that I have the
right to know how that conclusion was reached. If it
was a United Nations decision, most likely the result of
some arrangement, that would be regrettable and the
Security Council should have taken the matter up. In
this specific case, whether gang rape occurred or not,

09-56206

Finally, I would be remiss if, after what was said
by
the
Permanent
Representative
of
the
United Kingdom, Sir John Sawers — whose departure
I regret — I failed to recognize the efforts of all those
women and men who have deeply felt the unspeakable
suffering and burdens of Congolese women. To the list
of those mentioned on 30 September by the British
Permanent Representative (see S/PV.6195), I should
like to add the diplomats of the United States Mission
to the United Nations and especially the informal
group United for Women of All Nations, whose
activities have been decisive in ensuring that the plight
of Congolese women is not forgotten.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. In accordance with the understanding reached
in the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

9
