United Nations

A/RES/63/120

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 January 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 74

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 11 December 2008
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/438)]

63/120. Reports of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its resumed
fortieth and its forty-first sessions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the
elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability
and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the reports of the Commission on the work of its resumed
fortieth 1 and its forty-first sessions, 2
0F

1F

Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
_______________
1
2

08-47799

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/62/17), part two.
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum (A/63/17 and Corr.1).

A/RES/63/120

other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its resumed fortieth1 and its
forty-first sessions;2
0H

1H

Commends the Commission for the completion and adoption of the
2.
Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions; 3
2F

Also commends the Commission for the completion and approval of the
3.
draft Convention on Contracts for the International Carriage of Goods Wholly or
Partly by Sea; 4
3F

Welcomes the progress made by the Commission in its work on a revision
4.
of its Model Law on Procurement of Goods, Construction and Services, 5 on the
preparation of a draft legislative guide on the treatment of enterprise groups in
insolvency, on the compilation of practical experience with negotiating and using
cross-border insolvency agreements to facilitate cross-border insolvency
proceedings and on the preparation of an annex to its Legislative Guide on Secured
Transactions dealing with security rights in intellectual property, and endorses the
decision of the Commission to undertake further work in the area of electronic
commerce and commercial fraud;
4F

Also welcomes the progress made by the Commission in its work on a
5.
revision of its Arbitration Rules, 6 and encourages the Commission to complete this
work as soon as possible so that the revised Rules may be considered by the
Commission at its forty-second session, in 2009;
5F

Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
6.
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, as well as
promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in
this regard appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate
their legal activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts
and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
7.
work of the Commission concerned with technical assistance and cooperation in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical assistance and cooperation programme and, in that
respect, encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and
non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and
facilitate the effective implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
assistance and cooperation activities, including at the country, subregional and
regional levels, and for providing assistance with legislative drafting in the field of
_______________
3

Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/62/17), part two, para. 100.
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum (A/63/17 and Corr.1), annex.
5
Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum (A/49/17 and Corr.1), annex I.
6
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.V.6.
4

2

A/RES/63/120

international trade law, and draws the attention of the Secretary-General to the
limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical assistance and cooperation activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, to the financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical assistance programme of the Commission and
to cooperate and coordinate their activities with those of the Commission, in the
light of the relevance and importance of the work and programmes of the
Commission for promotion of the rule of law at the national and international levels
and for the implementation of the United Nations development agenda, including
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
Expresses its appreciation to the Government whose contribution to the
8.
trust fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral, 7 enabled renewal of the provision of that assistance, and appeals to
Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust fund in
order to increase expert representation from developing countries at sessions of the
Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and
capacities in the field of international trade law in those countries to facilitate the
development of international trade and the promotion of foreign investment;
6F

Decides, in order to ensure full participation by all Member States in the
9.
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent Main
Committee during the sixty-third session of the General Assembly, its consideration
of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are members of the
Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General;
10. Welcomes, in the light of the recent increase in membership of the
Commission and the number of topics being dealt with by the Commission, the
comprehensive review undertaken by the Commission of its working methods,
which was started at its last session, with the aim of continuing consideration of the
matter during its next sessions and with a view to ensuring the high quality of the
work of the Commission and international acceptability of its instruments, and in
this regard recalls its previous resolutions related to this matter; 8
7F

11. Also welcomes the discussion by the Commission of its role in promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels, in particular the conviction of
the Commission that the implementation and effective use of modern private law
standards on international trade are essential for advancing good governance,
_______________
7

Resolution 48/32, para. 5.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum
(A/63/17 and Corr.1), paras. 373–381.
8

3

A/RES/63/120

sustained economic development and the eradication of poverty and hunger and that
promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations should be an integral part of
the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the rule of law at the national
and international levels, including through the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General, and the fact that that the Commission is looking forward to being
part of strengthened and coordinated activities of the Organization and sees its role
in particular as providing assistance to States that seek to promote the rule of law in
the area of international and domestic trade and investment; 9
8F

12. Further welcomes the consideration by the Commission of the proposed
strategic framework for the period 2010–2011 10 and its review of the proposed
biennial programme plan for the progressive harmonization, modernization and
unification of the law of international trade (subprogramme 5), and takes note that,
while the Commission noted with satisfaction that the objectives and expected
accomplishments of the Secretariat and the overall strategy for subprogramme 5
were in line with its general policy, the Commission also expressed concern that the
resources allotted to the Secretariat under subprogramme 5 were insufficient for it to
meet, in particular, the increased demand for technical assistance from developing
countries and countries with economies in transition to meet their urgent need for
law reform in the field of commercial law, and urged the Secretary-General to take
steps to ensure that the comparatively small amount of additional resources
necessary to meet a demand so crucial to development are made available
promptly; 11
9F

10F

13. Recalls its resolutions on partnerships between the United Nations and
non-State actors, in particular the private sector, 12 and its resolutions in which it
encouraged the Commission to further explore different approaches to the use of
partnerships with non-State actors in the implementation of its mandate, in
particular in the area of technical assistance, in accordance with the applicable
principles and guidelines and in cooperation and coordination with other relevant
offices of the Secretariat, including the Global Compact Office; 13
1F

12F

14. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with the
General Assembly resolutions on documentation-related matters, 14 which, in
particular, emphasize that any reduction in the length of documents should not
adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the substance of the
documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the mandate and work of
the Commission in implementing page limits with respect to the documentation of
the Commission;
13F

15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue providing summary records
of the meetings of the Commission relating to the formulation of normative texts;
16. Recalls its resolution approving the establishment of the Yearbook of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, with the aim of making the
_______________
9

Ibid., para. 386.
A/63/6 (Prog. 6).
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum
(A/63/17 and Corr.1), para. 391.
12
Resolutions 55/215, 56/76, 58/129 and 60/215.
13
Resolutions 59/39, 60/20 and 61/32.
14
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
10

4

A/RES/63/120

work of the Commission more widely known and readily available, 15 expresses its
concern regarding the timeliness of the publication of the Yearbook, and requests the
Secretary-General to explore options to facilitate the timely publication of the
Yearbook;
14F

17. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the conventions emanating
from the work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to those conventions;
18. Welcomes the preparation of digests of case law relating to the texts of
the Commission, such as a digest of case law relating to the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 16 and a digest of case
law relating to the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 17 with the aim of assisting
in the dissemination of information on those texts and promoting their use,
enactment and uniform interpretation;
15F

16F

19. Takes note with appreciation of conferences celebrating the fiftieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards done in New York on 10 June 1958 18 (the “New York Convention”),
the progress made in the ongoing project of the Commission on monitoring the
implementation of the New York Convention, the decision of the Commission to
develop a guide to enactment of the New York Convention to promote a uniform
interpretation and application of the Convention and its decision that, resources
permitting, the activities of the secretariat in the context of its technical assistance
programme could usefully include dissemination of information on the judicial
interpretation of the New York Convention, to complement other activities in
support of the Convention;
17F

20. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their
multilingual development, maintenance and enrichment, 19 commends the website of
the Commission in the six official languages of the United Nations, and welcomes
the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and improve its website in
accordance with the applicable guidelines;
18F

21. Expresses its appreciation to Jernej Sekolec, Secretary of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law since 2001, who retired on 31 July
2008, for his outstanding and devoted contribution to the process of unification and
harmonization of international trade law in general and to the Commission in
particular. 20
19F

67th plenary meeting
11 December 2008
_______________
15

Resolution 2502 (XXIV), para. 7.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1489, No. 25567.
17
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/40/17), annex I.
18
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
19
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B, sect. X;
58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV, paras. 66–80; and
61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
20
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum
(A/63/17 and Corr.1), paras. 393 and 394.
16

5
