144

General A•1embly-Twen1y-nln1h Se1alon

2. A war of aggression is a crime against int~r~tional
peace. Aggression gives rise to international respons1b1hty.
3. No territorial acquisition or special advantage resulting
from aggression is or shall be recognized as lawful.

of international law and its codification, in accordance
with the aims of Article 13, subparagraph 1 (a) of
the Charter, contribute to the fostering of friendly relations among nations,

Article 6
Nothing in this Definition shall be construed as in _any ~ay
enlarging or diminishing the scope of the Chaner, mcludmg
its provisions concerning cases in which the use of force is
lawful.

I

Article 7
Nothing in this Definition, and in particular_ art_icle 3, could
in any way prejudice the right to self-determmallon, freedom
and independence, as derived from the Char~er, of people\
fordbly deprived of that right _and referred to m _the ~claration on Principies of lnternallonal Law concermng Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly peoples under
colonial and racist régimes or other forms of alien domination;
nor the right of these peoples to struggle to that end and to
seek and receive support, in accordance with the principies of
the Charter and in conformity with the above-mentioned
Declaralion.

Article 8
In their interpretation and application the above provisions
are interrelated and each provision should be construed in the
context of tbe other provisions.

3315 (XXIX). Report of the lnternational Law
Commi11aion•

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the lntemational
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-sixth session, 10
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of intemational law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective meaos of implementing the
purposes and principies set forth in Articles 1 and 2
of the Charter of the United Nations and in the DecJaration on Principies of Intemational ·1..aw conceming
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, 11
and to give increased importance to its role in relations
among States,
Noting with appre<;iation that, at its twenty-sixth
session, the lntemational Law Commission, in the light
of comments received from Member States, completed
the second reading of the draft articles on succession
of States in respect of treaties, as recommended by the
General Assembly in resolution 3071 (XXVIII) of
30 November 1973,
Taking note of the draft articles prepared at tbe same
session by the Intemational Law Commission on State
responsibility and on treaties concluded between States
and intemational organizations or between intemational
organizations.
Welcoming the fact that the Intemational Law Commission commenced its work on the law of non-navigational uses of intemational watercourses by adopting
the required preliminary measures,
Bearing in mind that the outstanding achievements
of the Intemational Law Commission during its twentysix sessions in the field of the progressive development
t See also p. 149, item 87.
10 01/icial

Records of the General Auembly, Twenty-ninth

Seuion, Supplement No. 10 (A/9610/Rev.l).
11 llaolutiaG 262S (XXV), annex.

l. Takes note of the repo~ of the Int~mationa_l Law
Commission on the work of 1ts twenty-s1xth sess1on;
2. Expresses its appreciatio'! to the ~ntemational
Law Commission for the work 1t accomphshed at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1975; •
4. Recommends that the Intemational Law Com·mission should:
. (a) Continue on a high priority basis ~t. i_ts twen_tyseventh session. its work on State respons1b~hty, taking
into account General Assembly resolutions 1765
(XVH) of 20 November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of
18 November 1963, 2400 (XXIII) of 11 December
1968 2926 (XXVII) of 28 November 1972 and 3071
(XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, ~ith a view to t~e
preparation of a first set of draft art1cles on respons1bility of States for internationally wrongful acts at the
earliest possible time and t? tak~ up, as_ soon _as .~Ppropriate, the separate top1c_ <?f _mtemat1onal hab1hty
for injurious ·consequences ansmg out of acts not prohibited by intemational law;
( b) Proceed with the prep~ration, on ~ priority
basis of draft articles on success1on of States m respect
of 0-:atters other than treaties;
(e) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles
on the most-favoured-nation clause;
(d) Proceed with the preparation of ~raft a~icles
on treaties concluded between States and mtemat1onal
organizations or between international organizations;
(e) Continue its study of the law of the non:-na~gational uses of intemational watercourses, takmg mto
account General Assembly resolutions 2669 (XXV) of
8 December 1970 and 3071 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973 and other resolutions conceming the work of
the International Law Commission on the topic, and
comments received from Member States on the questions referred to in the annex to chapter V of the
Commission's report;
5. Approves, in the light of the impo~nce of its
existing work programme, a tw~lve-week penod f~r_the
annual sessions of the Intemational Law Comm1ss1on,
subject to review by the General Assembly whenever
necessary;
6. Recognizes the efficacy of the methods and conditions of work by which the International Law Commission has carried out its tasks and expresses confidence that the Commission will continue to adopt
methods of work well suited to the realization of the
tasks entrusted to it;
7. Express~s its appreciation to the Secretary-General for having completed the supplementary report on
the legal problems relating to the non-navigational uses
of intemational watercourses, 12 requested by the General Assembly in resolution 2669 (XXV);
8. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with fÍlture
sessions of the Intemational Law Commission, further
seminars might be organized, wbich should continue to
11 A/9732 (vola. 1 and 11).

lleaolutiom adopted oa the reporta of the Slxth Commhtee

ensure the participation of an increasing number of
jurists of developing countries;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the twentyninth session of the General Assembly;

11
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on the question
of succession of States in respect of treaties and to the
Special Rapporteurs on the topic for their contribution
to this work;
2. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 1 August 1975, their written
comments and observations on the draft articles on
succession of States in respect of treaties contained in
the report of the lnternational Law Commission on the
work of its twenty-sixth session, 10 including comments
and observations on proposals referred to in paragraph 75 of that report, which the Commission was
prevented from discussing by lack of time, and on the
procedure by which and the form in which work on
the draft articles should be completed;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, before the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, the
comments and observations submitted in accordance
with paragraph 2 above;
·
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Succession of
States in respect of treaties".
23 l 9th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3316 (XXIX). Report of the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having conside.red the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its seventh session, 1:i
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 Decem·
ber 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law and defined
the. object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Further recalling its resolutions 2421 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968, 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November
1969, 2635 (XXV) of 12 November 1970, 2766
(XXVI) of 17 November 1971, 2928 (XXVII) of
28 November 1972 and 3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 concerning the reports of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its first to sixth sessions,
Reatfirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those aflecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among ali States on a
basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of ali peoples,
13 01/icial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/9617).

145

Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, at its fourteenth session, took note with
appreciation 14 of the report of the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade
Law on the work of its seventh session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction that work on uniform
rules on the Iiabtlity of ocean carriers for loss, damage
or delay with respect to cargo is nearing completion
and that a draft convention setting forth such rules
will be transmitted to Governments and interested inteinational organizations in 1975 for their comments;
4. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention to
the topics to which it has decided to give priority,
namely, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
(b) Continue to consider the legal problems presented by different kinds of multinational enterprises
and the advisability of preparing uniform rules gbvern·
ing the liability for damage caused by products intended
for or involved in international trade, in accordance
with the decisions thereon adopted by the Commission
at its seventh session;
(e) lntensify its work on training and assistance in
the field of international trade law, taking into account
the special interests of the developing countries;
(d) Maintain a close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
continue to collaborate with international organizations
active in the field of international trade law;
(e) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in min\:I
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(/) Keep its programme of work and working methods under review with the aim of increasing the effectiveness of its work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its seventh session.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3317 (XXIX). United Nations Conference on
Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2929 (XXVII) of 28 November 1972 and 3104 (XXVIII) of 12 December
1973 on the convening of a United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the lnternational
Sale of Goods,
H /bid., Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.l), para. 539.
