UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3336
14 February 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Monday, 14 February 1994, at 10.30 a.m.

President:
Members:

Mr. OLHAYE

(Djibouti)

Argentina
Brazil
China
Czech Republic
France
New Zealand
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. CARDENAS
Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. CHEN Jian
Mr. KOVANDA
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. KEATING
Mr. GAMBARI
Mr. AL-KHUSSAIBY
Mr. KHAN
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. BIZIMANA
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO
Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

94-85173 (E)

S/PV.3336
2

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN THE REPUBLIC OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
LETTER DATED 5 FEBRUARY 1994 FROM THE DEPUTY PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA TO THE UNITED
NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
(S/1994/124)
LETTER DATED 8 FEBRUARY 1994 FROM THE PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF PAKISTAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/1994/135)
LETTER DATED 10 FEBRUARY 1994 FROM THE PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION TO THE UNITED
NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
(S/1994/152)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt,
Finland, Germany, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovenia, the
Sudan, Sweden, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine and the United Arab
Emirates, in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with

the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.3336
3

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and
Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan), Mr. Repishti (Albania), Mr. Lamamra (Algeria),
Mr. Sucharipa (Austria), Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan), Mr. Rahman
(Bangladesh), Mr. Noterdaeme (Belgium), Mrs. Frechette (Canada),
Mr. Rey (Colombia), Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia), Mr. Haakonsen
(Denmark), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Breitenstein (Finland),
Mr. Zu Rantzau (Germany), Mr. Soegarda (Indonesia), Mr. Kharrazi
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Hayes (Ireland), Mr. Fulci (Italy),
Mr. Hatano (Japan), Mr. Bataineh (Jordan), Mr. Wolzfeld
(Luxembourg), Mr. Razali (Malaysia), Mr. Snoussi (Morocco),
Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Mr. Huslid (Norway), Mr. Catarino
(Portugal), Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Cissé (Senegal),
Mr. Türk (Slovenia), Mr. Yassin (Sudan), Mr. Osvald (Sweden),
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Batu (Turkey), Mr. Khandogy (Ukraine)
and Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT:

I have received a request dated

11 February 1994 from Ambassador Dragomir Djokić to address the
Council.

With the consent of the Council, I propose to invite him

to address the Council in the course of the discussion of the item
before it.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in response to the requests
contained in the following letters:

letter dated 5 February 1994

from the Prime Minister of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
addressed to the President of the Security Council, transmitted by

S/PV.3336
4

(The President)
a letter of the same date from the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council and contained in document
S/1994/124; letter dated 8 February 1994 from the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed, on
behalf of the members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the President of the
Security Council, document S/1994/135; and letter dated
10 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/1994/152.
Members of the Council also have before them letters dated
6 and 11 February 1994, respectively, from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, documents
S/1994/131 and S/1994/159.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the following other documents:

S/1994/123, S/1994/134

and S/1994/142, letters dated 4, 8 and 9 February 1994,
respectively, from the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/1994/126, letter dated 7 February 1994 from the
Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council; S/1994/127, letter dated
6 February 1994 from the Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General; S/1994/129, letter dated 7 February 1994
from the Permanent Representative of Slovenia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1994/136, letter dated

S/PV.3336
5

(The President)
8 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1994/137,
letter dated 7 February 1994 from the Permanent Representatives of
France, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/1994/138, letter dated 7 February 1994 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1994/139, letter
dated 8 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/1994/143, letter dated 9 February 1994 from the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council; S/1994/144,
letter dated 9 February 1994 from the Chargé d’affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1994/145, letter dated
7 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1994/146,
letter dated 9 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of
Malaysia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/1994/148, note verbale dated 5 February 1994
from the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1994/153, letter dated
10 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1994/158,
letter dated 10 February 1994 from the Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
and S/1994/166, letter dated 11 February 1994 from the Chargé

S/PV.3336
6

(The President)
d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
The first speaker is the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on whom I now call.

S/PV.3336
7

Mr. SACIRBEY (Bosnia and Herzegovina):

At the outset,

Mr. President, let me commend you for the able fashion in which you
have directed the activities of the Security Council, and for the
attention that you have given to the matter in hand.

Let me at the

same time direct my compliments to the Permanent Representative of
the Czech Republic for the fashion in which he directed the Council
during the month of January.
The terrorist attack on Sarajevo’s market-place last weekend
shocked and awakened the world by its brutality and carnage.

For

the last 22 months, though, the citizens of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have been traumatized on a daily basis by this form
of terrorism.

The lack of response to such atrocities had forced

the people of Bosnia to become resigned to their abandonment by the
Western Powers.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s ultimatum to the
Serbian forces besieging Sarajevo is most welcome, and overdue.
However, it is fair to note that the massacre of innocent civilians
in the market-place was unique only in its death toll and in the
media coverage it has received.

Bosnian civilians have been

targets of Serbian gunners on a daily basis; they have often been
struck by gunfire as they struggle to gather the essentials of life
or as they venture out of their homes and cellars seeking to
overcome the psychological depression of the siege.
Just the day before the market-place massacre, nine Sarajevo
civilians were murdered and almost 20 were maimed while waiting in
line at a United Nations relief centre.

Three weeks ago a group of

children were murdered while seeking to recapture their youth by
sledging on the snow.

Six of them found death as their only escape

from the horrors of Sarajevo.

Their surviving friends will have to

S/PV.3336
8

(Mr. Sacirbey, Bosnia and Herzegovina)
live with physical and emotional scars because of their attempts to
recapture childhood fantasy.
A couple of months ago 15 Sarajevans were targeted and
murdered while playing soccer.

It is impossible to recount all the

other incidents in which one or two or three innocent Sarajevans
happened to be the lonely, and therefore the forgotten, victims of
Serbian gunners targeting civilians for random terrorism.
In each previous instance the United Nations forces concluded
that the Serbian forces were responsible for the atrocities.

Each

instance symbolizes the ongoing siege and strangulation of
Sarajevo.

Each of these terrorist acts should have triggered the

Western and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) commitment to
stop the strangulation of Sarajevo, not to mention the obligation
to protect the safe areas, as required by Security Council
resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993).
Of course, the plight of the other five "safe areas" in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as that of the remainder of the country,
continues, at the same level of deprivation and suffering.

The

Muslim and Croat citizens of Banja Luka are being exposed to Nazistyle repression and physical torture.

Recently six civilians were

murdered, without any provocation, by the Serbian military police
in Banja Luka.

No legal recourse has been pursued by the Serbian

occupation authorities with respect to this crime.
The citizens of the safe area of Bihac have been exposed to a
week of an intensified Serbian onslaught and shelling.
are once again the targets.

Civilians

Bihac city hospital has been shelled

consistently; in the last few days it has been hit directly eight
times, killing 14 patients and causing enormous damage to the

S/PV.3336
9

(Mr. Sacirbey, Bosnia and Herzegovina)
facility.

This attack was timed to coincide with the world’s focus

on Sarajevo, but the consequences have been just as deadly as the
terrorist attack on Sarajevo’s market-place.
Late is better than never and a little is preferable to
nothing when human lives are directly at stake.

Let me, therefore,

thank NATO for its most recent effort, and in particular for the
leadership shown by its Secretary-General, Manfred Woerner.

Let me

also acknowledge the efforts of all those contributing to the
humanitarian relief, including the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), in our country.
We recognize the potential risk that these new steps may pose
for all, but we are certain that a failure of will to change the
deteriorating status quo would result in even greater danger for
Bosnian civilians, in no progress towards peace and in disaster for
all.

The new path that we have hopefully and finally taken is the

only logical first step towards peace.

For those who understand

only the language of force and the logic of war, this step will be
the first to counter their aggression and terrorism.
For us, who understand the logic of peace, this will provide
the necessary credibility and confidence to establish a more
suitable environment for the creation of peace.

This first step

cannot just be labelled as the logic of war or the logic of peace;
it is the only logical step.
We commend the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
for initiating this first step and the commitment by NATO.
Resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) do not require any further
action or consultation by the Security Council if the terms of
those resolutions and the ultimatum are not met by the Serbians.

S/PV.3336
10

(Mr. Sacirbey, Bosnia and Herzegovina)
The conditions of resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) and
the withdrawal of the Serbian forces and their weapons should be
executed fully and in a timely manner.

Any deviation should

trigger the necessary response, to which there is already a
commitment.
The Secretary-General and NATO have been delegated with this
responsibility, and the international community and Member States
expect that these delegated obligations and commitments will be
carried out without equivocation.
The Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is,
under resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993), explicitly allowed to
retain its forces and weapons within the "safe areas", including
Sarajevo.

None the less, as a commitment of good will, we have

also agreed to withdraw or to deliver our heavy weaponry to United
Nations control.

Our good will here certainly heightens the

obligation of NATO and the international community to be true to
the letter of their commitment, since our citizens may become even
more defenceless and exposed to any Serbian full or partial
non-compliance.

Any inclination to avoid taking the current first

step under the terms of resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) would
not be constructive.
Although we are prepared to consider United Nations
demilitarization and administration of Sarajevo as part of a final
and overall peace plan, such premature attempts can only delay the
taking of the necessary steps and deviate from the desired
conclusion.

In fact, any inclination to overlook what may be seen

as partial or even minimal Serbian non-compliance would be most
dangerous for our citizens, for NATO’s credibility, for the efforts

S/PV.3336
11

(Mr. Sacirbey, Bosnia and Herzegovina)
of the United Nations in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
for overall peace in the region.
The siege of Sarajevo should be completely lifted, and
movement into the city should be free of any Serbian control and
interference.
The Bosnians are continuing their commitment and efforts
towards negotiations.

We are making very painful concessions.

We

even continue to sit across the table from those who are
responsible for the market-place massacre and other terrorist acts.
The Western Powers have chosen this two-way track to a
negotiated settlement.

Ultimately, we may all have to pay the

price for negotiating with and legitimizing terrorists and
fascists.

None the less, we have no option but to follow the lead

of the most powerful, those who are, presumably, the defenders of
democracy, freedom and tolerance.

S/PV.3336
12

(Mr. Sacirbey, Bosnia and Herzegovina)
But I remind all not to forget the second track.

The proper

response to a terrorist act is the use of force and not a call for
more negotiations.

To state or even imply that a terrorist act

exhibits an even greater reason for negotiations is to give
political and diplomatic weight to that very act.
Council:

Members of the

keep your end of the bargain, your pledge to the proper

response, and we will remain committed to the difficult negotiating
track.
In this context, we encourage the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to ensure that the negotiations are not subject
to the so-called realities of the Serbian aggression and conquest the realities of war and genocide - and that peace is achieved on
the basis of Security Council and General Assembly resolutions and
the United Nations Charter.

Most notably, "ethnic cleansing"

should be reversed, and the acquisition of territory and the
changing of borders by force or genocide should be rejected.
We will support any efforts to broaden the involvement of the
Security Council and Member States in the peace process, and in
this context we back the relocation of talks, even intermittently,
to New York City.
Regardless of the negotiating track, the terrorist attack on
the marketplace in Sarajevo once again underscores the need to
bring war criminals at all levels to justice.
be sacrificed for political expediency.

Justice should not

Otherwise, we may truly

sacrifice any chance for a real and durable peace.
The plight of Sarajevo is only the tip of the iceberg of the
suffering and the aggression directed against the Bosnian people.
If peace is to be secured and the credibility of the negotiating

S/PV.3336
13

(Mr. Sacirbey, Bosnia and Herzegovina)
process is to be established, the international community must move
to implement Security Council resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993)
in the other five safe areas and to take the necessary measures to
secure the safety of all Bosnians throughout our country, or at
least to allow us to defend ourselves unhindered.
It is clear to us that the arms embargo imposed by resolution
713 (1991) does not apply to the Government of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are a country under attack from a much

better-armed aggressor bent on territorial conquest and genocide.
It is clear that the aggression continues and that the Council
still has not fully confronted the aggressor.

Our rights under

Article 51 of the Charter are clear and absolute.
The Council’s commitment to ensure full and timely compliance
with resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) around Sarajevo and to
extend this commitment to the other safe areas and the remainder of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be critical in determining the
necessity for us to exercise our full rights under Article 51.
Finally, let me quote Mr. Anthony Lewis, the syndicated
columnist, who has so extensively analysed and commented on the
aggression with respect to the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina:
"The NATO ultimatum to Serbian forces around Sarajevo
could be, at long last, a first step toward ending the
bloodiest aggression in Europe in 50 years.

Or it could be an

empty gesture by politicians trying only to escape
embarrassment." (The New York Times, 11 February 1994, p. A35)
It is our sincere hope that Mr. Lewis is correct in the former
rather than the latter assessment.

S/PV.3336
14

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Bosnia and

Herzegovina for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):
French policy on Bosnia and Herzegovina has a clear goal:

The

through a negotiated political settlement.

peace

The recent decisions of

the States members of the Atlantic Alliance should be interpreted
in the context of reinvigorating the search for a political
solution.

Their only purpose is to make available to the United

Nations the means to implement Security Council decisions, and thus
to improve the chances for peace.
In that perspective, our top priority is to lift the siege of
Sarajevo.

We want to prevent the recurrence of massacres of

civilians like those of 4 and 5 February.

We also want, by giving

the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) control of heavy
weapons, to begin the demilitarization of Sarajevo and to move
towards placing the city under provisional United Nations
administration as contemplated in the European Union plan of
action.

I would recall that this peace plan is the basis for the

political solution we seek.

We hope that the entire international

community will be able to endorse the efforts of the European Union
and that the Union’s objectives can be the object of a common
strategy by the international community, including - which is very
important - the Russian Federation.

In that connection, we welcome

the positions taken by the Government of the United States.
As I have just said, we wish first of all to lift the siege of
Sarajevo, and we hope we are on the right track.

Let me express my

Government’s satisfaction at the decisions taken on 9 February by
the North Atlantic Council, in response to the 6 February request
by the Secretary-General addressed to Mr. Woerner that the North

S/PV.3336
15

(Mr. Mérimée, France)
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), at the request of the United
Nations, authorize air strikes to prevent further shelling of
Sarajevo following the intolerable massacres of 4 and 5 February.
The decisions of the North Atlantic Council respond also to
proposals made by the United States and by France with a view to
ending the siege of the city and achieving the withdrawal or
supervision of the heavy weapons that represent a constant threat
to the city.
What did the North Atlantic Council decide?

Essentially, it

is that the heavy weapons of the Bosnian Serb forces within a
radius of 20 kilometres from the centre of Sarajevo shall be
withdrawn or regrouped and placed under UNPROFOR control within 10
days.

The North Atlantic Council also called upon the Government

of Bosnia and Herzegovina to place its heavy weapons within the
operational area under UNPROFOR control within the same time frame.
We welcome its having agreed to do so.
To ensure the implementation of these measures, the members of
NATO decided that heavy weapons remaining within the operational
area at the end of the stated time and not under the control of
UNPROFOR would be subject - no matter which side they belonged to to air strikes carried out in close coordination with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

The members of NATO also

agreed to Mr. Boutros-Ghali’s request to authorize the Commanderin-Chief of Allied Forces in Southern Europe to launch air strikes
against artillery positions from which attacks on civilian targets
in Sarajevo originated.
I will spare the Council a lengthy exegisis and simply say
that, for my Government, the North Atlantic Council decisions I

S/PV.3336
16

(Mr. Mérimée, France)
have just summarized are squarely within the framework of Security
Council resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) with respect to safe
areas.

Indeed, the lifting of the siege from those areas -

Sarajevo in particular - is the purpose of those resolutions,
which, inter alia, authorized UNPROFOR to use force, including air
power, in fulfilling its mandate.

Hence, there is no need for

these decisions of the North Atlantic Council to be submitted to
the Security Council for any further decision.

Moreover, my

Government considers that in contacting NATO the Secretary-General
was acting within his authority and in accordance with Security
Council resolutions.

S/PV.3336
17

(Mr. Mérimée, France)
The measures set out in the decisions taken by the North
Atlantic Council should make it possible to raise the Sarajevo
siege within 10 days.

My Government obviously will be very pleased

at any action taken by the parties which will lead to the
conclusion of a cease-fire and to the neutralization of heavy
weapons on a voluntary basis within the timed allowed.

In this

connection, we welcome the negotiations that have begun in Sarajevo
under the aegis of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the Commander of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My Government also takes

note of the desire of the Russian Federation that the Security
Council consider steps to raise the siege of Sarajevo and to place
the city under United Nations administration.
say that we share this same objective.

We are pleased to

Nevertheless, we believe

that such consideration should in no way call into question the
decisions of the North Atlantic Council, which should be
implemented fully.
May I again make it abundantly clear that the purpose of my
Government is to revive the diplomatic process and encourage the
search for a negotiated political solution.
The Council will have noted that the members of NATO, by
taking the decisions to which I have just referred, have been
acting very clearly in pursuit of a logic of peace.

We believe

that there is no other way to settle the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina than through negotiations.

The only lasting solution

to the conflict is not military, but political, and it must be
based on a peace plan acceptable to all parties.

A comprehensive

settlement plan now exists; it is that of the European Union.

This

S/PV.3336
18

(Mr. Mérimée, France)
plan, which so far has not been accepted by all the parties, is
once more being discussed.

Its provisions are not immutable.

They

can be modified to allow for qualitative adjustments to make the
future predominantly Muslim republic economically viable.

It is

important that the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina now make
its demands in this connection clearly known.

We are prepared to

consider them and to make the necessary efforts, in conjunction
with our partners and all other States concerned, to impress upon
the parties the advantage for them in accepting a political
settlement on that basis.
The conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina has now reached a
turning-point which we should all be aware of.

The time has come

for us all to come out strongly in favour of peace.

This is the

message my Minister wished to emphasize when he visited Sarajevo at
the end of last week.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States):

The objective of this

Council, as it is of my Government, should be to encourage the
parties to the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina to negotiate a
real peace, a just and viable peace that is freely accepted by all.
Put simply, the United States believes that this conflict should be
resolved at the negotiating table, not on the battlefield.

But the

horror of recent days is evidence that the objective of peace
cannot be obtained by diplomacy alone.

Our diplomacy must be

backed by a willingness to use force when that is essential in the
cause of peace, for it is only force plus diplomacy that can stop
the slaughter in Sarajevo and break the stalemate in Geneva.
There is a 10-day deadline for the withdrawal or placement
under United Nations control of heavy weapons identified within the

S/PV.3336
19

(Mrs. Albright, United States)
area of exclusion.

Weapons not under United Nations control may be

subject to air strikes.

During the 10 days the North Atlantic

Treaty Organization (NATO) will also respond, in coordination with
the United Nations, to the artillery or mortar fire that has
wreaked such havoc in Sarajevo.

These decisions are consistent

with resolutions approved by this Council.
further Council action.

They do not require

We need to remind ourselves that the

decision to initiate air strikes rests in the hands of the
Secretary-General, and it was the Council that put it there.
It is important for all to be clear about what the decision of
the North Atlantic Council means and what it does not mean.

It is

not an intervention in this conflict on behalf of one or another of
the parties.

The purpose is to persuade the parties that the

pursuit of a military conclusion to this conflict serves the
interests of no one.

As the Council has repeatedly stated, a

negotiated peace, acceptable to all, is preferable for all.

Those

who understand this point will have their security enhanced by the
North Atlantic Council decisions.

Those who do not will, through

their own aggression, put themselves at risk.
Neither NATO nor this Council can or should impose a
settlement upon the parties, for an imposed settlement will not be
a lasting settlement.

But by seeking to reduce the level of

violence around Sarajevo, a United Nations designated safe area, we
hope to reinvigorate and lend substance to the negotiating process.
My own Government is actively engaged in that effort.
At this point I would like to pay tribute to the
representative from the Russian Federation, for as recently as last
week, and as long ago as last February, his Government has
advocated taking action to demilitarize Sarajevo.

S/PV.3336
20

(Mrs. Albright, United States)
The international community is saying to the Bosnian Serbs
"You have a choice.

You can live up to your avowed desire for

peace by cooperating in steps that will reduce tensions and improve
the climate for peace, or you can take aggressive actions and
invite the bitter consequences.

In making this choice you should

not doubt our will, or that of our NATO partners to carry out the
9 February decision.

The shelling of Sarajevo must stop, and the

rights and safety of all United Nations and other international
personnel, whether official or private voluntary, civilian or
military, must be strictly respected."

In that regard, we note

that the United States will advocate strong action by this Council
if the Bosnian Serbs follow through on their threats to restrict
the movement of international relief workers.
To the parties in the conflict, we say "The time has come to
begin building a viable future for your people.

It is time for

reconstruction and repair, for tilling the soil and schooling the
young.

We can help you build a different future, but you must do

your part.

For your citizens are entitled to what

President Clinton called, in the context of the Middle East, the
quiet miracle of a normal life.

Your families deserve to be able

to cross the street, to sled down a hill, to worship God and to go
to the market without fearing that at any minute death may descend
upon them from the sky."
As we watch the Olympics on our television screens this week,
we are reminded that it was just 10 years ago that we watched the
1984 Olympics in Sarajevo.

It was just 10 years ago that the world

was treated to pictures of a modern, European city, of mosques
standing alongside Orthodox and Catholic churches, in what was a
wondrous symbol of a multi-ethnic city.

S/PV.3336
21

(Mrs. Albright, United States)
To my colleagues on the Council, and to the Secretary-General,
the decision of the North Atlantic Council will bring closer to
reality the sentiments we here in the Security Council have so
often expressed concerning Bosnia:

to seek an end to aggression,

to safeguard innocent lives, and to encourage the peaceful
resolution of disputes.

In so doing, for the first time a regional

security organization, NATO, has acted to implement a decision of
this Council to use force under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter.
We are entering uncharted waters.

Cooperation between NATO

and the United Nations is essential, not only for the citizens of
Sarajevo and other safe areas in Bosnia, but also for the precedent
it will set for the future of collective security.
The firm and fair implementation of NATO’s decision will
contribute much to the credibility of this Council and of the
United Nations, in which have been vested the most cherished
aspirations of humankind.
In closing, let me also pay special tribute to the
representative of France, with whom we have worked so closely in
recent days, and whose Government played such a critical role in
working to help the citizens of Sarajevo.

S/PV.3336
22

Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

This Council is only

too conscious of the tragedy of Bosnia and above all of the tragedy
of its people.

In the nearly two years of war in that country, the

suffering has been heart-wrenching, terrible crimes have been
committed and no good, no useful purpose has been served.

It is

right therefore that we should hold this debate at what could prove
a turning-point in the conflict, a moment when an already dreadful
situation could get even worse or a moment when a corner could be
turned and decisive progress be made towards a peaceful settlement.
The weekend before last some 70 civilians died in Sarajevo as
a result of artillery and mortar attacks.
those who caused these deaths.

We unreservedly condemn

There could be no more graphic

demonstration of the urgency of ending this strife.
It seems clear - and this is not a value judgement but rather
an analysis based on the facts - that none of the parties can
achieve their aims on the battlefield.

The longer the fighting

goes on, the more everyone will suffer.

Only a political

settlement achieved at the negotiating table will bring an end to
the hostilities and create conditions for a lasting peace.
This was the context within which the members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), of which my country is one,
met on 9 February to consider how they could best contribute
towards the search by the United Nations for a political
settlement.

That is why NATO, acting within this logic of peace,

agreed on a number of measures designed primarily to support the
efforts of the United Nations.
In this respect, NATO decided, first, to agree, with immediate
effect, to the United Nations Secretary-General’s request of
6 February to be prepared to launch air strikes, at the request of

S/PV.3336
23

(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
the United Nations, against artillery or mortar positions which the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) determines are
responsible for attacks against civilian targets in Sarajevo.
Secondly, NATO decided to call upon all the parties to respect
a cease-fire around Sarajevo.

NATO called on the Bosnian Serbs to

withdraw their heavy weapons from an area within 20 kilometres of
the city, excluding an area within 2 kilometres of the centre of
Pale, or to place their heavy weapons under UNPROFOR control within
10 days from that decision.

NATO also called upon the Bosnian

Government to place its heavy weapons in the same area under
UNPROFOR’s control within this period, and to refrain from attacks
launched from within the city.
Thirdly, NATO decided that the heavy weapons of any of the
parties found within this exclusion zone and not under United
Nations control after 10 days from 10 February would be subject to
air strikes, to be conducted in close coordination with the United
Nations Secretary-General and consistent with NATO’s earlier
decisions of 2 and 9 August on the provision of air support in
defence of UNPROFOR and in furtherance of its mandate.
My delegation participated in taking these important decisions
and supports them wholeheartedly.

Force should not be used unless

it is genuinely necessary and it contributes towards the search for
a negotiated settlement.

But it is clear that the shelling of

Sarajevo had to stop, and that its people had to be relieved.

It

is now up to the parties, and above all to the Bosnian Serbs, to
take the necessary action.

If they do not respond, they should be

in no doubt of the action that the United Nations and NATO working
together will take.

S/PV.3336
24

(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
We welcome and support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Force Commander in Bosnia to secure the parties’ observance of a
cease-fire and the withdrawal or cantonment under United Nations
control of heavy weaponry in Sarajevo.

The deployments by UNPROFOR

on 10 and 11 February to monitor the confrontation line are an
important first step.

These are valuable moves towards the wider

objective of placing Sarajevo temporarily under United Nations
administration, as envisaged in the European Union Action Plan.

It

is particularly encouraging that this objective, which must be seen
as part of an overall strategy for bringing peace to Bosnia, enjoys
the full support of the Russian Federation.
Looking beyond Sarajevo, UNPROFOR must be able to continue to
carry out its mandate to safeguard the delivery of humanitarian aid
and to deter attacks on the threatened areas.

It is essential that

the parties cooperate fully with UNPROFOR in ensuring that the
rotation of troops in Srebrenica and the opening up of Tuzla
airport to the humanitarian effort take place forthwith.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to all
those involved, often at considerable personal risk, in supporting
the humanitarian effort throughout Bosnia, as well as those,
including Lord Owen and Mr. Stoltenberg, who are working
ceaselessly for a negotiated settlement.

It is shocking that many

of these people continue to face dangers in carrying out their
duties.

The duty of the parties to cooperate fully and

unconditionally with the international humanitarian effort and to
observe the commitments they took upon themselves in the agreements
of 18 and 29 November 1993 is clear.

We for our part remain

S/PV.3336
25

(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
committed to sustaining this aid effort as long as the security
conditions allow.
In conclusion, delay and procrastination do not, in Bosnia,
lead to things getting better:

they lead to their getting worse.

That, alas, is the story of the last two years.

It is therefore

crucial that the parties negotiate seriously now to find solutions
to the remaining issues that separate them.

The European Union

Action Plan points the way towards a settlement.

We warmly welcome

the closest possible United States and Russian involvement in this
search for peace.

The international community must now work to

revitalize the peace process and bring it to an early and
successful conclusion.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
We are meeting today in response to the requests made by the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Pakistan - on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference - and the Russian
Federation to consider events that have stirred public opinion
throughout the world: the recent bombardments which once again have
devastated the city of Sarajevo, causing a high number of civilian
victims.
Our response must be clear and unanimous.

The international

community cannot allow such acts to continue.
The European Union, at the ministerial meeting of 7 February,
vigorously condemned the merciless bombardments of the civilian
population of Sarajevo and, in agreement with the United Nations
Secretary-General, has made the immediate lifting of the siege of
Sarajevo a priority objective, using, to this effect, all necessary
means, including recourse to air strikes.

S/PV.3336
26

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
We unconditionally condemn the perpetrators of these brutal
acts.

It is true that, thus far it has not been possible to

determine who was responsible for the bombardment on the market,
despite the investigations carried out by the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the establishment of an ad hoc
commission of investigation.

Nevertheless, we cannot overlook the

fact that this tragedy took place after many months during which
Sarajevo had been subjected to continuous bombardments from Serbian
positions, with many civilian victims, not to speak of the
immeasurable damage to the historical and cultural heritage of the
capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose unique character as a
multicultural, multi-ethnic and multireligious centre must be
preserved from destruction, as Security Council resolutions
824 (1993) and 859 (1993) point out.
If the Bosnian Serbs do not want to be the object of the
condemnation of the international community, which their conduct
has earned, they need but silence their artillery and withdraw them
or place them under the control of UNPROFOR, as has been demanded
of them at least since the London Conference in August 1992.
This situation could not continue, or remain without a
response.

Therefore, we are pleased by the rapid initiative taken

by the United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
in addressing a letter to his counterpart at the Atlantic Alliance,
Mr. Manfred Wörner, on 6 February.

His decision, based on the

relevant Security-Council resolutions and intended to make more
flexible the procedures which will enable the United Nations and
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to have recourse to

S/PV.3336
27

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
air strikes in support of UNPROFOR and as a deterrent to the
bombardments of the city of Sarajevo, was the appropriate step to
take at this point.

S/PV.3336
28

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
The Atlantic Council’s decision of 9 February is, in our view,
the appropriate response to the request by the United Nations
Secretary-General and reflects the firm will of the States members
of the Atlantic Alliance to, first, put an end to the siege of
Sarajevo, in compliance with Security Council resolutions
824 (1993), 836 (1993) and 844 (1993), thus sparing the civilian
population additional suffering; and, secondly, to support the
efforts to reach an agreement to demilitarize the city and its
environs, preventing any of the parties from obtaining military
advantages as a result of the prolongation or lifting of the siege.
The carrying out of air strikes by North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) forces, if needed, would take place in response
to a request by the United Nations in the event of further
bombardments of Sarajevo, and, in any case, in close coordination
with the Secretary-General, if Sarajevo and its environs are not
demilitarized as stipulated in the Atlantic Council’s decision.
Spain considers that these decisions are based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 836 (1993)
of 4 June 1993, which, may I recall, was adopted as the result of
the initiative contained in the Washington Declaration signed by
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the United States, the Russian
Federation, France, the United Kingdom and Spain.

We also consider

that those Security Council resolutions give sufficient authority
to the United Nations Secretary-General.

We have complete

confidence that, in close coordination with NATO authorities, he
will take whatever decisions are necessary in the circumstances,
within the context of those resolutions.

S/PV.3336
29

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
It therefore seems to us wise of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the contents of his letter of 10 February addressed
to the President of the Security Council, to have given
instructions to his Special Representative for the former
Yugoslavia, Mr. Akashi, and through him to the UNPROFOR Commander,
to complete, in coordination with his NATO counterparts, the
procedures required to begin and execute the air strikes that may
be deemed to have become necessary.
It is clear that to achieve these objectives it is crucial
that NATO guarantee the security of the personnel of UNPROFOR, of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and of the
other international agencies that are working together in the field
in a mission of peace, a humanitarian mission.

We therefore deem

it appropriate for the Secretary-General to have delegated to his
Special Representative the authority needed to approve any request
which may be made in that respect by the UNPROFOR Commander, a
delegation of authority which extends to operations of immediate
air support in defence of United Nations personnel in any area of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In any event, we hope that it will not be necessary to have
recourse to aerial force and that the leaders of the parties to the
conflict will prove to have the necessary good judgement to
cooperate with UNPROFOR to arrive at the appropriate arrangements
in regard to Sarajevo, by means of an agreement to be negotiated
and implemented in the immediate future.

We are therefore also

very pleased that the Secretary-General has given instructions to
Mr. Akashi and to the UNPROFOR military authorities to proceed with
and intensify their efforts in that direction, which are beginning
to bear fruit.

S/PV.3336
30

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
Furthermore, we must emphasize that the decision of the
Atlantic Council must fall clearly within the logic of peace and
not within the logic of war.

Indeed, the Atlantic Alliance has

expressly reiterated support for a negotiated settlement of the
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina acceptable to all parties, and
has praised the European Union’s Plan of Action, aimed at reaching
a negotiated settlement.
Therefore, a possible limited recourse to force by the
international community is not to be interpreted at all as an
abandonment of the quest for a political settlement of the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The main objective of the decisions

adopted by the United Nations and the Atlantic Alliance is to halt
the bombardment of Sarajevo and lift the siege to which the city
has been subjected, and at the same time carry forward the
negotiating process.

Nobody should be mistaken about this:

it is

not a question of the international community’s being a party to
the conflict but, rather, of protecting civilians and making every
possible move towards a negotiated settlement.
Spain has repeatedly stated that the crisis in the former
Yugoslavia has no military solution; indeed, it is difficult to
imagine any military solution which would be both feasible and
acceptable to the international community.
The negotiations among the parties, with the assistance and
encouragement of the international community, continue to be the
only possible way out.

We have therefore consistently supported

the efforts made within the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia, and in particular the efforts of its Co-Chairmen,
Lord Owen and Mr. Stoltenberg.

The European Union’s Action Plan of

S/PV.3336
31

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
November 1993 falls within this framework, and although it
obviously can be improved upon it constitutes the basis on which
work is now being done, and it offers the best prospects for a
negotiated settlement.

In this context and in the present

circumstances, priority should be given to lifting the siege of
Sarajevo as well as to the steps by the Co-Chairmen designed to
place the administration of the city under the temporary authority
of the United Nations as a key means to reach a comprehensive
agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Indeed, it is not enough to save Sarajevo, or what remains of
that city.

Sarajevo cannot be kept as an island within a sea of

endless fighting.
areas":

We have to take into account the other "safe

Srebrenica and Zepa, Goradze, Tuzla, Bihac.

Nor can we

forget all the people - the Bosnians of various groupings, Muslims,
Serbs, Croats and others - who are still suffering from the effects
of the war in places such as Brkco, Olovo, Vitez or Mostar.
Therefore, an agreement on Sarajevo must quickly be followed
by a renewed impetus to achieve an effective cease-fire and a peace
agreement for all of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
If a negotiated, viable and lasting settlement is to be
reached, all the parties must make concessions, even though
logically those who started the conflict and have up to now
obtained major advantages in the field should yield more.
The parties to the conflict and the international community
must not cease their efforts to reach peace.
redouble them.

Indeed, they must

To give the necessary impetus, there must be

coordinated action by international organizations - primarily the
United Nations and the Atlantic Alliance - and the more active

S/PV.3336
32

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
presence and participation of those countries and groups of
countries that can exercise a beneficial influence on the parties
to the conflict.

Specifically, we call for joint action by the

European Union, the United States and the Russian Federation, while
not overlooking the contribution which can be made by the
neighbouring countries and others, such as those that belong to the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Spain once again expresses its support for the work of the
Co-Chairmen of the Conference, Lord Owen and Mr. Stoltenberg, and
for their availability to help in seeking a negotiated and viable
solution to the conflict so as to contribute as much as they can to
the implementation of the peace agreements which will finally be
reached by the parties - for it is the parties which are primarily
responsible for reaching such agreements.
At the beginning of April 1992, the bombarding of Sarajevo
started and, with it, the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Let us

all do everything that is needed so that, as soon as possible, that
cruel bombardment will cease, marking the beginning of the end of a
war which should not have a second anniversary.

S/PV.3336
33

Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

As the Security Council meets

today to discuss the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is
difficult not to express a clear sense of frustration and
impatience, sorrow and indignation.
For almost two years the Council has been seized of the
murderous conflict that rages in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Dozens of

resolutions have been adopted, innumerable presidential statements
issued, serious diplomatic endeavours undertaken, various
international conferences and meetings convened and countless
agreements signed, many just to be immediately broken.

All that

has been to little avail.
The Bosnian war has gone from the headlines to the back pages
of the international press, and back, but a solution continues to
elude those sincerely striving to reach peace.

Despite all the

efforts put together by the international community, the critical
work of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), the
tireless dedication of the mediators of the United Nations and the
European Union and the formidable accomplishments of the
humanitarian agencies in delivering badly needed relief assistance,
innocent civilians continue to fall victim to bullets and artillery
shells in Sarajevo and other areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This meeting is being held under the impact of the bloody
attack of 5 February against the central market in Sarajevo.

The

powerful and distressing images of that vile onslaught are still
fresh in everyone’s mind.

The Brazilian Government and people were

appalled and outraged by that horrendous criminal act, for which
there can be no possible justification.
Nevertheless, no matter how trying the circumstances - and,
indeed, very trying they are - it is essential that the

S/PV.3336
34

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
international community not lose sight of what must remain its
ultimate goal:

putting an end to this painful conflict through the

achievement of a just and sustainable peace, acceptable to all the
parties.
Brazil has always stressed the need for a negotiated, freely
arrived at solution to the conflict and will continue to do so.
Any such solution should take into account the legitimate interests
of all parties and ensure the protection of the basic rights of all
people in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The logic of peace, as some have

put it, must prevail over the reasoning of war.

The final key to

any solution is to be found in diplomacy and direct negotiations in
good faith between the three warring parties, not guns.
In this connection, the most recent peace initiative of the
European Union has much merit and, in our view, provides a sound
basis for a fair resolution of the conflict.

It deserves to be

explored to the fullest.
The time has come, though, for the international community to
make it clear that, in addition to persevering on the diplomatic
path, it has the resolve to carry out its own previous decisions
aimed at curbing the fighting and supporting UNPROFOR in the
performance of its broad mandate.
My delegation welcomes the current close coordination between
the Secretary-General and his North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) counterpart with a view to fostering the implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions, in accordance with
resolution 836 (1993).
The security of UNPROFOR personnel continues to be a matter of
serious concern.

It is our understanding that in any circumstances

S/PV.3336
35

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
all the appropriate measures will be taken to ensure their safety,
as well as that of relief workers.
We are entering a new and crucial phase in the quest for a
settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Important initiatives and

proposals are now on the table for discussion, including the
demilitarization of Sarajevo.

The fact that there are considerable

risks involved cannot be denied, but neither can the realization
that conditions now exist for attaining a lasting peace.
Previous opportunities were, unfortunately, lost after being
rejected by one party or another.

Now it is high time the parties

seized this chance, ceased immediately all hostilities and accepted
peace.

There must be no doubt that the attitude of each party will

be decisive as the international community considers what steps
will be taken next.

Ultimately, it will be up to the parties to

agree on the best way to settle their differences or, otherwise, to
make the choice between peace and the continuation of war.
Before concluding, I should like to place on record my
delegation’s appreciation for the fact that the Council is holding
an open debate on this excruciating but very important issue.

As

part of the efforts to ensure transparency and openness in the
deliberations of the Council, Brazil sees it as absolutely
essential that the membership at large, and especially those
countries with a direct interest in any given matter, be provided
with the opportunity to voice their views so that the Council may
take them fully into account in carrying out its duties under the
Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV.3336
36

Mr. KHAN (Pakistan):

The Government and the people of

Pakistan have been deeply shocked, anguished and outraged at the
barbaric mortar attack by the Serbs on the central market in
Sarajevo on 5 February, which caused the death of 68 Bosnian
civilians and critically injured hundreds of innocent men, women
and children.

We deplore and condemn this attack in the strongest

possible terms.
This horrendous incident took place only a day after a similar
attack on the suburb of Dobrinja, in which 10 people were killed
and 26 wounded.

It was part of a series of genocidal and cowardly

acts on the part of the Serbs, who have continued to defy, with
contempt, the resolutions of this Council, especially those
concerning "safe areas".

This latest indiscriminate shelling of

Sarajevo confirms our worst fears that the inhabitants of Sarajevo
and other "safe areas" are left at the mercy of the ruthless
Serbian aggressors.
The Government and the people of Pakistan express their
heartfelt condolences and sympathy to the Government and the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the bereaved families.
Pakistan has consistently urged the international community to
act decisively in order to halt and reverse aggression against the
Bosnian Government.

We have advocated resolute action, including

the use of force, particularly air strikes, to enforce and
implement the mandatory decisions of the Council.

Regrettably,

despite the fact that most of the Security Council resolutions on
Bosnia and Herzegovina were adopted under Chapter VII, they remain
by and large unimplemented.
To my delegation it is clear that only decisive use of force,
particularly the use of surgical, punitive air strikes, will make

S/PV.3336
37

(Mr. Khan, Pakistan)
the Serbs conform to Security Council resolutions.

In this

context, the requisite legal framework already exists in relevant
Security Counci1 resolutions, particularly in the unambiguous
stipulations of resolution 836 (1993).

A major moral, political

and legal responsibility rests on those Powers that have the
necessary means to enforce the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
We welcome the decision taken by the Council of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Council on 9 February, giving
an ultimatum to the Serbs to lift the siege of Sarajevo and to
remove their heavy weaponry from the Sarajevo exclusion zone or
face punitive air strikes.

We commend the decision taken by the

Bosnian Government to voluntarily place its weaponry under United
Nations control.

NATO member States have a great responsibility to

fulfil the demands of justice and equity.

They must ensure that

all provisions of the NATO ultimatum and relevant Security Council
resolutions concerning "safe areas" are met by the Serbian side.
We express the hope that, unlike previous threats, this decision
will be fully and expeditiously implemented.

We also hope that the

small window of opportunity that has appeared for an honourable
peace in Bosnia will not be dissipated and that fundamental United
Nations principles will be upheld in finding a lasting and a
peaceful solution for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.3336
38

(Mr. Khan, Pakistan)
For too long Serbian forces have prevented the United Nations
Protection Force from opening Tuzla airport for humanitarian
operations.

Bihac is also reported to have been under Serbian

attack for the last few days.

The international community must

also pay equal attention to the security of the civilian population
in all safe areas and in other threatened towns and cities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My Prime Minister, Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto, accompanied by her
Turkish counterpart, Madame Tansu Ciller, paid a visit to Sarajevo
on 2 February.

Through their personal commitment to the courage

and fortitude of the Government and people of Bosnia, they called
upon the international community to preserve the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and political independence of Bosnia
and to reverse the consequences of ethnic cleansing.
Aggression acquiesced to is aggression legitimized.

Those of

us who fail to fulfil the responsibility to halt and reverse
aggression against Bosnia will be judged by history as accomplices
of the Serbian aggressors.
We reiterate that the arms embargo against the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is selective, and contrary to Article 51 of
the United Nations Charter.

It has prevented the victim of

aggression from exercising its legitimate right of self-defence.
In fact, it has perpetuated the gross military imbalance favouring
the Serbs, thus emboldening them to pursue their aggression with
impunity.

In this context, it is pertinent to refer to relevant

General Assembly resolutions, particularly resolution 48/88 of
20 December 1993 urging the Security Council to give all due
consideration, on an urgent basis, to exempting the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina from the arms embargo imposed on the former

S/PV.3336
39

(Mr. Khan, Pakistan)
Yugoslavia under Security Council resolution 713 (1991), of
25 September 1991.
The need to allow the Bosnian Government to defend itself has
become all the more urgent given recent reports of the presence of
regular troops of the Serbian and Croatian armies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic of Croatia

have also been violating the arms embargo by supplying arms and
equipment to their surrogates in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are awaiting with keen interest the report by the
Secretary-General, requested recently by the Security Council,
regarding the full withdrawal of Croatian army elements and their
military equipment from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

If the Croats fail

to comply with the demand of the Security Council, stringent
economic sanctions should immediately be imposed on Croatia.
There is also an urgent need to focus on the provision of
adequate funding for United Nations peace-keeping operations in
Bosnia and elsewhere in the world.

We believe that the issue of

adequate funding for peace-keeping operations must be addressed
urgently, as they are expected to increased in magnitude in the
years ahead.
We hope that the International Tribunal will soon begin trials
of those responsible for heinous crimes in the former Yugoslavia.
We call upon States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to provide generous resources for the Tribunal.

The

Prime Minister of Pakistan recently pledged a $1 million
contribution to the Tribunal’s expenses as a manifestation of
Pakistan’s faith in the United Nations and its commitment to the
cause of justice in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.3336
40

(Mr. Khan, Pakistan)
We also express the hope that the Commission of Experts will
be allowed to facilitate the work of the International Tribunal by,
inter alia, establishing a record of violations.
The Government of Pakistan fully supports the principled
position taken by the Bosnian Government and the constructive and
flexible attitude it has demonstrated in the peace negotiations.
We regret the fact that the Bosnian Government has come under
tremendous diplomatic and military pressure to accept the
partitioning of its sovereign country.

We renew our appeal to all

parties to maintain, in good faith, a total cease-fire and a
complete cessation of hostilities throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina
in order to create an atmosphere conducive to meaningful peace
negotiations.
In this context, we should like to recall the Declaration
adopted by the Ministerial Meeting of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC) Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
held in Geneva on 17 January 1994, which stressed that, if the
peace process is to have any success and legitimacy, it must ensure
the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and a geographically and
economically viable, and defensible, territory for the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Moreover, the Serbs must be compelled to

return all lands seized by the use of force and "ethnic cleansing";
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina must retain its sovereign
access to the Sava river and the Adriatic sea; Sarajevo must remain
the undivided capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a symbol of
unity, tolerance and integration; the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes must be ensured; and there must be

S/PV.3336
41

(Mr. Khan, Pakistan)
international guarantees for the implementation of a peace
agreement and guarantees of future security.
My delegation shares the view that the venue of the peace
negotiations should be shifted to New York in order to bring them
under the direct supervision of the Security Council.

All peace

proposals must conform to the principles contained in the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

We must not encourage the dominance

of "realities on the ground" over legitimacy.
The tragedy of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a cause of concern to
the entire international community.

Restoration of peace in this

beleaguered country is a collective obligation.

The extent of

death and destruction at the hands of aggressive forces in Bosnia
makes it the most compelling case for united, global action.
How we respond to this challenge will determine the moral
content of the future world order.

The international community

must ensure that the time-honoured principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter triumph over expediency in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The proposal to convene an immediate meeting of the

Security Council to consider practical ways to demilitarize
Sarajevo and introduce United Nations control was put forward by
the Russian Federation, in view of the need for the international
community to take the most decisive action to put a stop to the
escalating violence in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
believe that a genuine partnership between the members of the
international community will indeed emerge, in the name of a
lasting peace, in open discussion of the problem.

We

S/PV.3336
42

(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
Russia, like the international community as a whole, is
extremely disturbed by the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina and by
the obstacles standing in the way of a settlement to this bloody
conflict.

The recent barbaric shellings of Sarajevo, which have

cost the lives of scores of people, have aroused great indignation
in Russia, and we believe that the perpetrators, whoever they may
be, must be severely punished.

We look forward to the report of

the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the results of the
investigation into these tragic events.
In the present circumstances, we believe that it is extremely
important to concentrate our efforts on preventing further
bloodshed, to refrain from any action that might fan the flames of
war, and, at last, make the breakthrough to a settlement to the
conflict, guided first and foremost by the logic of peace.
We note with satisfaction the agreement between the Bosnian
Serbs and the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina achieved under
the guidance of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), on
a cease-fire and on action towards ensuring that all sides - both
Serb and Muslim - immediately either put their heavy weapons in the
Sarajevo area under UNPROFOR control or withdraw them from the
area.
This approach is close to our own position.

Russia has more

than once proposed the immediate demilitarization of Sarajevo,
which would then be placed under United Nations control.

S/PV.3336
43

(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
We believe that such steps would constitute major progress
towards settling the entire Bosnian conflict.
Three weeks ago the Russian Federation put forward the
additional initiative of calling on the Security Council to
consider adopting further measures to consolidate the safe areas in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Unfortunately, it took the market-place

tragedy in Sarajevo for the Security Council and the United Nations
forces to become more actively involved in settling this problem.
In his 11 February letter to the President of the Security
Council the Secretary-General stated that he was instructing his
Special Representative for the former Yugoslavia,
Mr. Yasushi Akashi, to finalize detailed procedures for the
initiation and conduct of air strikes, and to ensure that those
procedures took adequately into account the Secretary-General’s
responsibilities vis-à-vis the Security Council, in accordance with
previously adopted resolutions of the Council.
There can be progress towards a settlement only if neither
party secures any advantage while the United Nations forces are
carrying out their demilitarization procedures.
As past cease-fires and other agreements between the parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina have often broken down, it is clearly of
great importance that the Security Council back up its demands with
a strong decision supporting the Secretary-General’s letters dated
6 and 11 February; encouraging positive progress in Sarajevo; and
supporting the Secretary-General’s proposal with respect to the
prompt conclusion, with UNPROFOR mediation, of an agreement on an
effective cease-fire in and around Sarajevo, on the withdrawal or
regrouping and placing under UNPROFOR control of heavy weapons
belonging to the Bosnian Serbs and on the placing under UNPROFOR

S/PV.3336
44

(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
control of heavy weapons belonging to the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in that district, and on ensuring strict compliance
with the security regime in the Sarajevo area, including protection
for UNPROFOR personnel and halting all violations of that regime,
in accordance with Security Council decisions.
In addition to these steps to untie the Sarajevo knot, we
believe it essential constantly to state explicitly our support for
the process of negotiations towards an overall settlement of the
Bosnian conflict.

It is now very important to urge all three

parties to the conflict to reach a compromise.
For its part, the Russian Federation will continue to
cooperate with the European Union and the United States of America
in an attempt to find a peaceful settlement.
We are not overdramatizing the present complex and confusing
situation with respect to international efforts to settle the
crisis.

Now under way is the difficult process of agreeing on a

consensus approach by the international community and of
coordinating action between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

All of this involves tremendous responsibilities.

More than ever before, we need cooperation and the maximum
convergence of positions in order to press on with the process of a
political settlement in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. KEATING (New Zealand):

New Zealand welcomes this

opportunity for the members of the Security Council, supported by
the wider membership of the United Nations, to send an unmistakable
message today to the Bosnian Serbs and to their backers in
Belgrade.

My delegation was amongst the first to support the

request by the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to convene
this meeting.

We supported his request not only because of the

S/PV.3336
45

(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
tragic events of Saturday, 5 February, in Sarajevo, but because we
believe that too much of the Security Council’s discussion - of
this and other important issues - is held in private.
As I have said, this debate gives the United Nations the
opportunity to send a very clear message.

What is that message?

It is that we, the United Nations, have crossed the Rubicon on this
issue.

There is no turning back.

If the strangulation of Sarajevo

does not cease, if the heavy weapons are not withdrawn or placed
under the control of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), if there are further indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, force will be used.
It is now more than six months since resolution 836 (1993) was
adopted.

New Zealand had advocated the selective use of air power

well before the adoption of that resolution.

We strongly supported

resolution 836 (1993), urging that air power should be authorized not only to defend UNPROFOR personnel, but also, if necessary, to
carry out UNPROFOR’s mandate and protect civilian populations.
We were pleased initially with the result.

The prospect of

the use of air power did, for a time, have a salutary effect.
Bombardments and shellings of safe areas diminished, and there were
some constructive developments in the peace-negotiating process.
However, it is a sad testament to human nature that even during
that period there was never a single day in which the fear of
attacks did not blight the lives of the people living in the
so-called safe areas.
But in the latter months of 1993 it became quite clear that
any positive impact of resolution 836 (1993) had dissipated.
noose around Sarajevo was pulled ever tighter.

The Serb

negotiators became bolder and less conciliatory in the peace

The

S/PV.3336
46

(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
negotiations.

And as the negotiations faltered, a resurgence of

conflict saw all parties vying to gain or regain territory.

The

protagonists began again - wrongly, in our view - to place hope in
an eventual solution by military means rather than by negotiation.
This situation has led to increasing pressure on the citizens of
Sarajevo and the other towns in Bosnia which were declared safe
areas by the Council in 1993.

In our view, this situation led

almost inevitably to the tragedy that struck the market-place of
Sarajevo on Saturday, 5 February.

Regrettably, and horribly, there

was nothing especially distinctive about the shot which caused this
tragedy.

Whichever individual or unit was responsible, that attack

and its awful consequences were part of a pattern of increasing
pressure which has encompassed Sarajevo since the siege began.
We believe the time has come to break this dreadful cycle.
The ultimatum that has been put down regarding heavy weapons is
both necessary and appropriate.

The prospect of forceful

intervention by the United Nations is what is needed at this time.

S/PV.3336
47

(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
We therefore welcome the fact that the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the Member States of NATO have now concluded
that the time has come, in terms of resolution 836 (1993), to place
air forces in readiness to undertake air strikes.
The initial indications from Sarajevo that the Bosnian Serbs
may be willing to move back their heavy weapons and meet the
requirements of resolution 836 (1993) are most welcome.

But there

must be no illusions in the minds of those who command Bosnian Serb
units about the serious consequences of delay, obstruction or
renewed bombardment.

The Security Council insists on a complete

and permanent cessation of bombardment and a complete and permanent
withdrawal of the offending weapons.
My Government pledges its full support to the
Secretary-General in the execution of the mandate he was given by
this Council in June 1993.

Both the Secretary-General and the

Member States whose aircraft may be involved have our support if it
should become necessary to take action.
That the United Nations may be obliged to take action of this
kind is highly regrettable.

New Zealand believes that the use of

force should always be an instrument of last resort.
does not advocate the indiscriminate use of air power.

New Zealand
Air strikes

must be carefully calculated as part of a calibrated response to
aggression.

But we will support their use, if they are the only

means to protect the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR),
ensure it can carry out its mandate including to deter attacks
against "safe areas" and to deliver relief, and facilitate progress
towards a peace settlement.
In this regard, I need to say a few words about the peace
negotiating process.

The complexity of the situation in Bosnia and

S/PV.3336
48

(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
Herzegovina should not blind us to the simple reality that peace
will not come to that tortured country until there is an agreement
between the parties that gives them the confidence to stop
fighting.
Throughout all the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, New
Zealand has supported negotiations under United Nations auspices
designed to reach a fair settlement.

But we believe that

negotiations must take place in an overall environment in which the
protagonists - by deeds as well as words - demonstrate a
willingness to reasonably accommodate the political, cultural and
social interests of the other parties.

Negotiations cannot be said

to be fair where the civilian population of one party lives in
constant fear of random bombardment, deprivation of humanitarian
supplies and repeated war crimes in respect of captured persons and
property, and even the wanton destruction of places of worship.
In these circumstances it is necessary and appropriate that
the United Nations, as the sponsor of the negotiating process,
should use the powers approved in resolution 836 (1993), and
unfortunately the time has come when they may have to be used.

But

I stress that the use of this deterrent must be seen as only one
element in an overall set of measures designed to reinforce a
solution by negotiation rather than a solution by war.
In this regard it is timely that new ideas are also coming
forward to reinvigorate the negotiating process.

My delegation

welcomes, for instance, the efforts being made by the Government of
Slovenia to refocus the attention of the international community on
the core problems of Bosnia.
But I must disagree with anyone who advocates either directly
or indirectly proposals that would deflect the impact of what has

S/PV.3336
49

(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
been done this last week.

The international community, with

virtual unanimity, has now warned that force will be used if the
heavy weapons are not moved back and if bombardment of Sarajevo
continues.
Sarajevo can be put under international administration.

That

is already envisaged in the peace agreements under negotiation.
But in our view the future efforts of the Security Council and of
the negotiators in Geneva should be directed towards the promotion
of a negotiated settlement as a full package and not the à la carte
selection of items which suit one party.
I must also record that New Zealand does not agree with those
who would advocate allowing a free flow of arms into Bosnia.

We do

not believe that such a step would enhance prospects for a
negotiated settlement.

It would only compound the killing and

suffering and create further difficulties for UNPROFOR’s
humanitarian operations.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the tragedy of
Bosnia has overshadowed us for too long.

Let us hope that we are

now at a turning-point and that the resolve of the United Nations
to act robustly in that country will communicate itself to all
parties, giving comfort and confidence to the victims, and reason
for the aggressors to lay down their weapons.
Mr. GAMBARI (Nigeria):

My delegation wishes to associate

itself with previous speakers in expressing outrage at and
condemnation of the series of attacks against the civilian
population in Sarajevo.

Nigerian condemns these dastardly attacks,

and in particular the massacre of 68 people in Sarajevo market on
5 February 1994, which we regard as totally reprehensible and
completely unacceptable.

We believe that a turning-point has been

S/PV.3336
50

(Mr. Gambari, Nigeria)
reached when the international community must act decisively to
ensure an end to these atrocities once and for all.

This Council

should send a clear and unambiguous signal that there is a limit to
its tolerance of these attacks.
reached already.

That threshold has in fact been

It is now time for firm and decisive measures

instead of the multiple threats and costly procrastination of the
past.
We fully support the idea of having a thorough investigation
of the shelling of the crowded market place in Sarajevo, which
occurred on 5 February 1994, but the Council should not be
prevented from taking decisive measures now, because there is ample
evidence of clear responsibility for other and earlier incidents
such as those in which 10 people were killed on 4 February and six
girls were killed on 22 January this year.

The Council should

avoid giving the impression that it is only when large casualties
are involved that it shows concern.
In this context, we welcome the Secretary-General’s letter to
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Secretary-General.
We fully support the steps he has taken, which we believe are
within the scope of the authority vested in him under resolution
836 (1993).

We also welcome the decision of the North Atlantic

Council and its determination to take all necessary measures, in
collaboration with the United Nations, to prevent further
deterioration of the situation in Sarajevo.
This is not the first time in this tragic conflict that NATO
has threatened to use air strikes to stop the strangulation of
Sarajevo.

What is new is that the international revulsion

following the sad events of 5 February 1994 has propelled the
leaders of NATO to act should their latest ultimatum be disregarded

S/PV.3336
51

(Mr. Gambari, Nigeria)
by the Serbs.

None the less, what we have at present from NATO is

the promise of action and not yet the delivery of such action
against the perpetrators of great atrocities in Sarajevo.
Furthermore, the promise of action to protect Sarajevo addresses
only one part of a wider problem - that is, how to protect a whole
people from total destruction at the hands of those who appear
determined to "ethnically cleanse" them out of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

On this wider issue the international community needs

to take urgent further action.

NATO has the resources and the

moral obligation to do its part in the context of regional
organizations playing major roles in resolving regional conflicts.

S/PV.3336
52

(Mr. Gambari, Nigeria)
Considering the developments in various parts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the beginning of this year, my delegation feels
that, unless the security situation throughout Bosnia improves
dramatically and the peace talks resume promptly and lead to early
agreements, the time has perhaps come to revisit the issue of
lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
following reasons.
First, we should remind ourselves that the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a sovereign and independent country, a Member of
the United Nations.

None the less, the sovereignty and territorial

integrity of Bosnia have been constantly and clearly violated - a
situation which continues to this day.
Secondly, unspeakable atrocities, including "ethnic
cleansing", rapes, killings and wanton destruction, are being
perpetrated on the country, with the civilian population bearing
the brunt of these cruelties.
Thirdly, this very Council has pledged several times to
protect Bosnia and for this purpose established "safe areas".

But

this did not deter further atrocities; instead, the "safe areas"
are besieged and bombarded every day.

Quite often, the very

soldiers and other personnel sent by the United Nations to carry
out this Council’s mandate are harassed, killed and in other ways
prevented from carrying out their legitimate duties, including the
delivery of humanitarian aid.

Being fully aware of the relative

military strengths of the various parties in Bosnia, the Council
should allow those who are disadvantaged to exercise their inherent
right to self-defence by suspending the arms embargo imposed on
them.

S/PV.3336
53

(Mr. Gambari, Nigeria)
What we are proposing is not to advance the logic of war, but
to establish the linkage between the logic of peace and a logic of
justice.

For we believe strongly that peace without justice cannot

endure.

It is in this context that Nigeria firmly believes that

the situation in Bosnia cannot be resolved militarily but by
negotiations and through a just political settlement.

Hence, we

strongly support the ongoing peace efforts and believe that they
should be intensified.

In the search for a political solution,

however, a just and lasting peace cannot be achieved by imposing
unacceptable conditions on any one party.

To achieve peace, the

international community must be firm and resolute in defence of
universally accepted principles.
Therefore, in summary, my delegation strongly supports the
following specific proposals.
First, the steps so far taken by the Secretary-General should
be fully endorsed.

We believe that resolution 836 (1993) provides

him with the necessary authority to call for action without further
reference to this Council.
Secondly, the sieges of Sarajevo and of any other designated
"safe area" must be lifted immediately and the bombardments must
cease forthwith.

The issues of complete demilitarization and the

future administration of Sarajevo should be the subject of
negotiations between the parties under the auspices of the European
Union and the United Nations.
Thirdly, the Security Council should reiterate its demands for
an immediate cease-fire throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
intensification of efforts towards a political settlement.

All

parties must recognize and accept the basic principles of the
inadmissibility of acquisition of territories by force, respect for

S/PV.3336
54

(Mr. Gambari, Nigeria)
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, and the
fundamental human rights of all people.
Fourthly, in the absence of peace and security throughout
Bosnia, the Council should perhaps reconsider the arms embargo on
Bosnia with a view to enabling the country to exercise its inherent
right to self-defence.
Finally, it is our view that the sum total of these
recommendations for action by the Council would constitute and also
advance the logic of peace with justice - the only realistic and
humane logic in this tragic conflict.
Mr. CARDENAS (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish):
The gravity of the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina compels the
Security Council to consider the situation in that country yet
again.
The latest events - the indiscriminate attacks on the civilian
population of Sarajevo - have revealed levels of irrationality and
cruelty that deserve nothing but our most vigorous and unequivocal
condemnation.

These attacks are an affront to civilization and

demonstrate a total lack of respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law which cannot be tolerated.
The militias which are intent on spreading terror among the
civilian population of Sarajevo and are responsible for the
artillery strikes can only be described as criminal bands.

It

should once more be reaffirmed that behind these acts of barbarism,
which do not differentiate between the civilian population and
military objectives, there are persons who should be tried by the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia.

The international

S/PV.3336
55

(Mr. Cardenas, Argentina)
community has placed its hopes in that Tribunal, established by the
Security Council last year.

The effect of its functioning will be

the complete restoration of justice.
The slaughter of children and innocent residents of Sarajevo,
the breakdown of essential services for the civilian population and
the organized and systematic paralysis and deviation of the flow of
humanitarian aid lead us to ponder the depths of human monstrosity
that war can reveal.

These atrocities, as well as the acts and

consequences of "ethnic cleansing", are not abstract practices but
tragedies which affect persons and families, whose sufferings we
share.
In the drive for territorial conquests by force and in the
name of selfish ideologies that exclude groups and sectors, very
serious violations of fundamental human rights - such as the right
to life, physical integrity, freedom and property - have been
carried out in Bosnia and Herzegovina, violations which the
international community can in no way accept.

The very real

genocide taking place in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a repugnant
aberration which must end.

The full enjoyment of human rights in

that country must be promptly restored.
For that to happen, the first requirement is peace, which the
conscience of all mankind demands.

The United Nations has always

advocated and continues to advocate a solution to the conflict at
the negotiating table.

So it must be.

To this end, the United

Nations has mobilized enormous human and material resources through
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), a peace-keeping
force which is nobly and generously operating in very high-risk
situations.

The immense and arduous work in the humanitarian field

which our Organization has been doing deserves all our gratitude.

S/PV.3336
56

(Mr. Cardenas, Argentina)
We demand, and will continue to demand, that humanitarian aid be
permitted to circulate freely, and we repudiate those who, in open
violation of international humanitarian law, interrupt, delay or
divert the arrival of the respective convoys.
Taking into account the work of the United Nations Protection
Force, to which my country is a major contributor of troops, and
the presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the humanitarian
organizations, we cannot, under the present circumstances, go along
with certain proposals to re-examine the situation, which might
have adverse effects on the functioning of these bodies and on the
intensity of the conflict itself.
Security Council resolution 836 (1993) sets forth a framework
for action in relation to the "safe areas".

In this context, since

appeals for peace have failed, the possibility of having recourse
to force on behalf of the Organization and with the support of the
Charter is - as the Secretary-General points out in paragraph 43 of
his document "An Agenda for Peace" (S/24111) - essential to
preserving the credibility of the United Nations as the guarantor
of international security and, moreover, should be understood as an
instrument within the logic of peace.

The action for collective

security is legitimized by the Security Council decisions adopted
within the context of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
In this tragic hour, we support the wise and brave decision of
the Secretary-General to request the cooperation of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.

That organization’s response of

9 February clearly shows the necessity of cooperation between both
institutions in order to face this unique crisis.
Attacks on the civilian population in Sarajevo require firm
and adequate action by the international community to put an end to

S/PV.3336
57

(Mr. Cardenas, Argentina)
the aggression, the siege of that city and the incredible savagery.
Artillery strikes on the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina should
never again take place.

All the parties to the conflict should

move towards peace in good faith, at the negotiating table.
To this end, we appeal to all of them to exert themselves to
the utmost to reach a political settlement.

We know that such a

settlement will necessarily require all the parties to make
concessions which, nevertheless, will not be more onerous than the
sacrifices and sufferings of war.

The peacefully negotiated

solution to this conflict must be realistic and just.
can it be permanent.

Only then

S/PV.3336
58

(Mr. Cardenas, Argentina)
We also support the proposal to place the city of Sarajevo
under temporary United Nations administration, and we agree on its
demilitarization within the context of a comprehensive solution to
the conflict.
The parties must respect the existing cease-fire, place all
heavy weapons under the control of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR), and proceed accordingly, adjusting their conduct
to the logic and the objective of peace.
The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves the same
consideration as any other United Nations Member in regard to the
full application of the principles of the Charter.

Its inhabitants

must be able to aspire to live in a pluralistic, integrated and
tolerant society.

In this forum, Argentina clearly states its

rejection of the policy of intolerance and racism.

The rights of

every minority must be recognized and respected within the
framework drafted by this very Organization.
Moreover, Argentina rejects the acquisition of territory
through the use of force.

Therefore, we pronounce once again

ourselves in favour of respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The work of UNPROFOR, we repeat, deserves our greatest
appreciation.

UNPROFOR is operating under high-risk conditions and

in areas where groups dedicated to terror and violence seek to
erase the most basic foundations of human society.

Let us recall

with respect and recognition the soldiers of several nations who
have given their lives and been wounded in the difficult task of
achieving the purposes and implementing principles of our
Organization in the countries of the former Yugoslavia.

Let no one

S/PV.3336
59

(Mr. Cardenas, Argentina)
lose sight of the concrete results achieved through UNPROFOR’s
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina:

striving for peace, saving

many lives and trying to prevent, or lessen, the terrible
sufferings of the civilian population.

We continue to warn all

parties of the need to respect fully the security of United Nations
personnel.
The citizens of our countries are following most attentively
the attitude of our Organization to this crisis.

There can be no

question of a passive attitude to the widespread trampling
underfoot of the norms of international humanitarian law.

We refer

to the ethical basis of United Nations action in this conflict,
which began to become clear with resolution 688 (1991) of April
1991.

Since then the Council realizes that there may be violations

of international humanitarian law which, since they are
exceptional, are a threat to international peace and security.
our view, it is not a question of interests.

In

That cannot be so

when repeated very grave behaviour offends the conscience of
humanity.
Therefore, let us not lose sight of the words of the preamble
of our Charter, in which the peoples of the United Nations declare
themselves determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm fundamental human rights and to defend
the dignity and worth of the human person, the equal rights of
nations large and small as well as justice and respect for
international law.
It is time for the ideals reflected in these words also to
reach the children of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
is our joint commitment.

This

S/PV.3336
60

Mr. AL-KHUSSAIBY (Oman):

At the outset, on behalf of the

Sultanate of Oman, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to
the friendly Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to the bereaved families of those who lost their lives
following the last tragic shelling of that Republic by Serb forces.
We join previous speakers in extending to you, Sir, our
sincere thanks for giving us this opportunity to address the
Council regarding the recent events that have taken place in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Since the establishment of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its subsequent accession to United Nations
membership in May 1992 we have seen that country subjected to
continuous armed and military aggression which has targeted its
sovereignty and independence and violated its legitimate right to
live in peace.

During the past two years of the conflict in Bosnia

and Herzegovina we have witnessed gross violations in this respect
of international and humanitarian law and of basic human values.
What we are now witnessing in Bosnia and Herzegovina - the killing
of innocent civilians in various areas, the siege of cities, the
blocking of humanitarian convoys from delivering their relief
supplies to the vulnerable, as well as "ethnic cleansing" and all
the other ongoing atrocities - constitutes flagrant defiance of the
will of the international community and a total disregard for the
resolutions adopted in this connection by the international
community.
We are assembled here once again, this time to review the
prevailing circumstances in Bosnia in the aftermath of the recent
massacre perpetrated by the Serbs against the innocent people of

S/PV.3336
61

(Mr. Al-Khussaiby, Oman)
Sarajevo on Saturday, 5 February 1994, which left at least 66
people dead and 159 wounded, the majority of them unarmed
civilians.

This massacre was committed at a time when the Serbs

were pretending to resort to the negotiating table.

Such a

contradictory position raises serious doubts as to whether the
Serbs, as the aggressors, are serious enough and ready to reach a
peaceful settlement to this conflict.
My country, while condemning this new Serbian aggression,
would call upon the Security Council to take the appropriate and
necessary measures to punish the aggressors and to protect the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who have resorted to this
Organization, seeking its support for their just cause.
Since the eruption of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia
and the aggression against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
a Member of the United Nations, my country has been calling on the
international community to allow this newly emerging Republic to
exercise its full right of self-defence in accordance with
Article 51 of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

While

efforts have been made by the European Community towards carrying
out air strikes against the Serbian forces, which have Sarajevo
under siege, we believe that it is high time to restore the balance
of power in the area in a manner that will enable the people of
Bosnia to defend themselves against any potential future attacks by lifting the arms embargo on defensive weapons imposed on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Welcoming the efforts of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and the contents of the two letters dated
6 February 1994 from the Secretary-General of the United Nations

S/PV.3336
62

(Mr. Al-Khussaiby, Oman)
addressed to you, Sir, in your capacity as President of the Council
for this month, and to the Secretary-General of NATO, the
delegation of Oman views these steps as recognition of the urgent
need to strengthen the defensive capabilities of the Bosnian
people.
In this context, we note that if the Serb forces concede or
surrender to the ultimatum to them by withdrawing their heavy
weapons beyond 20 kilometres from the Sarajevo city centre, there
is no guarantee that the same artillery will not be used in the
killing of other innocent people in other areas of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, undoubtedly confirming what we have pointed out before
about the primary need of the Bosnian people for self-defence.
That need cannot be met without the lifting of the arms embargo on
defensive weapons imposed on Bosnia and Herzegovina, as contained
in resolution 713 (1991) on the arms embargo to the former
Yugoslavia.

S/PV.3336
63

(Mr. Al-Khussaiby, Oman)
The establishment of peace has always been and will remain our
main objective in this area, and in the context of my country’s
endeavour to establish this significant principle we reiterate our
demand that the arms embargo imposed on the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina be lifted, for we are quite confident that the people
of that country do not seek any aggression against their
neighbours, but, on the contrary, seek to live in coexistence with
them.
In the light of those factors, we join many third-world
countries, the Muslim nations and others in their rightful
orientations, which stem from their belief that the sole means of
ending this conflict depends upon granting the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina their legitimate right to defend themselves.

Such a

right cannot be achieved unless the unjustifiable, imposed arms
embargo is lifted.
The time has come for the international community to
demonstrate, through the Security Council, its credibility by
strongly supporting the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
face of this aggression.

We therefore look forward to seeing the

Council take appropriate measures towards realizing the legitimate
right of self-defence of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We reaffirm our full support for this initiative calling for the
lifting of the arms embargo imposed on this Republic in order to
help its people in ending the suffering and injustices they have
endured and to help in bringing about peace and security, for which
this young, emerging Republic has been waiting for too long.

S/PV.3336
64

Mr. KOVANDA (Czech Republic):

The continuing conflict in

Bosnia and Herzegovina is one in which something called "sporadic
fire" has been elevated to normality, in which massacres and
"ethnic cleansing" are employed to change, and even create, borders
and in which historical, religious and cultural monuments are
destroyed as a matter of course.

It is a conflict without parallel

in post-war Europe.
We find the Serbian party bearing primary responsibility for
this conflict.

Many of its leaders are fanning the dangerous

flames of ethnic disturbances, which feed extreme nationalism on
all sides of the conflict, nationalism that is so foreign to
everything that Bosnia and Herzegovina used to represent before the
war started.

This results in a great danger for peace and security

far beyond the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We feel, of course, the same indignation as every other
speaker has expressed over the 5 February Sarajevo market-place
massacre.
yet.

We note that the guilty party has not been identified

Unless and until it is identified, we do not feel it

appropriate to apportion blame, however strong our suspicions may
be.

At any rate, we hope that the culprit will be identified and

then dealt with through appropriate legal mechanisms, especially
the International Tribunal for Yugoslav war crimes.
Meanwhile, though, there is an important sense in which the
identity of the culprit this time around is irrelevant.

The

massacre of 5 February was just one of a number of atrocious
attacks on the city, and the culprit in others has been identified
only too clearly as the Serbian side.

More people than ever before

lost life or limb on that fateful Saturday, but, in our opinion,

S/PV.3336
65

Mr. Kovanda, Czech Republic)
the difference between the death of six people and the death of
more than 60 is one of numbers only.
This is an occasion for us to do some soul-searching.

We have

to ask ourselves why the death of six schoolchildren last month did
not have the same effect.

Why did the death of 10 people on

Friday, a day before the critical Saturday, not have the same
effect?

If 60 lost lives led us to see the conflict in a different

light, would 50 have been enough?

Or 40?

If 10 lives lost were

not enough to shake us up, would 20 have done the trick?

We have

to address these questions in order to investigate our own sense of
humanity in politics, our own reactions to war and the degree to
which we have become inured to far-away suffering.
On 9 February a cease-fire was agreed between the Bosnian
Serbs and the Government forces.

We welcome this step, of course.

Still, we bear in mind the dozens of cease-fires agreed to
previously, only to be honoured in their breach.

We hope for the

best in this latest cease-fire and are encouraged that, so far, it
has been more or less holding. We hope that it proves to be durable
enough to overcome the cynicism we have developed over the past
months and years about the capacity of the parties to honour their
own commitments.
We welcome with relief the visible and unequivocal readiness
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to put muscle
behind the demands of the international community.

We applaud in

this regard NATO’s response to the request of the United Nations
Secretary-General to authorize air strikes against heavy-weapons
positions responsible for attacks against civilians. The 10-day
deadline is long enough to be met, but too short for any of the

S/PV.3336
66

(Mr. Kovanda, Czech Republic)
parties to squabble and seek a change in conditions.

The latest

reported conditions put forward by Bosnian Serbs indicate to us
that they perhaps continue to prefer the military option, and this
is unacceptable.
Let me also mention in this context that we have never doubted
that the Secretary-General has since last summer had all the
necessary authority to invoke the use of air power, concerning both
close air support and air strikes, as far as the Security Council
is concerned.
The threat of air strikes cannot be seen in isolation.

It is

a part of a broader set of measures and does not, in and of itself,
amount to a solution.

Any solution has to come from the three

sides in the conflict.

The threat has been issued, in particular,

to prevent the strangulation of Sarajevo, which in turn will make
it possible to place the city under United Nations administration,
should that be the desire of the parties.

The new air-strike

situation will, however, help concentrate their minds on seeking a
solution.
The fact that NATO has demanded more seriously than ever
certain behaviour on the part of the combatants should drive home
the point that the combatants themselves are, in the final
analysis, responsible for reaching a settlement.

That this did not

happen in the latest round of the Geneva negotiations is not
altogether surprising; the NATO measures significantly changed the
situation, and this change has first to be grasped, assimilated and
analysed by all the participants in Geneva.

We believe that the

acute possibility of air strikes will eventually contribute to real
progress.

S/PV.3336
67

(Mr. Kovanda, Czech Republic)
This conflict will not allow any party to emerge as an
all-round, permanent victor.

It would only compound the tragedy

if parties to the conflict did not grasp this fact, if they failed
to recognize that the option of peace is the only one available and
if the Saturday massacre ended up being just another episode in
accomplishing the self-serving but unattainable goals of military
adventurers.
The PRESIDENT:
morning.

We have heard the last speaker for this

A number of names remain on my list of speakers.

In view

of the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence of the
Council, to suspend the meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.
