S/2004/386

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 May 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 13 May 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1529 (2004), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti.
I should be grateful if the report could be brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-35087 (E) 140504

*0435087*

S/2004/386

Annex
Letter dated 12 May 2004 from the Deputy Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General
I have the honour to enclose the status report on the Multinational Interim
Force in Haiti. This report is submitted in accordance with paragraph 9 of Security
Council resolution 1529 (2004).
I should be grateful if you would bring this report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) James B. Cunningham
Ambassador

2

S/2004/386

Attachment
Status report on the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti
1.
The United Nations Security Council adopted resolution 1529 (2004) on
29 February 2004 in response to the deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situation in Haiti. By resolution 1529 (2004) the Council authorized
the immediate deployment of the Multinational Interim Force (MIF) for a period of
three months to contribute to a secure and stable environment in the capital and
elsewhere in the country.
2.
The Commander of the Combined Joint Task Force Haiti (as Commander of
MIF) submits this 60-day report in accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution 1529
(2004).
3.
MIF originally focused operations in and around the cities of Port-au-Prince,
Gonaïves and Cap-Haïtien to accomplish the tasks set out in paragraph 2 of
resolution 1529 (2004). On 24 April the Combined Joint Task Force began
operations in Hinche and cities in the southern claw of Haiti in order to increase
stability beyond previously patrolled population centres. The following results have
been noted since the status report dated 8 April 2004.
Task 1. To contribute to a secure and stable environment to support the
constitutional political process
(a) Ongoing MIF assessment indicates that the constitutional political
process has remained consistent since an initial dramatic improvement in the days
after the current Government of Haiti was established. The Government is still
limited in its ability to maintain civil organizations and infrastructure in some
isolated cities. Examples include Hinche, Les Cayes and Jérémie.
(b) MIF continues to provide site security to the Primature and the
Presidential Palace to ensure the unimpeded function of these critical government
facilities.
Task 2. To facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance and humanitarian
worker access
(a) All appropriate requests for support through the Civil Military Operations
Centre by humanitarian assistance organizations have been fulfilled. MIF operations
have contributed to providing an environment in which humanitarian assistance
organizations feel safe to operate without overt military protection. However, two
recent incidents of harassment on Route 300 between Port-au-Prince and Hinche
indicate sporadic lawlessness that will be addressed by MIF in upcoming operations.
(b) MIF collaborates with humanitarian assistance organizations through the
Civil Military Operations Centre to distribute assistance in targeted areas. MIF civil
affairs teams assess and communicate critical needs within Haitian society to the
appropriate humanitarian assistance organization.
(c) The Civil Military Operations Centre also coordinated with the Port-auPrince port authorities to address systemic problems that routinely delayed
humanitarian shipments. The process for clearing relief supplies through the Haitian
Customs department has returned to pre-crisis standards.

3

S/2004/386

Task 3. To facilitate the provision of assistance to the Haitian police and Haitian
Coast Guard to support public safety and human rights
(a) The MIF maritime component (United States Coast Guard forces attached
to MIF) worked with the Haitian Coast Guard to develop a long-term training plan
for the Haitian Coast Guard personnel to increase competency in basic seamanship
skills, boarding procedures, and boat-handling skills. They also conduct joint
maritime patrols with the Haitian Coast Guard and provide assistance in repairing
Haitian Coast Guard boats and physical structures. Additional support over time is
required to allow the Haitian Coast Guard to develop the ability to operate
independently.
(b) MIF forces continue to conduct joint patrols of population centres with
the Haitian police. These patrols have directly affected the public’s perception of
security and normalcy, and have served to increase the experience level of the
Haitian police.
(c) MIF, in coordination with the American Embassy, instituted the
Department of Defense rewards programme to persuade Haitians to provide
information that leads to seizure of weapon caches. This programme supplements
previous efforts to seize illegal weapons during joint Haitian police/MIF patrols. All
MIF weapon confiscation efforts are intended to support the ability of the Haitian
police to ensure public safety, provide force protection to MIF personnel, and
improve the overall security situation in Haiti.
4.
We continue to work towards facilitating the transfer of authority to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. MIF planners attended the Southern
Command Joint Inter-Agency Planning Group Conference on 29 and 30 April 2004
to coordinate transition and redeployment guidance and concepts. MIF planners
have also maintained regular contact and communication with United Nations
representatives to ensure the synchronization of United Nations and MIF planning
efforts. We have requested liaison officers from designated multinational force
partner States to further improve planning efforts.
5.
Notable progress has continued since the last report in returning portions of the
country of Haiti to an acceptable level of stability. Conditions have improved across
the board, and MIF operations have allowed market and school activities to return to
pre-crisis levels throughout the country. We are expanding MIF presence into the
southern claw to verify reconnaissance reports on conditions in that region, and to
demonstrate the international community’s resolve to continue stable conditions in
Haiti.
Task 4. To support establishment of conditions for international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations and the Organization of American
States, to assist the Haitian people
As reported in the first MIF report in March, thanks to the rapid deployment of
the Multinational Interim Force, the staff of international and regional organizations,
including OAS and the United Nations, have now been able to return to work in situ
and assistance projects have resumed.

4

S/2004/386

Task 5. To coordinate, as needed, with the OAS Special Mission and with the
United Nations Special Adviser for Haiti, to prevent further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation
As reported in the first MIF report in March, the Multinational Interim Force
Commander has met with the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, John
Reginald Dumas, and with OAS representatives in order to exchange views on the
situation in Haiti and the best means of responding to humanitarian objectives. MIF
contributors believe that the coordination of international and regional organizations
is crucial to improving the humanitarian situation and maximizing the effectiveness
of international assistance. This vital work will continue.

5
