TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 20MARCH1973

PANAMA

CITY

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l701)

...,...,.. . .. ... I .. .. .... .. I..

1

.. ... .... ......... .. ., .. .. .. .. ... ... ..

1

Consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter . . . , . . . , . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV.1701

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
i

SEVENTEEN
Held in the Legislative

HUNDRED

AND FIRST

MEETING

Palace, Panama City, on Tuesday, 20 March 1973, at 10 a.m.

President: Mr. Aquilino E. BOYD (Panama).

4. Let me begin by stating that it is my sincere hope that,
as they have done before on many occasions, the members
of the Council, aware of the need for reconciliation and
understanding, will try to reach agreed solutions on pressing
international problems by a process of give-and-take and
compromise. It is no secret that at the outset many
Governments were uneasy at the prospect of these exceptional meetings of the Council in Panama. The question
now is whether the Council is able to counteract those
initial doubts. I should like to think and hope that the
Council’s deliberations in Panama are being undertaken in
the spirit of the words of Benito Judrez engraved on the
memorial block at United Nations Headquarters: “EZ
respetoal derechoajeno es la paz“-respect for the rights of
others is peace.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l701)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in
Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter.

5. The design for world order outlined in the Charter
provides for the harmonization of national, regional and
global interests. In our increasingly interdependent world
the distinction between regional and global interests is
inevitably becoming less clear. It is therefore natural that
the Security Council, the world’s highest organ for the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
from time to time see for itself at close range the context of
particular problems, as it did in Addis Ababa last year and
is now doing here in Panama. By such exceptional meetings
it should be able to bring to the solution of those problems
the advantages of its unique status as a permanent and
paramount body for the settlement of international differencesand disputes, I hope also that in holding occasional
meetings away from Headquarters the Council may become
more of a reality to the peoples of the world whose
interests it serves.

The meeting was calIed to order at 10.45 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles
of the Charter
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with decisions previously taken by the Council
[169&h-1699th meetings] and with its consent, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Bolivia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Jamaica, Mauritania, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them in the Council chamber, on the
understanding that when it is their turn to speak they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table.

6. We all know well that in its 27.year history the Council
has not, for obvious reasons, been able to impose the
settlement of international disputes. Instead it has become
increasingly a body through whose deliberations the process
of conciliation, compromise and reduction of tension has
been brought to bear on problems which have proved
insoluble by other means. This is usually a long and
unspectacular process during which the Council often
attracts to itself the recriminations and accusations of
ineffectiveness which might otherwise be directed at the
parties to a particular dispute. It is none the less a process
designed to allow parties to a dispute to be reasonable, to
refrain from violence and to make concessions within the
broad framework of the Council’s procedures. Let us hope
that this aspect of the Council’s functions may also prove
to be useful in regard to the problems it has been discussing
during this past week.

2. I call on the Secretary-General, who wishes to make a
statement of extreme importance at the present stage of
our deliberations.
3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
If I am speaking again
at this stage, it is to present to the Council certain
reflections after almost a week of debate and after having
listened to many speakers, most of them from the
continent on which we are meeting.
1

7. It is indeed, as I said in my earlier statement at the
outset of this session /1695th meeting/, most beneficial
that the Council should have met for the first time in one
of the countries of Latin America. Although the Council
has spent relatively little time in the past 27 years in
considering the problems of Latin American countries, the
representatives of those countries have from the outset
made a great contribution to the proceedings of both the
Security Council and the General Assembly and have
played an active part in many United Nations peace-keeping
operations.

advancement of dependent Territories. It is indeed to a very
large extent thanks to the collective efforts of the Latin
American Group and its influence with the United Nations
that during the years following the Second World War mt~st
Non-Self-Governing Territories could achieve their in&pen.
dence thr.ough progressive development and peaceful nego.
tiation.
14. It is a fact recognized by everybody that Latin
America, its peoples and its statesmen have contributed
largely to the fulfilment of the aims of the United Nations.
Therefore, it seems to me that the moment might be
appropriate to ask ourselves to what extent the United
Nations can contribute to the solution of the problems of
this continent. We are all aware of the fact that there are
manifold problems which do exist in this region, The
records of the present debate of the Security Council show
that, in the eyes of the Latin American countries them+
selves, these problems of a political and economic nature
need to be solved urgently. 1 need not refer to any of the
specific statements which have impressed me over the past
few days, simply because of the fact that the Council itsetf
thought it appropriate to initiate this series of meetings
devoted to the consideration of matters pertaining to peace
and security, particularly in Latin America.

8. We are indeed in urgent need of more friendly, more
concrete and more practical co-operation among all nations.
Governments should not forget that the international
institutions which they ‘have developed over the years by
now cover practically every field of human endeavour on a
world-wide basis. In this context universality becomes ever
more important.
9. Latin America has a rich cultural tradition in which
respect for the human being and for the rule of law plays a
pre-eminent part. Its contributions to international law are
as important as the reality of the legal principles by which
the States of Latin America conduct their relations with
each other, and the world has much to learn from both. I
would mention, in particular, the principles of sovereign
equality, non-intervention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

1.5. Various burning problems have been raised in the
course of this debate. They relate to economic develop
ment-including the full use of natural resources-to decoID
nization, disarmament and non-intervention. All of these
problems will have to be dealt with in accordance with the
spirit of our time in the present historical context.

10. True to its legal traditions, Latin America has played a
prominent part in the United Nations in the progressive
development and codification of international law. I am
sure that, in the years ahead, the traditions of Latin
American jurisprudence will continue to serve as a source of
inspiration and guidance in the task of formulating the law
of nations,

16. One issue of special concern to the States of this
continent is the question of the Panama Canal, ~lli~h 1~
been mentioned here by every speaker. This problem awaits
a solution which can only be based on the respect for law
and the search for justice. A solution will have to take into
account the basic principles which are enshrined in the
Charter such as the principle of territorial integritv,
sovereign equality, the obligation to settle all international
disputes by peaceful means and the principle which bY now
has become an accepted common standard, namely, thett
any State is entitled to put to full use and for its 0%~
account all its natural potentialities. However complex 11~
issue in question-and it is, indeed, of enormous complcxitY
as the debate in this chamber has shown and as the history
of this country proves-we must do our utmost to pave the
way for a peaceful and just solution.

11. Latin America has also made a significant contribution
to the efforts of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security. One instance is provided
by the Treaty of Tlatelolco.* That Treaty, which was
signed a little more than six years ago, testifies to Latin
American statesmanship and remains a landmark in the
history of arms control and disarmament negotiations.
12. It is sometimes forgotten in the world at large that the
States of Latin America,’ one third of the original United
Nations membership, played a crucial role in the writing of
the Charter, particularly as it relates to the relationship
between the global Organization and regional institutions.
They also did much to reinforce the position of the small
Powers in the United Nations, and to chart the early course
of our Organization.

17. In this issue, which is of such importance not only to
the parties concerned and not only to the continent but
also to the world as a whole, I would strongly appeal to
Panama and the United States of America to seek a solution
in a spirit of friendship and confidence. I would further
urge the members of the Council to seek an agreement that
would help the parties concerned in their endeavours tQ
take further steps towards a solution which would take info
account the national aspirations as well as the legitinlate
rights and interests of the community of nations which an
at stake. I am confident that the Governments directly
concerned are fully aware of their responsibilities. Tile
attention of the world is focused on this series of meetill@
of the Council. Let usnot disappoint their expectations.

13. The contribution of Latin America has been impressive and far-reaching in the field of decolonization. During
the formative years of the United Nations it played a
leading and determining role in enlarging the involvement
of the Organization in the process of decolonization and in
promoting the political, economic, social and educational
1 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634,p. 326).

2

18. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation Porn Spanish): I
wish most warmly to thank the Secretary-General for his
outstanding statement, which contains the elements of
equity and justice which the Panamanian people is seeking.

24* In the first PhCe, large wavesof Africans and Arabs
have, throughout distant and recent history, found homes
in the Caribbean and Latin American countries, These
Africans and Arabs have identified themselves fully with
other races in the region and have been completely
integrated and assimilated there. In recent history their
grievances, and, indeed, the struggle waged in Latin
America for the complete elimination of these grievances
by their roots, are precisely the preoccupations of both
Africa and the Arab world. The legitimate and inalienable
rights which Latin America strivesto establish in the fields
of rCSPeCt of national independence, territorial integrity,
self-determination, free exploitation of their natural resources and social progress are the very aspirations and
ambitions of the African and Arab worlds.

19. Mr, ABDULLA (Sudan): My delegation heard with
deep sorrow and grief of the untimely passing away of
Mr. Chacko, the Deputy Under-Secretary-General of the
Department of Political and Security Council Affairs,
whose high qualities as an international civil servant and
personal integrity and friendliness merited the admiration
of all those who had known him. On behalf of the Sudan
delegation I offer my heartfelt condolences to his family
and to the Indian delegation.
20. On behalf of my delegation also, I wish to express to
Ambassador Boyd, who is presiding over our meeting this
morning, and through him to the Government and the
people of the Republic of Panama, our thanks for the warm
welcome and hospitality extended to us during the Council
meetings in their beautiful capital of Panama. I also take
this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Boyd, whose
tireless efforts and friendly and co-operative qualities have
been positive factors in persuading the Council to convene
in Panama City.

25. A quick survey of the conditions of international
peace and security in these two regions will show beyond
doubt how similar and indivisible these problems are,
whether in Latin America, Asia or Africa.
26. In southern Africa, for example, colonialist and racist
regimes dominate and exploit millions of Africans and
non-whites who live there. Through inhuman and barbarous
methods of domination, these regimes endeavour to suppress the mounting liberation fight for self-determination
and independence of the millions who live in these
Territories dominated by Portugal, South Africa and the
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia. The tragic
details of this situation have been amply and ably told in
his statement yesterday by the Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples [1699th meeting] and by
many African representativeswho have precededme in the
Council. I only wish to drawthe attention of the Council to
its recent decisions [resolution 328 (1973)J following the
submission of the report of its Special Mission to Africa
whereby the Council determined that the policy of these
regimes threatens international peace and security in
southern Africa. Indeed, a number of previous decisions by
the Council have determined that these regimes threaten
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring
African States like Zambia, Guinea, Senegaland the United
Republic of Tanzania.

21. As this is the frrst opportunity for me to address the
Council since Ambassador Scali joined it as the permanent
representative of the United States of America, it gives me
pleasure to extend to him my warm welcome, and to assure
him of the same co-operation we extended to his predecessor, Ambassador Bush.
22. Following the Secretary-General’s statement I should
like now to make my own statement. I should like to say
from the outset that my delegation has firmly supported
the holding of these Council. meetings in Panama with the
conviction that any positive deliberation on “measures for
the maintenance and strengthening of international peace
and security in Latin America” is a step towards reinforcing
international efforts in other parts of the world, and
especially in southern Africa and the Middle East where a
dangerous situation exists.
23. The common interest of Africa and the Arab world in
international peace was demonstrated by the unanimous
support of both the African Group and the Arab Group in
the United Nations concerning the invitation of the
Government of Panama to the Security Council to hold
meetings in its capital This solid support is further
demonstrated by the large number of African and Arab
representatives who are now here to attend the meetings
and to express solidarity with Latin America. Indeed, the
Council has already listened to a number of speakers from
those two Groups, of whom I mention only the Executive
Secretary of the Organization of A,frican Unity and the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations [170&h meeting]. It will be recalled that,
apart from the similarities of their problems related to
matters of international peace and security, these two
groups are linked by history and sentiment and, indeed, by
common future aspirations and, therefore, cannot but
demonstrate their sympathy and solidarity with Latin
America and Panama.

27. In another region, of which my country is a member,
namely, the region represented by the League of Arab
States, the conditions of international peace and security
are extremely dangerousas a result of the repeated Zionist
aggression against Arab States ending with the military
occupation of the lands of three States Members of the
United Nations. In the processof this expansionist war by
Israel, the majority of the population of Palestine was
chased out of its country to be replaced by immigrant
Zionists from all parts of the world. Indeed, by occupying
militarily part of Egyptian territory Israel not only has
&p&red Egypt of the effective practice of its sovereignty
and ter&o&
rights over the Suez Canal but also has
deprived the countries of three continents from free passage
through that vital international waterway. The Security
Council and public opinion, therefore, cannot and should
not allow the occupation by force of the territories of three
Member States, the denial of the right to self-determination
3

of the Arab population of Palestine and the interruption of
international communication through the Suez Canal,
which had been administered and operated by Egypt to the
full satisfaction of all users before the Zionist military
occupation.

with a deep sense of appreciation that my delegation
acknowledges the invaluable contribution of some I..atia
American countries, as founding Members of the United
Nations, to those efforts. Yet today there are remnants of
colonialism. As I have already indicated, in Africa obdurate
racist regimes, with medieval mentality, cling to suprernacist claims of racial superiority while denying to the
majority of the citizens the right to participate in running
their affairs. In Latin America colonial questions are still a
source of international discord. I am referring to questions
of dependent Territories and peoples in the westem
hemisphere. It is to the credit of the countries involved tllat
they are ready to negotiate the solutions to these questions.
We genuinely expect that such solutions would be in strict
conformity with the principles of self-determination and
independence as set forth in the Charter.

28. With those two examples of dangerous situations, for
which the colonialist and racist regimes in southern Africa
and racist expansionist Israel are responsible respectively,
my delegation wishes to provide yet a third reason for the
interest and solidarity of Africa and the Arab world with
Latin America in matters of peace and security. It follows
that my delegation should express profound sympathy and
solidarity with the Caribbean States by voicing the sincere
hope that their expressed desire to join the Latin American
Group will find the sympathetic consideration it merits. An
enlarged and unified Latin America will provide Africa and
the world with great assistance in the search for international peace and security.

32. AS the spokesmen of Latin American countries diagnosed the state of the political health of their region,
among the recurring issues raised was the question of
disarmament. Quite evident was the theme that the
requirement of peace and security in the region called for
strengthening the force of law against the law of force. This
theme finds eloquent expression in the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, better
known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco. The Treaty, in our view,
represents a very serious and positive action by the Latin
American countries signatory to it in dealing with the
problem of security in their region and removing themselves
and their region from the rivalries of nuclear Powers. It is
an attitude which Latin America shareswith the Afro-Asian
countries. My delegation gives the firmest support to their
position and hopes that the obligations and duties that arise
from such an important relationship will be open to ah
countries in the region, either to fulfil or to perform I

29, Turning now to the subject on the agenda before the
Council, I wish to say that, in our opinion, it was
appropriate that ample time wasgiven to the spokesmen of
the Governments of Latin America and the Caribbean to
address themselves to that subject. Having heard them, my
delegation was impressed by what appeared to us to be a
remarkable demonstration of hemispheric solidarity on the
vital matters of peace and security in their region. No less
remarkable was their perception of the root sources of
global insecurity, namely, the remnants of colonialism,
misery and ignorance, the gap between the rich and the
poor and armaments, especially nuclear weapons. I must
say that in so far as those matters affect their region the
representatives of the Latin American and the Caribbean
countries have demonstrated to us their genuine aspirations
for peace and security, aspirations which represent a
world-wide longing and which are shared by all of mankind.
The reason we are here is to examine how the Council,
which is charged with the task of maintaining international
peace and security, could contribute to the efforts of the
Latin American countries to realize their aspirations for
peace.

33. As we have listened to several pronouncements from
representatives of Latin America the view has time and
again been expressed by several that peace and security
cannot be fragmented into political, social or economic
components in the misplaced hope of solving one without
tackling the other, It is a view that my delegation shares
fully, a view we have expressed in various organs of the
United Nations, because we believe that economic development, as defined by the peoples whose interests are to be
served by it, is a prerequisite for stability, which in turn
promotes international peace and security. The genuine and
ardent desire expressed by Latin American countries, both
in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop
ment and at the United Nations, for economic advancement
and social justice, is a trend to which my delegation will
give both full support and encouragement. My country aiso
supports the efforts being made by Latin American peoples
to have control over their national resources, reassert their
sovereignty and defend the interests of their countries. The
Sudan, as a member of non-aligned countries, fully adheres
to the Declaration of the Conference of Foreign Ministers
of Non-Aligned Countries held last year in Georgetow
Guyana, in which the following was stated:

30, If any central idea dominated the creation of the
United Nations it wasthat of keeping the peace and settling
disputes among nations. It is in keeping with this idea that
my country has always supported the improvement of the
United Nations effectiveness in this field of its activities,
and it is in this spirit that my delegation will addressitself
to the issues that have been raised so far.
31. First, there is the question of colonialism ln all its
forms and manifestations. My country has nothing but
disdain for any kind of relationship between peoples which
contains the idea that any people is good enough to be
another people’s masters. It is a healthy sign, however, that
almost all former colonizers have mercifully abandoned the
mistaken belief that colonialism had nothing but a beneficent character. For in its wake, colonialism imposed a
system of oppression and calculated degradation on the
peoples who were colonized, a system, I might say, which
had always in it the seedsof discord and hence of threat to
world peace. The United Nations had played an important
role in paving the way towards the independence of former
colonies and it must consistently pursue that path, It is

“the reahzation of Latin America’s full and true independence is an essential element in the general emancipation
process of the developing countries and in the strengthen.
ing of international peace and security”.
4

pleasantcity of Panama-I undertook to pay you a full
tribute in your own country. May I, therefore, begin by
expressingto you our deep admiration at the way you have
beenconducting the businessof our Council, involved asit
is this month first with the intractable problem of Zambia
and now with the most important and at times difficult
problemsof your own continent. 3ut your skill and talents
do not surpriseUS, for you inherit a tradition and emulate
an example which could not but qualify you as a most
effective representative of Panamato the United Nations
and to its Security Council. I am sure that your illustrious
forebearswould have beenproud of your achievement,and
it must be a source of satisfaction to you that not only
your countrymen from all walks of life can see you at
work, but your own Foreign Minister has seenyour daily
diplomatic negotiations, your socialcharm, your boundless
energy and your spontaneoushospitality in fullest measure
andin the closestquarters,We have all benefited from these
qualitiesand our warmestthanks go to you.

34. Allow me now to turn to a problem that is very close
indeed to the heart of the people of Panama. I am referring
to the question of the Panama Canal Zone. Our visit to
Panama and to the Canal Zone has convinced USmore than
ever that the Hay-Bunau Varilla Convention of 1903,2 with
its subsequent amendments, not only is unfair to Panama,
but is completely out of the spirit of the age and the
principles of international law. In the words of the Minister
of External Relations of Peru:
“The Canal Zone, which geographically, politically,
economically and socially belongs to the Republic of
Panama, is an indissoluble part of its national territory.”
[1696th

meeting,

para. 31.1

We may add that in fact the 1903 Convention cuts through
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Panama.
35. It is a matter of principle and policy of my Government to uphold the right of any country to full and
effective sovereignty and integrity of the totality of its
territories. My delegationis, however, pleasedto note that
the two parties concernedare agreedon the sovereigntyand
jurisdiction of Panama over all its national territory,
including the Canal, and wishestherefore to expressits full
sympathy for Panama’sdemandthat the 1903 Convention
should be abrogatedand that a new treaty shouldemergeas
SOOTas possiblewhereby Panama’seffective sovereignty
andtotal jurisdiction over all its territory will be vindicated.

40. But, apart from these personal compliments, my
delegation would wish most sincerely to expressto your
people and to your Government our great appreciation of
the hospitality, welcomeand friendship they have extended
to us. Nothing seemsto be too much for your people to
make our stay here comfortable and enjoyable and our
work smooth and effective. I realize how much effort,
resourcesand sensitivity must have goneinto your desireto
pleaseus. We are most grateful, and we must compliment
you on setting a standard which any one of us would find
difficult to achieve. Further, we were both stimulated and
honoured by the presenceof your head of Government,
General Omar Torrijos, at the opening of this seriesof
meetings on 15 March /1695th meeting].
His lucid and
terse statement of the Panamanian problem and his
patriotism are lessonsfor a.lJof us. Indeed, he remindedus
of the soldierswho fell at Thermopylaemany centuriesago.
We seethe samespirit in your Foreign Minister who has
showered us with affection and kindness and whose
guidancein our work and understandingof our position
havebrought us closerand closerwith eachpassingday.

36, In keeping with the above-mentioned views, and
taking into account the strength of the view that hasbeen
expressedon the subject to the effect that the disputeis
such that its continuance is likely to endangerthe maintenance of peace and security, my delegation will vote in
favour of any draft resolution that takes those viewsinto
consideration. In the same manner it will considerwith
favour any other draft resolutionswhich will contribute to
the maintenance and the strengthening of international
peaceand security in Latin America.
37. As I stated earlier, Africa, the Arab world and the
Non-alignedGroup to which my country belongsare duty
bound to support any contribution towards the realization
of international peaceand security anywhere in the world. I
need not repeat the spontaneoussympathy and solidarity
which both the African and Arab worlds extend to Latin
America and all our English-speakingbrothers in the
Caribbean,which history, similar problems and common
aspirationsdictate to all of us. It is the sincerehope of my
delegation that this meeting of the Security Council in
Panamawill enhancefurther the solidarity and co-operation
betweenmy part of the world and Latin America.

41. India’s relations with Panamaare alsoshowingmany
signsof steady progress.The first resident Ambassadorof
India to Panamais a member of our delegationand we are
gladthat it was possiblefor his high missionin this country
to beginat this historic time.
42. Not only with Panamabut with all the other countries
of South and Central America, as alsowith the Caribbean
countries, our relations grow stronger.Wehave beendeeply
movedby the great interest the countriesof Latin America
have taken in Indian history, culture and philosophy, and
particularly in our struggle for independence.Over the past
few years, we have opened severalnew diplomatic missions
in this region, and since 1968 our trade with this areahas
increasedfour times.

38. TO our friends in Panamait is our pleasantduty to
wish them every successin their endeavoursto attain the
full national sovereignty and territorial integrity of their
country.

43. Our ever-increasingco-operation and friendsbip finds
many echoes in the debatesand decisionsin the United
‘Nationsand elsewhere.When, five years ago, Mrs. Indira
2 IsthmianCanalConvention.For thetext, see Treaties and Other
Gandhi, Prime Minister of India, visited a number of Latin
International Agreements of the United States of America,
17761949, vol. 10, Department
of State publication8642mash- American and Caribbean countries on a voyage of friendshipshesaid: “I believe that the peopleof South America,
ington,D.C.,U.S.GovernmentPrintingOffice, 19721,P.663.

39. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President,in our meetingat New
York on 10 March-the last we had before we left for this

5

..

Asia and Africa have a common stake in the defence of our
common interests.” We shall neither falter nor fail in
identifying those common interests and in serving them to
the best of our ability.

could not be pronounced upon by the Council without a
comprehensive discussion of all their implications, even if
we were to overlook the normal procedure under which the
Council discussesspecific issues.

44. It is in that spirit that we came to Panama, not only to
discuss the problems before us, but to know our friends
better, with a deeper humanity and a fuller understanding.
The participation of so many foreign ministers and other
representatives of Latin America has helped us significantly
in our task. So have all the contacts we have been able to
establish outside the Council chamber.

48. What the foreign ministers and other representatives of
various States in this region have been able to convey to the
Council members through their statements is that the entire
continent is so restless with the present state of affairs and
so conscious of a high spirit of nationalism that it wiIl no
longer accept the role which history had, through a seriesof
most unfortunate developments, imposed on it. Gone arc
the days when the Secretary of State of the United States
could inform the British authorities in the following terms:
“To-day the United States is practically sovereign on this
continent, and its fiat is law upon the subjects to which it
confines its interposition”. That was contained in a letter
written by Secretary of State Richard Olney to the British
in 1895.

45. Much has been said about the advisability or otherwise
of the Council meeting outside its Headquarters. Perhaps it
is too early, and our experience too limited, to come to any
firm conclusion. But we are convinced that last year’s
meetings at Addis Ababa, as also the present series of
meetings in Panama, have been most rewarding and
significant. I use the world “significant” deliberately, for
we must take into account the fact that nearly 40 States
apart from the members of the Council are present during
our discussions. Of these, 22 States have asked to be heard,
as have representatives of three international organizations
and three Chairmen of various United Nations bodies. This
is not the time to go into detailed reasons, but I wonder,
for instance, how many of us had a proper appreciation of
the impact on today’s young men and women of this region
of the teachings and ideals of Bolivar, San Martin, Juarez
and several others. It was in anticipation of the successof
our meetings here that our Prime Minister sent her message
to you on the opening day [see 1696th meeting,

49. This fierce spirit of independence and this fervent
desire for full restoration of national dignity go far beyond
immediate issues. The ardent wish to use their national
resources for the benefit of their people themselves,
without any pressure, their insistence on full national
sovereignty and territorial integrity and at the same the
their desire to co-operate with each other for more fruitful
and friendly relations are aspects which I might call, for
want of better words, “a continental resurgence” which
reflects the spirit that has animated this meeting: the spirit
of Panama.
50. We, who believe in non-alignment and who, over the
years, after harsh criticism, sometimes bordering on downright vilification, have been struggling for our views and
ideals, are now entering an era when our values seem to be
more and more widely accepted and have indeed become
the basis of important recent developments among several
powerful countries in a manner which would have been
inconceivable a few years ago. We cannot but be pleased
with these new developments in the New World, They bring
US closer, and increasingly we draw sympathy and sustenance from each other. We fully appreciate the emerging
spirit in this continent and completely support the present
insistence of the Latin American countries to pursue the
values which not only are consistent with the principles of
the non-aligned countries but are in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. In this
process we have been greatly assisted by a large number of
resolutions, declarations and other documents we have
adopted with varying degrees of solemnity through the
years. I do not wish to catalogue all these documents, for
that has been very ably done by the representative of
Kenya [170&h meering] but would confine myself to
mentioning only a few. The first and foremost are the
following General Assembly resolutions: the resolution
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples; the resolution
adopted at the fifteenth session relating to the economic
development of economically less developed countries; the
resolutions on permanent sovereignty over natural resources; the two Declarations adopted at the twenty-fifth
session; and, finally, the specific resolution regarding the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin

para. 217/,

46. While all these developments bring us hope and
confidence, the most unfortunate and untimely death of
Mr. Chacko, who served the United Nations with exemplary
devotion, industry and rectitude, has cast a pall of gloom
on our delegation, as indeed on many others besides. We are
most grateful for the various compliments paid to
Mr. Chacko’s services and the words of condolence and
sympathy to his wife and family which have been forthcoming at these meetings of the Council.
47. When the Council decided to meet in Latin America
for the first time, I believe all members were conscious of a
new and vibrant awakening in this region, and of the need
not only to adjust the relations among the countries of the
western hemisphere towards each other, but also to connect
these developing aspirations and relations to the wider
context of promoting and maintaining international peace
and security. That would explain why the agenda was
drawn up in the broadest possible terms so that any
country that wished to bring its problems before the
Council, in connexion with the maintenance and strengthening of international peace and security, could do so. It
was understood then, and it is understood now, that the
Council could not, within the time available to it in the
series of meetings in Panama, attempt to find solutions to
all these problems and issues, if indeed there was an
inclination to study them in all their aspects. Some of the
questions raised by numerous foreign ministers of Latin
American countries to whom we had the privilege of
listening would show that some of these questions at least
6

..

America. I have mentioned those few important documents
chiefly to indicate that our assessment of the problems
afflicting this continent has to be reviewed in the context
of significant decisions and declarations we have already
adopted. That point was emphasized once again this
morning by the Secretary-General.

their insistence on Iiberalizing tariffs and trade, particularly
when they depend essentially on one or two products for
export, and on participating fully in the international
monetary arrangements, which affect them even more
vitally than many others who are richer and technologically
more advanced.

51, In the political field, all the representatives of Latin
American countries have emphasized the urgent and great
need to be fully sovereign in their territories. This exercise
of full sovereignty has been frustrated, if not defeated,
because of outside pressure. We do not believe that by the
mere adoption of resolutions by the Security Council these
pressures would be eliminated. We see this elsewhere also,
as in the Middle East, where principles are adjusted to
convenience with startling cynicism. One can argue that
some cross-fertilization of ideas between different countries
and different States could be beneficial to the countries
concerned and may contribute to a richer and more fruitful
civilization. But to move from that point to a position
where the countries cannot freely serve what they consider
to be the interests of their people is indeed a perversion.
Time and again we have heard the foreign ministers refer to
their inability to pursue their own ideas which they
consider necessary, if not essential, for the welfare of their
people, because of manipulation, machination and manifold
pressures. The second political aspect, which many speakers
have referred to, is the interference, sometimes amounting
even to military action, from outside to prevent different
political systems and ideologies from succeeding and
coexisting. The third political problem raised by the foreign
ministers and the others is the problem of colonialism of
different kinds in some areas of the region. In this respect,
the United Nations has taken a number of decisions with a
view to eliminating colonialism from all areas of the world,
including Latin America. But colonialism in its most brutal
form exists in large areas of Africa. I believe that the
foreign ministers and other representatives are perfectly
aware of this; nevertheless they did well to bring to our
notice the problems of colonialism in that region. I am
speaking of traditional colonialism and not of its new
forms-which still exist in parts of Latin America and which
have to be eliminated with all speed.

53. In the military field, the Latin American countries are
accepting more and more readily that foreign bases and
military alliances do not bring about greater security but
simply greater tension. That has been a cardinal feature for
those of us who believe in non-alignment. We have been
opposed to these bases and alliances, not only as a matter
of principle but from the deep conviction that they tend to
lead to a collision course, especially in an age when the
nuclear holocaust has become a permanent threat. The
export of arms to areas of conflict and the establishment of
bases are totally unjustified if the countries of the world,
particularly the developing ones, are to settle down to using
their own resources and developing their own countries,in
a spirit of co-operation with neighbours and with mutual
accommodation between the rich and the poor nations. It
follows, therefore, that the Latin American countries that
wish to eliminate these basesand the sending of arms to the
areas of conflict reject the theory that any country can
arbitrarily and unilaterally decide whether its defence
interests are best served by establishing foreign bases and
then give effect to those decisions, irrespective of the
wishes of the countries that are thus brought into an.
ever-widening parameter of tension and conflict. If military
bases are objectionable as such, how much more objectionable are they when they are established not with the
consent of the Governments concerned but on the offensive
theory of “might is right”, because one is weak and the
other is strong.
54. Turning to the specific issues,we believe that the most
urgent problem before the Security Council at this meeting
is the question of the Panama Canal. As we enter this
Palace, we read on large boards two sentences. One
sentence reads:
“You may rest assured that in our negotiations with the
USA you will always find us standing on our feet and
never on our knees; never.”

52, In the economic field, the speakers emphasized a series
of problems of general application. The first and foremost
is the difficulty they face in exploiting their natural
resources because of a number of so-called private and
public agreements arrived at over the years in different
circumstances when the Governments concerned had hardly
any choice and were obliged in many instances to write off
their patrimony in a manner which now appears to them
intolerable. They wish to recover in full what they were
obliged to surrender but are prevented from doing so in a
variety of ways. We believe that, because of this experience,
in any discussion about full use of natural resources many
Latin American countries are determined to repair the
damage already done, as also to protect themselves from
the damage likely to be done in the future. Hence their
demand for expanding the limits of their territorial seas.
Hence also their desire, on the one hand, to work for total
disarmament for ensuring international peace and security
and, on the other hand, to divert resources from armament
to economic construction and development. Hence too

The second sentence reads:
“Let the Ambassadors of friendly Republics and members of the foreign presshere present answer: What nation
of the world can withstand the humiliation of a foreign
flag piercing its heart? ”
55. We are certain that the Panamanian Government, in
any future discussions, will assert its full right of sovereignty, and there is thus no question of its negotiating on
its knees. There is, similarly,. no doubt in our minds of the
popular resentment at the visible manifestations of extraterritorial sovereignty about which the above-mentioned
question has been asked, We also believe that the problem is
much more fundamental than the question of giving a little
more money for compensating in some manner the derogation of what the Panamanians justly consider their birthright.
7

56. The Convention of 1903, signed almost within two
weeks of Panamanian independence, cannot be regarded by
any modern standards as normal, particularly when the
circumstances under which it was signed are considered. It
is an instrument which one party interprets as allowing it to
deny Panama effective exercise of sovereignty on its entire
territory. We are glad, therefore, that this unequal Convention has recently been recognized as such by the Govemment of the United States, which has fully accepted that a
far-reaching revision of its relationship with Panama is
overdue, and that what was possible in 1903 is not at all
right in the conditions of today. The Panamanian Govemment has also told us in informal contacts that the United
States has agreed to abrogate that Convention and to
replace it by a modern treaty.

negotiations by the parties concerned will produce solutions in the shortest possible time within the general
framework of the Charter and of the various resolutions we
have already adopted.
61. With some such action as II have indicated, the Council
will have concluded the present series of meetings at
Panama City. But the ramifications of our deliberations
during the last few days will be both deep and wide. The
members of the Council will return richer in understanding
and more vigilant of their interest and determination in
maintaining and strengthening international peace and
security in this area. The people of Panama, as indeed the
people of many countries of Latin America, may possibly
draw some satisfaction from the fact that even if the
Council could not or would not solve all their problems, it
is at least sensitive to their difficulties and aspirations, and
that the Council’s sympathy for the many trials and
tribulations that lie ahead can be depended upon. Such an
assurancemay strengthen their resolve and fortify them in
their belief that, with genuine attempts on all sides,
peaceful solutions can be found, in time, to all problems.
The road may be rough and long, but the journey can come
to an end-not without sacrifice, but without armed
conflicts. At least, that is the belief we must adhere to, just
as we must continue to hope that all Members of the
United Nations will abide by its Charter in its entirety.

57. We welcome these developments. We have also been
informed that the concept of perpetuity would be given up,
that American jurisdiction in Panama would disappear, and
that all the aspects of the operation of the Canal should be
negotiated in a manner which would, on the one hand,
ensure full sovereignty of the Panamanian Government and,
on the other, keep the Canal free for transit to all ships,
without any discrimination. We believe that these are the
essential features of a new treaty-features that seem to
have been accepted by both parties-and they have been
referred to in the draft resolution before us(S/lO931/.
58. In doing so, the sponsors continue to be particularly
careful to search for flexible language so that in the course
of the negotiations-which we hope will be renewed
immediately and concluded speedily-the parties, while
respecting the principles already agreed to, could work out
the details, not as a result of any directives from the
Security Council on how they should proceed, but as a
result of negotiations between equals. We hope, therefore,
that this draft, or any subsequent revision of it, will
command the approval of all the members of the Council.

62. But we in the Indian delegation shall return with a
measure of exhilaration. Geographically, India is far away
from the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
But we have a nearness born of similar experience in the
past and shared hopes for the future. Today our peoples are
engaged, each in their own community, in the same task: to
realize a fuller life and to move towards a greater unity out
of conditions of social and economic disparity and ethnic
and many other diversities. Externally, too, they strive for
the same objectives: for peace, for tolerance and for justice.
They have a common determination to be independent, to
be self-reliant, and to co-operate with each other on a basis
of equality. Some months ago, the Prime Minister of India
said:

59. From what F have already stated on the other
problems brought before us, it seems to the Indian
delegation that the only additional draft resolution which
the Council may at this stage consider relates to the
exploitation of natural resources. We are in general sympathy with the draft resolution which was submitted
yesterday (I 700th meetifig] by the Minister of External
Relations of Peru [S/l0932/Rev,l].
We hope that, as a
result of further examination and consultation, the Council
will be in a position to adopt a unanimous decision on this
important subject,

“Each country has its own heritage and distinct
personality which it naturally wishes to develop in its
own way. But we must also beat in mind our community
of interests and take positive initiatives for working
together among ourselves and with other countries in
order to make a richer contribution to the evolution of a
world more livable for all of us and of a social order more
in consonance with the yearnings of modern man.”

60. As regards the other subjects which the foreign
ministers and other representatives have mentioned to us, I
have already indicated our general views. We consider that
these questions should not-at this stage, at least-be
embodied in any formal resolutions of the Council, but
should be included in a declaration in which the President
might mention the issues and state briefly the consensusof
the Council on them in general terms. If such a declaration
by the President could be worked out, it would indicate the
general reaction of the international community to these
problems and the direction in which we must move in order
to find solutions to them. Since some of the problems
mentioned are strictly of a bilateral nature, we hope that

63. If our presence and discussion for a week in this
country makes our task a little lighter in our march
together towards a better future, then all the efforts the
friendly people of Panama have made in welcoming US and
looking after us will be more than worth while. I am sure
that those of us who belong to the world of “have-no%”
would consider the pursuit of such an ideal worth living for,
and perhaps worth dying for; and I am equally sure that our
more fortunate fellow human beings will not fail us.
64. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretatiofl @om
French): Mr. President, my first remarks will quite natu8

rally be addressed to you and will express the gratitude of
my delegation for the magnificent welcome your Government has extended to the Security Council. When we came
to Panama we knew that we would fmd outstanding
hospitality here, worthy of the best Hispanic traditions. But
what we have found has even exceeded our expectations: In
addition to the multiple attentions lavished upon us, we are
particularly aware of the atmosphere of courtesy, and aho
of cordiality, sympathy and candor, which surrounds US.
We shall leave your country with the regret that we were
unable to get to know it even better. In assuring you of my
gratitude for the personal part you played in organizing our
stay here, I request you to be so kind as to convey this
expression of the gratitude of the French delegation to the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Lakas; to the
head of Government, General Torrijos; and to His Excellency Mr. Juan Antonio Tack, your Foreign Minister.

advanced in years, did not hesitate to commit his fortune
and his immense prestige to that colossaI undertaking.
Unfortunately, the technical, financial and medical conditions were not yet such as to permit the successful
completion in that last quarter of the nineteenth century of
a task far more difficult than that achieved at Suez, After
more than 20,000 workers, including several thousand
French nationals, had succumbed to the rigours of the
climate, and in particular to yellow fever, and after
hundreds of millions of dollars-which, I am assured,today
would be equivalent to $1,000 million-given from their
savingsby the enthusiastic French had been swallowed up,
the work had to be suspended. Some 20 years later, the
United States took over and, thanks to advances in
medicine and technology, was able to complete the
undertaking over a route quite close to that chosen by the
engineers of Ferdinand de Lesseps.

65. In the men who today lead your country we find a
symbol of all Latin America, that is to say, youth and its
creative dynamism, a keen sense of responsibility to the
future, and unquestionably also the determination to tackle
the problems along new and bolder lines than those
sketched by preceding generations. But neither have these
leaders forgotten the humanist and juridical tradition, SO
that beyond daily concerns and the play of circumstance,
their quest is directed towards principle, towards testimony
having exemplary value, towards the universal.

69. I know that the people of Panama have not forgotten
the contribution of my compatriots to that great undertaking, which has given your country particular importance
and an altogether special role in international relations. I
shall not conceal from you in this regard that I was truly
touched when I saw the noble monument that you have
erected facing the ocean, almost at the entrance to the
Canal, and dedicated to the memory of all those who had a
decisive part in building the inter-oceanic waterway, among
whom you have given a prominent place to its French
initiators.

66. May I state that in such an atmosphere the representative of France in no way feels himself on unfamiliar ground,
that he listens with sympathy to the reflections of the
representatives of Latin American States whom we have
been hearing in these past few days, and that he has no
difficulty in understanding their concerns, The reason for
this is simple: we are all of us guardians of the same Latin
heritage, within which our relations were from the beginning established in a commonalty of thought and feeling,
founded on a dialogue between equals, as is only fitting
between members of one and the same community, aware
of the enrichment that can accrue to each from the
experience of others, but also concerned to respect their
various identities. It was therefore without difficulty that
from you to us there developed a flow of sympathy and
co-operation, fed from the sources of our common culture
and swelled by centuries of intercourse between the men of
our two continents.

70. While referring to certain aspects of the relations
which at various times in history the Latin American
community has had with France, I cannot fail to recall the
journey that General de Gaulle made in 1964 when he
travelled to various countries in ‘this continent in order to
testify to the interest that France takes in the efforts that
the countries of Latin America, each in accordance with its
own genius, traditions and aspirations, have undertaken in
order to develop their economies, improve the well-being of
their peoples and assert their responsibility. This diversity
of experience, of which your countries today provide the
example, without any doubt constitutes the most real sign
of their vitality and of the immense possibilities open to
them. Did not General de Gaulle, on the occasion of that
historic journey, affirm that Latin America was the
continent of the twenty-first century?
71. You have also, outside the Latin community, multiplied your contacts with other countries in the hemisphere,
and your group was recently further enriched by the influx
of new members from the Caribbean area, countries that
have a different cultural heritage and whose association
with your own can only redound to the benefit of all. We
are happy to maintain with these new members of your
community also special relations of friendship.

67. There are so many examples of these relations and of
this intercourse that I shall confine myself to mentioning
the influence of French political thought and the example
of our great revolution at the time when the destiny of
your nations was taking shape, and the sympathy that your
liberation movements have always enjoyed in my country.
68. Since I am speaking about this period of your history,
I am quite naturally led to mention the memory of the
great Liberator Sin-& Bolivar and, by way of a reference to
the famous Congress held here in Panama in 1826, to say
something about the role played in the conception of the
Canal by two illustrious Frenchmen. Lucien Bonaparte
Wyse was the first, in the nineteenth century, to have the
idea of cutting through the isthmus, and Ferdinand de
L%eps, the creator of the Suez Canal, although already

72. Beyond these historical and cultural bonds, we have
another reason to sympathize with the concerns of Latin
America, This has to do with the very principles which
guide France’s foreign policy and which are aho your own:
the concern for national independence and the desire for
co-operation.
73. The presence of the Security Council in Panama,
Mr, President, at your Government’s invitation, which, as
9

the great principles on which our Charter is based, or how
great is our concern that they should be respected and
implemented. We do, however, wonder about the role the
Council can play when it is a question not of particular
situations to which those principles should be applied but
rather of their formulation and their enunciation, if not of
their revocation. Is not that role rather one for the General
Assembly, where all Members of the United Nations are
seated, or, perhaps, the Economic and Social Council for
questions falling more particularly within its competence,
such as permanent sovereignty over natural resources, a
principle mentioned by many speakers? If it undertakbs a
task not specifically its own, the Security Council might in
future be in danger of encroaching on the prerogatives of
the General Assembly and other organs of the United
Nations and of being absorbed in over-general discussions,
and thus find itself incapable of carrying out the missions
expressly entrusted to it under Article 24 of the Charter,
and on which it is in fact called to meet very frequently.
Furthermore, would there not be some confusion created if
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council should be led to adopt provisions
on identical subjects that were not strictly similar?

you know, we welcomed, is in keeping with this Latin
American tradition of co-operation, entente and quest for
peaceful solutions to situations which might degenerate
into open crises. What we have here, in a word, is
“preventive diplomacy”, as has been rightly noted by
several preceding speakers-diplomacy that seeks to remedy
situations arising from the inadequate or insufficient
exercise of the fundamental principles of national independence and co-operation.
74. Representatives of already ancient nations, and consequently the embodiment of their history, of countries often
richly endowed with human and material resources, it is
your intention to adjust your foreign relations in order
more strictly to protect your sovereignty and better to
harness your natural wealth. At the same time, as the heirs
of a well-established tradition of regional co-operation, as
also co-operation among the international community at
large, you are asking yourselves about the terms of that
co-operation, which too often reflect the inequality of
fdrces. What you seek is to preserve and strengthen the
security and harmony of your continent for the benefit of
its peoples’ development on a footing of equality and
mutual respect.

78. Those questions deserve to be posed before the
Security Council is, as some seem to envisage, asked to
draft texts couched in general terms setting forth universal
principles and concerning subjects some of which are
currently under discussion elsewhere. We could not lend
our support to such a text at this point.

75. In the forefront of the concerns expressed in this
Council is the question of the Canal. That, of course, as
many speakers have emphasized, is a problem which
concerns primarily the Republic of Panama and the United
States, since it is a matter of negotiating the instrument
which will replace the present agreement, concluded by
those two countries 70 years ago. We hope the two parties
will quickly succeed in reaching agreement on the terms of
a new treaty, since, according to the information they
themselves have given us, their intentions are already in
agreement on the principal objectives to be given the
negotiators. We do not, however, think it is for the Council
to enter into the details of an agreement which is under
negotiation or to dictate to the parties the terms of the
arrangement they are seeking. We none the less hope that
the two parties will continue and complete a task they set
themselves as long ago as 1964, respecting the principles of
sovereignty and co-operation which should guide their
relations, so as to maintain the use of a waterway which is
of moment to the entire international community. We are
convinced of their determination to achieve that.

79. The fact remains that these meetings of the Council in
Panama will have given us an opportunity to gather From
representatives of Latin America most useful information
about their concerns which will have to be taken into
account in the future work of the United Nations. The
resulting benefit for each member of the Council should be
matched for the Latin American community by an assurante that it has been heard and that the lessons drawn from
these meetings will not remain without effect upon our
future attitude when we are considering questions to which
our attention has been drawn.
80. For my part, I note above all the concern of the States
of the Latin American continent to asserttheir identity and
to secure respect for their sovereignty and independence.
They may rest assured of the positive contribution Franci:
is ready to make to the maintenance of peace and security.
which should be based on relations of equality and mt1tua.l
respect among States for the benefit of each of them and
the entire international community.

76. In regard to other situations to which the Council’s
attention has been drawn, they seem to me to involve an
awareness of the all too frequent gap between principles
and their application, The Latin American community is all
the more keenly aware of this disparity since it made a
remarkable contribution to the drafting of various of the
great principles of the Charter of the United Nations, such
as the legal equality of States, non-intervention,
the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the self-determination
of peoples. However, the tradition of Latin America is not
solely legal; it is also humanitarian, which explains the role
your countries played in the preparation of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

81. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fram Spanisf&’ The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Zaire. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
82. Mr. IPOTO EYEBU BAKAND’ASI (Zaire) (i?Q-+‘rPfeJiltion from French): Mr. President, may I at the outset thank
the Council and you for having been good enough to allow
me to make this statement on behalf of the delegation of
Zaire. Through you, I should like to thank the Government
and people of Panama for the very warm welcome tleY
have been good enough to give my delegation and also for

77. I believe I do not need to emphasize how strongly we,
like any other member of the Security Council, and
particularly its Latin American members, are attached to
10

the great hospitality
treasuring.

my delegation is still enjoying and

83. Now, may I say that a very famous historian once
wrote that frontiers were merely the scars of history. I
think he was perfectly right because frontiers are intended
more to unite nations than to divide them. This is
particularly valid regarding the great maritime areas,
whether we call them oceans, seasor any other name. They
have never been natural or artificial frontiers, but have
always been ways of joining the peoples on their coastlines,
helping them in their communications and in their trade.
But we have met here in one of these areas where man’s
industry and genius have completed the grandiose undertakings of nature. Nature had allowed an extra arm of land
to exist here which geographers call an isthmus, and man
divided it with a canal, a waterway that became extremely
important in international affairs, linking two oceans
which became the two poles of world trade and navigation.

not exclusively mean a settlement of disputes, nor does it
solely mean to deal with threats to the peace or a threat of
aggression. Conditions must be created of such a nature as
to encourage the existence of peace, but conditions that are
more than merely political. If we study it this way we
realize that the Charter recognizes that an Organization
designed primarily to ensure international peace and security must also play an active role in improving economic
and social conditions of people and contribute to a
widening of the field of human freedoms. The developing
countries are increasingly aware of the fact that political
and economic independence are a dialectical pair: one
conditions the other, and the other confirms and completes
the first. They have all realized now, I think, that economic
independence is the material underpinning of political
independence. As far as my own country, Zaire, is
concerned, we made a fundamental choice, and the
Manifesto of our national party states it as follows:
“Economic independence is the basic goal to which all
the nation’s efforts must be directed. The attainment of
this independence is the only means of bringing about a
genuine improvement in the living standard of the people.
Hence, the People’s Movement of the Revolution commits itself to an unceasing struggle to ensure that our
country shall no longer be an economic colony of
international high finance.”

84. The inter-oceanic Panama Canal, like that of Suez, is
an exemplary proof and an outstanding symbol of the will
to co-operate internationally and also historic proof of the
principle of interdependence and of the fact that one group
must round out the needs of another because, despite the
well-known historic vicissitudes, the work started by
Ferdinand de Lesseps,interrupted, given up time and again,
resumed by the United States of America later and-after
changing hands-being completed, is of exemplary importante.

88. Accordingly it is only fair that this debate in the
Security Council has revealed the interest that the Latin
American countries attach to the problem of sovereignty
over natural resources, which is closely linked to the
economic independence that these countries are seeking. AS
the majority of speakers that have preceded me in this
debate have stressed, the problem of sovereignty over
natural resources has already been covered in a number of
resolutions of the General Assembly such as resolution
1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, which states in its
paragraph 7:

85, Following on the invitation of the Government of
Panama, the Security Council has convened in Panama in
order to examine ways and means of maintaining and
strengthening international peace and security in Latin
America, in accordance with the provisions and the
principles of the Charter. To a certain extent, these
meetings of the Council are a posthumous tribute to that
great liberator of peoples who, in his dream of unity and
the creation of a greater Colombia, had held in this same
city the 1826 Congress of Panama, which carried within it
the seeds of the future Organization of American States; I
pay tribute to the great Simdn Bolivar of illustrious
memory.

“Violation of the rights of peoples and nations to
sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources is
contrary to the spirit and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and hinders the development of international co-operation and the maintenance of peace.”

86. The history af individual rights in the nineteenth
century has taught us that the political emancipation of
man can only be fully ensured when economic democracy
has been established which allows the individual fully to
enjoy his role as a citizen and to carry it out with full
independence. Today, the developing countries quite justifiably feel that they, too, will not fully enjoy their political
independence until that independence is crowned with
sovereign economic rights. Indeed one of the aims set out in
the Charter of the United Nations to help us to maintain
international peace and security is the achievement of
international co-operation through a solution of the economic, social, intellectual or humanitarian problems that
may arise, by developing and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.

89. The delegation of Zaire felt it appropriate to recall
that paragraph in order to suggest to the Council that it
appeal to all Member States to assist the developing
countries to exercise permanent sovereignty over their
natural resources. It might also perhaps be helpful if the
Council were to recommend the drafting of an international
convention on respect for the permanent sovereignty of
States over their natural resources, such a convention to be
open for signature by all Member States.
90. Although one of those two proposals does not
automatically exclude the other, the delegation of Zaire
leaves it to the Council to decide, in accordance with the
formula it regards as the best.
91, There are some matters which become so persistent
and bitter that they poison international relations and
create a political climate that may tempt a peaceful State to

87. With the authors of the Charter, I too would say that
the maintenance of international peace and security does
11

resort to force, because the situation becomes untenable, or
that may draw States of goodwill into a series of events
likely to provoke the use of force without either party
having at the outset desired such an outcome.

the first occasion on which an international conference was
held on this soil. I mean, of course, the Congress which
Simdn Bolivar, the Liberator, summoned here in Panama in
1826 to promote reconciliation between the peoples of this
continent and to lay the foundations of greater international understanding. Britain sent an observer to attend that
meeting, and it gives me particular pleasure to follow after
nearly 150 years in the footsteps of my late colleague.
Bolivar was a prophet in his internationalism, as in so many
other ways, and the Congress that he organized was the
direct inspiration of the movement which led to the
creation at the end of the last century of the Pan-American
Union, and later of the Organization of American States.
That Organization, and the others since created to promote
all aspects of hemispheric co-operation, are models which
we all admire.

92. We only hope that the question of the Panama Canal
and the Canal Zone will escape such a misfortune. The
delegation of Zaire earnestly hopes that instead of maintaining only an apparent peace Panama and the United
States will negotiate the question of the Canal and the
Canal Zone in an effort to find a just, peaceful and lasting
solution.
93. In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of the delega.
tion of Zaire, to greet the Latin American peoples and their
Governments and to assure them that, in the struggle that is
common to us all, they can rely on the support and the
fraternal solidarity of the Republic of Zaire.

98. It was natural, therefore, that the Latin American
States should from the first have taken the closest interest
and played a most active role in the United Nations. One is
sometimes apt to forget that they numbered 20 of the 51
founder Members. And they have given practical expression
to this interest in the number of distinguished international
civil servants whom they have provided to serve the United
Nations. From the beginning the Latin American States
were anxious that full scope should be given to the regional
organizations under the Charter, and they were largely
responsible for ensuring that this was recognized in the
provisions of Chapter VIII, and particularly Article 52.
Much of the Charter and subsequent United Nations
institutions reflect Latin American jurisprudence in the
general field of public international law. The Latin American Members have given a lead in the work of the
Organization in the field of human rights, in&ding those
concerned with racial harmony and the rights of women.
Nearly a quarter of the States which have ratified the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
rights, nearly a third of the States which have ratified the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
more than half the States which have ratified the Optional
Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights are
Latin American.

94. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
have not so far had the opportunity to congratulate you
and your Government on the occasion of these meetings of
the Security CounciI in Panama or to thank you for the
admirable efficiency with which you have organized them,
as well as for the thoughtfulness and generosity which you
have shown in providing for all our needs, both in
connexion with our work and by way of relaxation. Like all
those who have spoken before me, I should like to express
on behalf of my delegation, deep appreciation and thanks
for everything you have done for us. May I also extend my
congratulations to you personally on the success with
which you have carried through the unique achievement of
presiding in the same month over the deliberations of the
Council both in New York and here in your own country.
95. Before proceeding further I would join my colleagues
who have paid a tribute to Mr. Chacko and mourned his
death. He was indeed the model of an international civil
servant, a man of the highest integrity, industry and charm.
The United Nations will be the poorer without him, and we
send our sympathy to his widow and family, to the
Secretary-General and to his former colleagues.
96. The Security Council agreed to hold special meetings
in Panama on the basis of an agenda calling for “Consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of
internationaI peace and security in Latin America in
conformity
with the provisions and principles of the
Charter”. After listening to the statements of foreign
ministers and other representatives from Latin America
who have addressed us, my strong impression is that peace
and security in this continent of Latin America are in good
hands. It is clear that their countries are guided by those
principles of international respect and co-operation which
are enshrined in the Charter. I say this after making every
allowance for the many difficult problems which, even with
the greatest goodwill, face all States in their relations with
each other.

99. Latin American Governments have played a notable
role too in the economic work of the United Nations. The
Economic Commission for Latin America, at this moment
meeting in Ecuador, was quickly recognized as a pace setter
in this field. And it is fair to say that the Latin American
States were a driving force behind the creation of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD). Latin America has produced some of the most
distinguished economists active in recent years, economists
who have made an important contribution to the work of
the United Nations.
100. The international community owes much also to
Latin American initiatives in the whole field of disarmament, especially those directed towards averting the threat
of nuclear disaster. We think here in the first place of the
example of Mexico and of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. We all
rccognize this Treaty as a pioneering achievement. In the
case of the United Kingdom, my Government has given
concrete expression to this recognition by ratifying botll
the Additional Protocols I

9’7. It is indeed the tradition and practice of stable
relations between one another that has enabled the Latin
American States to make their remarkable contribution to
the work of the United Nations. It is right that at this
meeting we should refer, as earlier speakers have done, to
12

101. The direct links between my country and the nations
of Latin America go back to the earliest years of their
independence. Britain was closely associated with the
struggle of the Latin American peoples to achieve nationhood, Indeed British statesmen of that time looked to the
emerging countries of the subcontinent to set a new pattern
of liberalism and democracy, a new example to the nations
of the Old World, where these ideals seemed then in eclipse.
These links were strengthened by the co-operation of
Britain and Latin America in the development of this
region. For a long time it was to Britain that Latin
American countries looked for resources and expertise to
develop their economy, their industries and their communications. An enduring memorial to this co-operation remains
in the thousands of my countrymen who settled in the New
World and whose descendants have made a notable contribution to the countries of their adoption.

Security Council should concern itself with Latin America.
We readily agree that economic questions can have import.
ant political implications, but many of those questions that
have been raised at these meetings-such as that of
permanent sovereignty over natural resources-are properly
the responsibility of other principal organs of the United
Nations and indeed are already under active consideration
in the Economic and Social Council. I feel it therefore
necessary to sound a note of caution in relation to the role
and competence of the Security Council. Though the
Council is a body of the highest prestige and authority, this
does not mean that it is the right forum in which to debate
questions which belong to other United Nations organs, still
less to adopt resolutions on these matters. We should also
bear in mind that it is not the function of the Council to
pronounce upon questions of principle or of general
apphcation-these are more appropriate for the General
Assembly-but
rather to deal with specific problems
brought to its attention in the light of the purposes and
principles of the Charter and in accordance with its
provisions.

102. Since that time we have seen a complete transformation both in the Latin American countries and in our
relationships with them. The major countries of the region
are now themselves substantial economic units with their
own industrial base, exporting not only their traditional
products but a wide range of manufactured goods as well.
In the great debate which revolves around the whole
question of international policies on development, the role
of Latin American nations has become of key importance.
It was entirely appropriate that the third session of
UNCTAD took place in Santiago, and my Government
looks forward to continuing exchanges with the Latin
American countries in UNCTAD and other international
economic forums.

105. As the debate has progressed a number of contentious issues have inevitably come in for special mention.
Inasmuch as they reflect the particular preoccupations of
individual countries, they deserve to receive a sympathetic
hearing. On the other hand, many of them are essentially
bilateral issues, on which the process of direct diplomacy is
still continuing and which neither side had made the subject
of specific complaint to the Council.

103. The United Kingdom Government is keenly awareof
the great scope that still exists for extending and strengtlzening our bilateral relations. Traditional friendship is not
enough; it must be sustained with care and a recognition
that the proper basis for good relations is an understanding
of the new forces in Latin America and the aspirations of
the Governments and peoples of these countries. It has
been for this reason that we have in recent years taken steps
to increase the knowledge of Latin America in my own
country, for example by the establishment of centres of
Latin American studies in a number of universities, including my former college at Oxford, and by organizing
reciprocal manifestations in Latin America. Last May my
Government sponsored an important conference on Britain
and Latin America in London which was attended by the
most distinguished figures in Latin American Government
and business. Inaugurating that conference, my Prime
Minister, Mr. Heath, emphasized that it was the policy of
the United Kingdom Government to give its strongest
support to the principle of co-operation and trade with
Latin American States. I am happy to say that Latin
American ministers are frequent visitors to London and we
look forward with special pleasure and expectation to the
State Visit to Britain of the President of Mexico later this
month.

106. There have been numerous references to the position
of the Canal Zone in relation to the maintenance of peace
and security in the region. I think all previous speakers have
been unanimous as to the importance of the Canal to the
international community, particularly from the economic
point of view. It would indeed be a serious matter if
differences over the Canal were to lead to a situation where
its role as a link between nations were endangered and it
became instead a focus of instability. It is at least a cause
for some satisfaction that neither party has suggested that
such a situation has arisen. On the merits of the problem, I
share the doubt voiced by our Australian colleague [1699th
meetingJ about third parties getting involved in a matter of
this kind on which we do not know all the facts. But I share
the feeling also that, as he put it, the present agreement
governing the regulation of the Canal is in certain respects
anachronistic and in urgent need of revision. Indeed that
view seems to be accepted by both parties. And both have
stated that they attach the greatest importance to these
negotiations. Many representatives have referred to them
and expressed the hope that they will be brought to the
earliest possible conclusion, It is of definite interest to
Britain, as a major maritime country, that the regulation of
the Canal should be based on an accepted understanding
between the parties principally concerned, and we certainly
share the hope that these negotiations will be brought to a
satisfactory conclusion.

104. I have dealt on these examples of economic, commercial, and cultural relationships because this has traditionally
been the context in which my country has been concerned
with the Latin American continent. This does not mean
that we think that this is the point of view from which the

107. Another topic which has figured prominently in
statements in this debate is the legacy of colonialism. At
the same time most speakers seem to agree that this is not
one of the major problems confronting Latin America and
that such colonial questions as are yet unsolved do not
13

resolution of their differences. Latin American statesmen
have eloquently set forth principles of international consultation and conciliation springing from the idea and the ideal
that international conflict in this area can and must he
resolved peacefully. Many of these principles have found
their way into the Charter and into the practice of the
United Nations.

require the attention of the Security Council. Thus,
although the questions of the Falkland Islands and of Belize
have both been mentioned, I was glad to hear both the
representative of Argentina and the representative of
Guatemala say that they considered that they could best be
tackled on the basis of bilateral discussions. My Government welcomes and endorses that view. My Government’s
policy has consistently been based on the interests of the
inhabitants and the principle of self-determination. In this
connexion I need only refer to the Bahamas, which are
about to become independent this year, and to the
Associated State of Grenada, which, from the moment it
expressed its desire to proceed to full independence, has
had no impediment placed in its way. That is the principle
on which we operate.

113. We note with particular pleasure the active role
played by the people and the leaders of our host country,
Panama, who have been in the forefront of the development of the inter-American system since the founding of
their country. In fact, the first seeds of pan-Americanism
were planted here by Simbn Bolfvar, at the Panama
Congressof 1826.
114. The United States sets great store by its close and
fruitful association with the countries of Latin America. We
fully share their deep and genuine concern for the
continuation of peace, prosperity, political stability and
economic and social development in this hemisphere.

108. I have concentrated my remarks on the achievements
of the countries of the Latin American region and of their
contribution to the United Nations. We see that acrossthe
whole range of activity the voice of Latin America has been
the voice of moderation, of compromise, and of respect for
legality. As an area of relative stability it has been a force
for stability in international politics. As a continent
containing some of the most developed of the developing
countries it provides a bridge between the developed world
and the third world. This meeting of the Security Council
in Panama will have been worth while if it concentrates our
attention on those attributes of Latin America which have
enabled it to play a constructive and moderating role in
international relations, and if our presence in Panama
encourages the countries of the continent to continue to
make their own special contributions to world peace and
progress.

115. The countries of this region were among the original
supporters of the United Nations and have remained among
the most fruitful and dedicated of its Members. All of us
recognize their role in the United Nations and their
contributions to international peace and security. Many
Latin American countries have participated directly in
United Nations peace-keeping operations, operations which
go to the heart of the Organization’s purposes. All have
contributed in many ways to the resolution of disputes
among nations and of the problems confronting the world.
We are all aware of the high competence of Latin American
jurists in the field of international law and the unwavering
support in this hemisphere for the sanctity of solemn treaty
obligations even as the search for constructive change
continues.

109. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): I join
previous speakers in expressing my gratitude to the President, the Government and the people of Panama for the
admirable organization of this meeting by the Panamanian
Government and for the generous welcome and warm
hospitality that we have received here. It is indeed an
exhilarating experience to see the determination, dedication
and devotion of the Panamanian people which is evident in
the bustling economic activity, reflected visibly in the pace
of construction that we see around us.

116. It is in fact the absence of truly threatening
international issues within the Latin American area which
led my Government to question the necessity of OUT
meeting away from United Nations Headquarters at this
time. Our delegation expressed the views of the United
States very clearly. Meetings of the Security Council,
whether at Headquarters or away, should be based on its
primary Charter responsibility to maintain international
peace and security.

110. May I also express the deep sorrow of my delegation
about the death of Mr. Chacko. Although I did not know
him personally, members of the United States Mission are
unanimously agreed that he was the model of an effective,
utterly unbiased international civil servant, He will be
missed,

117. While the Charter confers this responsibility on the
Security Council, it also provides-indeed, in Article 33, it
specifically enumerates-many ways to resolve international
issues before such matters are brought directly before the
Council. A look at the efforts now under way with regard
to nearly all the major problem areas of the world
underscores this wide variety of channels, both inside and
outside the United Nations, which can be used to achieve
the Charter goals, “to practice tolerance and live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours”.

111. “Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles of
the Charter.” That is the agenda item for these meetings in
Panama.
112. For more than a century, the nations of Latin
America have demonstrated an enviable and unparalleled
record in achieving and maintaining that international peace
and security on this continent. They not only have avoided
major international conflicts within the hemisphere, but
also
have created a viable framework for the peaceful

118. For example, the United States and the Soviet Union
have undertaken with each other to do “their utmost” to
avoid military confrontation and to respect the sovereign
equality of ah countries. The United States and the People’s
Republic of China have undertaken to broaden the under14

standing between their peoples and this process has taken
new strides in recent weeks. The United States, together
with other parties to the Viet-Nam conflict, has arrived at a
cease-fire agreement for Viet-Nam, and other interested
nations have pledged in Paris their full support and
co-operation in strengthening peace in Indo-China. In
Europe, the United States is participating in preliminary
discussions in Helsinki and Vienna aimed at specific and
practical improvements in East-West relations.
119. These have all been due in large measure to the wise
and imaginative leadership of our President, Richard Nixon,
as he pursues his great goal of a generation of peace for all
mankind, Because of his diplomatic initiatives, his courage
and his readiness to try new approaches, the world is on the
threshold of co-operation and friendship among nations
undreamed of just a few years ago.
120. In looking back at what has been achieved, and
forward to what remains to be done, one is struck by the
variety of means, the wealth of institutions and the host of
relationships which can be turned to positive effect.
121. In this hemisphere, over a period of 150 years, our
peoples have established relationships that, in our view,
make us a unique community. There are, of course, a
number of bilateral questions in this hemisphere that
remain unresolved-many have been mentioned at this
table-but progress is being made in many of these through
patient negotiation. For instance, the United States and
Panama have been seeking-through negotiation-a new
status for the Panama Canal which would bring it into
harmony with contemporary political realities.

mercial affairs into an ornanizstion devoted to the peace
and security of the hemisphere. It is also deeply involved in
the region’s economic and social development, educational,
scientific and cultural co-operation, human rights, juridical
affairs, and technical assistance and training, to mention
but a few. As it has grown, it has increased its capacity to
achieve its essential purposes. These are to strengthen the
peace and security of the continent, to prevent possible
causesof difficulty and to ensure the peaceful settlement of
disputes. It also provides for common action on the part of
the member States in the event of aggression. It assists in
the search for solutions to political, juridical and economic
problems when they arise among members, and in the area
of development it is concerned with the promotion of
co-operative social and economic action,
I

125. The United States has also warmly supported the
many activities of the United Nations in the area of
economic and social development in Latin America. However, for most of the 1960s the United States Government
was the major external contributor of assistance to Latin
America in seeking its economic and social development. As
we agreed to do at Punta de1 Este in 1961, the United
States provided over $10,000 million for the development
of the American Republics during the period 1961 to 1972.
We kept our promised word.
126. In the past few years the countries of Latin America
have increased their reliance upon the major multilateral
lending institutions for the bulk of their official external
capital assistance. In recognition of this, the United States
has channelled an increasing proportion of its loan funds to
Latin America through multilateral institutions, particularly
the Inter-American Development Bank. In December of last
year, for example, the United States formally signed the
replenishing agreement under which it agreed to provide
$1,000 million to the Fund for Special Operations of the
Bank. The total flow of United States funds through all
channels, bilateral and multilateral, has never been higher.
As a result, the total .assistancereceived by Latin America
from all sources is going up steadily. The United States has
given special and increasing attention to the economic and
social concerns of the hemisphere. Total lending commitments by the Agency for International Development, the
Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank to
Latin America in 1972 are more than double those of 1964.

122. With respect to multilateral relationships in this
hemisphere, the regional institutions and arrangements we
have developed, and the broad and deep contacts joining
our Governments and our citizens have grown into what is
now known as the inter-American system. That system is
characterized not only by formal institutions but also by a
sense of solidarity and a community of common interests
and objectives on which we seek to build a lasting
foundation for truly effective inter-American co-operation.
We have a common faith in the benefits of freedom, the
importance of the individual, the power of reason and the
rule of law. The conclusion that the inter-American system
is indeed a foundation of some permanence, is supported
by the significant intellectual, economic, security, and
political ties which further draw us together,

127. The United States has had a long and cordial
relationship with the independent nations of this hemisphere. Recognizing the principle of sovereign equality and
respect for the right of States to pursue their own
development, the United States is building a constantly
evolving relationship with Latin America, a relationship
which we trust will become even more cordial and mutually
beneficial.

123. A system that is both progressive and evolving, and is
notable for its continuing usefulness to its membership, is a
system which is also able to accommodate diversities. The
most obvious of these are the different cultural backgrounds, economic conditions and political institutions
which remind us that we are individual nations, as well as
members of a hemispheric community.

128. I should like to reflect briefly regarding the United
States position on some other issueswhich have been raised
in statements before the Council.

124. The Organization of American States is the keystone
of the inter-American system. It exists as a regional agency
within the meaning of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. It is also the oldest international organization of its kind in the world, dating from 1890. It has
grown from an institution concerned primarily with com-

129. The United States has always been, and continues to
be, a strong advocate of the Latin American nuclear-free
zone. We signed Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America-the
15

Treaty of Tlatelolco-on 1 April 1968. The Protocol went
into effect for the United States on 32 May 1971. By these
actions the United States pledged itself to respect the
denuclearized status of Latin America, not to contribute to
any violation of the Treaty and not to use or threaten to
use nuclear weapons against any of the contracting parties.

135. My country is happy that it was able in 1972 to
disburse in various ways approximately $227 million, with
direct effect, and stimulate the Panamanian economy. In
fact, our loans and grants to Panama represent the highest
per capita level of United States assistanceanywhere in the
world-in part, because of our friendship, but mostly
because Panama has demonstrated a high capacity to
programme and to utilize financial assistanceeffectively,

130. The question of permanent sovereignty over natural
resources is currently an active item in the United Nations,
specifically in the Economic and Social Council Committee
on Natural Resources and the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor. We do not
question the principle of “permanent sovereignty”. However, at the same time we wish to point out that we do not
believe that complex issue is properly before the Security
Council. In accepting the principle of permanent sovereignty we strongly reaffirm our support for the principles
of General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) including inter
din the observance in good faith of foreign investment
agreements, the payment of appropriate compensation for
nationalized property, as required by international law, and
the recognition of arbitration or international adjudication.

136. We believe that all mankind has been well servedby
the Panama Canal since its completion nearly 60 years ago.
During those years it has never been closed, And it has
transited an ever-increasing number of ships carrying cargo
to and from all parts of the world.
137. Although the 1903 Convention still governs the basic
relationship between the United States and Panama con
cerning the Canal, that relationship wassignificantly revised,
as well as reaffirmed, in the Treaties of 1936s and 1955.4
On both occasions the United States relinquished important
rights and provided important new benefits for Panama.
138. In 1964, recognizing that a comprehensive modernization of our relationship should be undertaken, the United
States began negotiations with Panama with three essential
objectives in view, which remain valid today:

131, Similarly, we believe that the question of multinational corporations, which has been raised in different
contexts, should not be brought before the Security
Council. It is at present under discussion in several other,
more appropriate United Nations bodies. A group of
eminent individuals, appointed by the Secretary-General
under Economic and Social Council resolution 1721 (LIII)
of 2X July 1972, is studying the impact of multinational
corporations. UNCTAD is doing a study on the restrictive
business practices of multinational corporations. Finally,
the International Labour Organisation is looking into the
relationships of activities of such corporations to social
policy. We fail to see what the Security Council can
effectively accomplish in this particular field.

(a) The Canal should be available to the world’s commeb
cial vesselson an equal basis at reasonable cost;
(b) So that the Canal should serve world commerce
efficiently, the United States should have the right to
provide additional Canal capacity; and

(c) The Canal should continue to be operated and
defended by the United States for an extended but
specified period of time.
139. It was recognized then, as it is today, that these
objectives would require the conclusion of a new treaty or
treaties to replace the 1903 Convention and its amendments. By 1967 three draft treaties had been negotiated
and agreed to by the two negotiating teams. At that time
the Panamanian Government did not move to ratify the
treaties, but in October of 1970 requested the United
States to renew negotiations. The United States agreed to
do so, and negotiations were in fact renewed in June 1971,
when the Panamanian negotiating team arrived in Washing
ton. During the intensive negotiations which followed, the
United States has fully recognized that the relationship
originally defined in the 1903 Convention needs to be
brought into line with the realities of the world today, as
well aswith the mutual interests of both countries.

132. We happen to share the judgement of the Economic
and Social Council resolution that these corporations “are
frequently effective agents for the transfer of technology as
well as capital to developing countries”. No country has to
welcome or even accept foreign investment; if it does so, it
of course may establish its own rules. However, it also has
the obligation, in that case, to abide by those rules, to
compensate the investor for retroactive changes in the rules
or, in the case of expropriation or nationalization of private
property, to make adequate provision for just compensation as required by international law.
133. Now I come to discuss United States relations with
Panama. Our close and mutually beneficial friendship has a
long history, characterized, to be sure, by occasional
differences and friction, But the bonds linking our two
peoples continue strong and vibrant.

140. The United States is ready to conclude a new treaty
promptly, At the same time, we believe it is necessary that
the United States continue to be responsible for the
operation and defence of the Canal for an additional,
specified period of time-the length of which is one of’ the
many issues to be negotiated. As a result of the persistent
efforts made by both sides, significant progress has been

134. We rejoice in the progress achieved by Panama-it has
been striking. Over the past four years the economy has
been growing at a rate of 7 to 8 per cent, one of the highest
rates of growth in the world. Outside help has contributed
to this rate of growth, but there has also been a high level
of labour and investment by the dedicated Panamanian
people.

3 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. CC,P. 17.
4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 243, p. 211.

16

goodwill and the diplomatic machinery already exist within
the area to resolve these problems.

made in the treaty talks towards reaching mutual understanding on major principles.

145. The question then ,arises as to what contribution the
Council can make at these meetings, and what the Council
will carry back to United Nations Headquarters as a result
of its meetings in Latin America.

141, I would like to make clear that the United States, no
less than others that have spoken at this table, supports
Panama’s just aspirations. The United States negotiators,
cognizant of those aspirations, have already recognized
that :

146. With Latin American issues, as with issues in other
parts of the world, the members of the Council must look
to what this body can actually accomplish, the consistency
of its proposed actions with the provisions of the Charter,
and their impact on the chances of resolving existing
differences.

fa) The 1903 Convention should be replaced by a new,
modem treaty;
/b) Any new Canal treaty should be of fixed duration,
rejecting the concept of perpetuity;

147. For the Council to take a partisan stand or reflect
only a parochial viewpoint would risk undermining the
processes of bilateral and regional diplomacy which have
servedthis hemisphere so well.

(c) Panama should have returned to it a substantial
territory now part of the Canal Zone, with arrangement for
use of other areas. Those other areas should be the
minimum required for United States operations and
defence of the Canal, and would be integrated into the
legal, economic, social and cultural life of Panama, on a
timeatable to be agreed upon;

148. For the Council to pronounce itself on a wider range
of issues, not directly concerned with the maintenance of
international peace and security, risks diluting the results
already achieved in other United Nations organs and would
question the seriousness of the Council’s purpose in holding
its meetings here.

(d) Panama should exercise its jurisdiction in the Canal
area pursuant to a mutually agreed time-table;

fe) Panama should receive substantially increased annual
payments for the use of its territory relating to the Canal.

149. We have been engaged in discussion since 15 March,
and much of what has been said is valuable, constructive
and informative, That in itself is a positive element, But this
series of meetings can be productive in other ways.
Tomorrow evening we should be able to adjourn to return
to New York and say that our deliberations have contributed renewed vigour to the effective, realistic and harmonious search for the realization of the objectives of the
United Nations, not only in Latin America, but everywhere.
If we can do that, then these meetings will have been a
success,

142. Accordingly, those who attack the 1903 Convention
are attacking a phantom foe, a non-existent enemy. The
1903 Convention has already been revised significantly to
Panama’s advantage. We were on the verge of changing it a
third time in 1967, and we are ready to change it again-to
write a new treaty-when negotiations continue in the spirit
of friendship and co-operation that should be the hallmark
of Panama-United States relations.

150. The PRESIDENT (interpretatioti from Spanish):
Before adjourning this meeting, I should like to announce,
as the representative of PANAMA, that the delegation of
Panama reserves its right to speak at the very beginning of
this afternoon’s meeting in exercise of its right of reply to
the representative of the United States regarding certain
ideas expressed in his statement that were not in conformity with the reality of our relations with the United
States, or with what has been done regarding negotiations
for a new Canal treaty.

I43. We recognize that much remains to be settled. Yet
we believe the aforementioned points represent a substantial foundation of important principles, and are confident
that with continued goodwill by reasonable men on both
sides, and some patience, a mutually satisfactory treaty can
result.
144. In reviewing the relationships among the 532 million
active and dynamic people residing in this hemisphere, it
would be incorrect to leave the impression that there are no
problems or no issues needing attention. Obviously there
are, as there are anywhere, But we know that both the

The meetingroseat 1.10 p.m.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depoeitaires
du mondo entier. Informer-vous
aupri?s de votre librnire
ou adressea-vous
A : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IlOKi’UBTh

COMO

CONSEGUIR

li3AAHHn

OPrAHZi

PUBLICACIONES

BAl&HH

DE LAS

OIi’bEAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAIKIIFII

UNIDAS

LRS publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
esmn en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
an todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas. SecciBn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73.82086-April

197h-1,925
