76

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region,
to declare their support for establishing such a zone and to
deposit those declarations with the Security Council,
Considering that the Israeli statements contained in a
letter dated 12 July 198469 continue to disregard the safe­
guards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 487 (1981)
of 19 June 1981 in which, inter alia, the Council called
upon Israel urgently to place its nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Noting with concern Israel's persistent refusal to commit
itself not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weapons,
despite repeated calls by the General Assembly, the Secur­
ity Council and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
and to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards,
Conscious of the grave consequences which endanger
international peace and security as a result of Israel's
development and acquisition of nuclear weapons and
Israel's collaboration with South Africa to develop nuclear
weapons and their delivery systems,
Recalling its repeated condemnation of nuclear collabo­
ration between Israel and South Africa,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
Israeli nuclear armament, 70
I. Condemns Israel's continued refusal to implement
Security Council resolution 487 (1981), unanimously
adopted by the Council on 19 June 1981, and its refusal to
renounce any possession of nuclear weapons;
2. Requests the Security Council to take urgent and
effective measures to ensure that Israel complies with the
resolution and places all its nuclear facilities under Inter­
national Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
3. Requests again the Security Council to investigate
Israel's nuclear activities and the collaboration of other
States, parties and institutions in these activities;
4. Reiterates its request to the International Atomic
Energy Agency to suspend any scientific co-operation with
Israel which could contribute to Israel's nuclear capabili­
ties;
5. Reiterates further its condemnation of the Israeli
threat, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
to repeat its armed attack on peaceful facilities in Iraq and
in other countries;
6. Reaffirms its condemnation of the continuing
nuclear collaboration between Israel and South Africa;
7. Requests the United Nations Institute for Disarma­
ment Research, in co-operation with the Department for
.Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat and in consultation
with the League of Arab States and the Organization of
African Unity, to prepare a report providing data and
other relevant information relating to Israeli nuclear arma­
ment and further nuclear developments taking into
account, inter a/ia, the report of the Secretary-General on
Israeli nuclear armament, 7 1 and to submit it to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the nec­
essary support to the United Nations Institute for Dis­
armament Research to enable it to carry out the task
entrusted to it under the present resolution and for the
Institute to submit a report to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
69 A/39/349.

70 A/39/435.

71 A/37/434.

72 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thir(l•-e11(hth Session. Supple­
ment No. 42 (A/38/42). annex VI

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear arma­
ment".

102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
39/148. Review of the implementation of the recom­
mendations and decisions adopted by the
General Assembly at its tenth special ses­
sion
A
UNILATERAL NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/183 J of 20 December 1983,
in which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare,
with the assistance of qualified governmental experts and
applying the methods customary in these cases, a report on
ways and means that seemed advisable for stimulating the
adoption of unilateral nuclear disarmament measures
which, without prejudice to the security of States, would
come to promote and complement bilateral and multilat­
eral negotiations in this sphere,
Recalling also the concrete proposal submitted to the
Disarmament Commission at its 1983 session to the effect
that the preparation of a study on unilateral measures
would be at present of particular value in view of the
impasse existing in both the bilateral and the multilateral
negotiations, 72
Recalling further the conclusion of the General Assem­
bly at its tenth special session, to the effect that unilateral
measures of arms limitation or reduction could contribute
to limiting the arms race, 73
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General 74
transmitting the study prepared by the Group of Govern­
mental Experts on Unilateral Nuclear Disarmament Mea­
sures,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the study on unilat­
eral nuclear disarmament measures; 75
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and to the Group of Governmental Experts on Unilateral
Nuclear Disarmament Measures that assisted him in the
preparation of the study;
3. Takes note of the conclusions of the study and trusts
that they may encourage nuclear-weapon States to take the
steps necessary to promote and orient adequately disarma­
ment negotiations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
reproduction of the report as a United Nations publica­
tion 75 and, making full use of all the facilities of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, to
publicize the report in as many languages as is considered
desirable and practicable.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
73 See resolution s. I 0/2. para. 41.
74 A/39/5 I 6.
75 Ibid., annex. The study was subsequently issued under the title Unilat­
eral Nuclear Disarmament Measures (United Nations publication. Sales No.
E 85.IX 2).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

B
BILATERAL NUCLEAR-ARMS NEGOTIATIONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/ l 83 P of 20 December 1983,
Deeply regretting that the bilateral nuclear-arms negotiations at Geneva between the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America are not con­
tinuing,
Firmly convinced that an early agreement in those dis­
rupted negotiations, in accordance with the principle of
undiminished security at the lowest possible level of arma­
ments and military forces, would be of crucial importance
for the strengthening of international peace and security,
Deeply concerned that the absence of negotiations has
impeded efforts to strengthen international peace and
security and to achieve progress towards disarmament,
Convinced that, through negotiations pursued in a spirit
of flexibility and responsibility for the security interests of
all States, it is possible to reach agreement,
l. Urges the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Government of the United
States of America to resume, without delay or pre-condi­
tions, bilateral nuclear-arms negotiations in order to
achieve positive results in accordance with the security
interests of all States and the universal desire for progress
towards disarmament;
2. Calls upon the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Government of the United
States of America to spare no effort in seeking the attain­
ment of the final objective of the negotiations;
3. Invites the Governments of the two States men­
tioned above to work actively towards the enhancement of
mutual trust in order to create an atmosphere more condu­
cive to disarmament agreements;
4. Expresses its firmest possible encouragement and
support- to efforts to resume negotiations and bring them to
a successful conclusion.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
C
NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN ALL ASPECTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling that at its twelfth special session, the second
special session devoted to disarmament, it expressed its
profound preoccupation over the danger of war, in particu­
lar nuclear war, the prevention of which remains the most
acute and urgent task of the present day, 76
Reaffirming that nuclear weapons pose the most serious
threat to mankind and its survival and that it is therefore
essential to proceed with nuclear disarmament and the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming also that all nuclear-weapon States, in par­
ticular those which possess the most important nuclear
arsenals, bear a special responsibility for the fulfilment of
the task of achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament,
76 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session,
Annexes, agenda items 9 to 13, document A/S-12/32, para. 62.
77 Resolution S-10/2, para. 47.
78 Of/icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 42 (A/39/42). para. 23.
79 Resolution S-10/2

77

Stressing again that existing arsenals of nuclear weapons
alone are more than sufficient to destroy all life on Earth,
and bearing in mind the devastating results which nuclear
war would have on belligerents and non-belligerents alike,
Recalling that at its tenth special session, the first special
session devoted to disarmament, it decided that effective
measures of nuclear disarmament and the prevention of
nuclear war had the highest priority and that it was essen­
tial to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms race in all its
aspects in order to avert the danger of war involving
nuclear weapons,77
Stressing that any expectation of winning a nuclear war
is senseless and that such a war would inevitably lead to
the destruction of nations, to enormous devastation and to
catastrophic consequences for civilization and life itself on
Earth,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 35/ l 52 B of 12
December l 980, it noted with alarm the increased risk of a
nuclear catastrophe associated both with the intensifica­
tion of the nuclear-arms race and with the adoption of the
new doctrines of limited or partial use of nuclear weapons,
which are incompatible with its resolution 110 (II) of 3
November 1947, entitled "Measures to be taken against
propaganda and the inciters of a new war", and which give
rise to illusions of the admissibility and acceptability of a
nuclear conflict,
Noting with alarm that to the doctrine of a limited
nuclear war was later added the concept of a protracted
nuclear war and that these dangerous doctrines lead to a
new twist in the spiral of the arms race, which may seri­
ously hamper the reaching of agreement on nuclear dis­
armament,
Gravely concerned about the renewed escalation of the
nuclear-arms race, in both its quantitative and qualitative
dimensions, as well as reliance on the doctrine of nuclear
deterrence, which in fact are heightening the risk of the
outbreak of nuclear war and lead to increased tensions and
instability in international relations,
Taking note of the relevant deliberations of the Dis­
armament Commission in 1984 with regard to item 4 of
its agenda, as contained in its report,78
Stressing the urgent need for the cessation of the devel­
opment and deployment of new types and systems of
nuclear weapons as a step on the road to nuclear disarma­
ment,
Stressing again that priority in disarmament negotia­
tions should be given to nuclear weapons, and referring to
paragraphs 49 and 54 of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly,79
Recalling its relevant resolutions on this subject,
Welcoming the Joint Declaration issued on 2 2 May
1984 by the Heads of State or Government of Argentina,
Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden and the United Republic
of Tanzania,80 as well as the positive response this Decla­
ration has met with in many States,
Noting that the Conference on Disarmament, at its 1984
session, discussed the question of the cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament81 and, in par­
ticular, the establishment of an ad hoc committee for nego­
tiations on that question,
Regretting, however, that the Conference on Disarma­
ment was prevented from reaching agreement on the
establishment of an ad hoc committee for the purpose of
80 A/39/277-S/16587, annex. For the printed text. see Official Records of
the Security Council, Thirty-ninth Year, Supplement.for April, May and June
1984, document S/16587, annex.
8 I Official Records of the General Assemb/v. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 27 (A/39/27), sect. 111.C.

78

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

undertaking multilateral negotiations on the question of
the cessation of the nuclear-arms race and nuclear dis­
armament,
Considering that efforts will continue to be made in
order to enable the Conference on Disarmament to fulfil
its negotiating role with regard to the cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament, and that for
this purpose all members of the Conference on Disarma­
ment should display a constructive approach to such nego­
tiations, bearing in mind the high priority they have
accorded to this question in the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session,
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament is the
most suitable forum for the preparation and conduct of
negotiations on nuclear disarmament,
1. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to pro­
ceed without delay to negotiations on the cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament and especially
to begin the elaboration of practical measures for the ces­
sation of the nuclear-arms race and for nuclear disarma­
ment in accordance with paragraph 50 of the Final Docu­
ment of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, including a nuclear-disarmament programme,
and to establish for this purpose an ad hoc committee;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Cessation of the nuclear­
arms race and nuclear disarmament: report of the Confer­
ence on Disarmament".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

C ·onvinced that the renunciation of the first use of
nuclear weapons is a most important and urgent measure
for the prevention of nuclear war, and taking note of the
broad, positive international reaction to the concept of
non-first use of nuclear weapons, including the appeal con­
tained in the Final Communique adopted at the Meeting
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegation
of the Non-Aligned Countries to the thirty-ninth session of
the General Assembly, 82 held in New York from I to 5
October 1984,
I . Considers that the solemn declarations by two
nuclear-weapon States made or reiterated at the twelfth
special session of the General Assembly, concerning their
respective obligations not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons, offer an important avenue to decrease the danger
of nuclear war;
2. Expresses the hope that those nuclear-weapon States
that have not yet done so would consider making similar
declarations with respect to not being the first to use
nuclear weapons;
3. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to con­
sider under its relevant agenda item, inter alia, the elabo­
ration of an international instrument of a legally binding
character laying down the obligation not to be the first to
use nuclear weapons;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Non-use of nuclear
weapons and prevention of nuclear war".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

D

E

NON-USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS AND PREVENTION
OF NUCLEAR WAR

PROHIBITION OF THE NUCLEAR NEUTRON WEAPON

The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the survival of mankind posed
by the existence of nuclear weapons and the continuing
arms race, in particular in the nuclear field,
Recalling that, in accordance with the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, the
first special session devoted to disarmament, effective
measures of nuclear disarmament and the prevention of
nuclear war have the highest priority, 77
Recalling also that this commitment was reaffirmed by
the General Assembly at its twelfth special session, the sec­
ond special session devoted to disarmament,
Bearing in mind its relevant resolutions on this subject.
Reaffirming that the most effective guarantee against the
danger of nuclear war and the use of nuclear weapons is
nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of
nuclear weapons,
Recalling that, in paragraph 58 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session, 79 it is stated that all States
should actively participate in efforts to bring about condi­
tions in international relations among States in which a
code of peaceful conduct of nations in international affairs
could be agreed upon and which would preclude the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming also that the nuclear-weapon States have
the primary responsibility for nuclear disarmament and
for undertaking measures aimed at preventing the out­
break of nuclear war, inter alia, by establishing corre­
sponding norms regulating relations between them,
82 A/39/560-S/16773, annex, para 136

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 79 in which
it is stated that the achievement of nuclear disarmament
will require urgent negotiation of agreements, inter a/ia,
for the cessation of the qualitative improvement and
development of nuclear-weapon systems, which is espe­
cially emphasized in paragraph 50 (a) of that Document,
Recalling also that in paragraph 50 of the Final Docu­
ment it is also underlined that in the course of negotiations
consideration can be given to mutual and agreed limita­
tion or prohibition, without prejudice to the security of
any State, of any types of nuclear armaments,
Stressing that the development and production of the
nuclear neutron weapon is a dangerous consequence of the
continuing qualitative arms race in the field of nuclear
weapons, especially through the qualitative improvement
and development of new nuclear warheads by enhancing
specific characteristics of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming its relevant resolutions on the prohibition of
the nuclear neutron weapon,
Sharing the world-wide concern expressed by Member
States, as well as by non-governmental organizations,
about the continued and expanded production and intro­
duction of the nuclear neutron weapon in military ar­
senals, which escalates the nuclear-arms race and signifi­
cantly lowers the threshold of nuclear war,
A ware of the inhuman effects of that weapon, which
constitutes a grave threat, particularly to the unprotected
civilian population,

III.

79

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the consideration by the Conference on Disarma­
ment at its 1984 session of issues connected with the cessa­
tion of the nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament as
well as the prohibition of the nuclear neutron weapon,83
Regretting that the Conference on Disarmament was
prevented from reaching agreement on the commence­
ment of negotiations on the cessation of the nuclear-arms
race and nuclear disarmament, including the prohibition
of the nuclear neutron weapon in-an appropriate organiza­
tional framework,
l . Reaffirms its request to the Conference on Disarma­
ment to start without delay negotiations within an appro­
priate organizational framework, with a view to conclud­
ing a convention on the prohibition of the development,
production, stockpiling, deployment and use of nuclear
neutron weapons as an organic element of negotiations, as
envisaged in paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this question by the General Assembly at
its thirty-ninth session;
3. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit
a report on this question to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Prohibition of the
nuclear neutron weapon".
102nd plenary meeting
1 7 December 1984

F
CLIMATIC EFFECTS OF NUCLEAR WAR: NUCLEAR
WINTER

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in the Final Document of the Tenth Spe­
cial Session of the General Assembly,79 after referring spe­
cifically to "the threat to the very survival of mankind"
posed by the existence of nuclear weapons, it declared, in
paragraph 18, that removing the threat of a world war - a
nuclear war - is the most acute and urgent task of the
present day,
Noting that, in spite of recent scientific endeavours, the
environmental and other climatic consequences of a
nuclear war still pose a major challenge to science,
Noting that, as a result of recent atmospheric and biolog­
ical studies, there have been new findings which indicate
that in addition to blast, heat and radiation, nuclear war,
even on a limited scale, would produce smoke, soot and
dust of sufficient magnitude as to trigger an arctic nuclear
winter which may transform the Earth into a darkened,
frozen planet where conditions would be conducive to
mass extinction,
Recognizing that the prospect of nuclear winter poses an
unprecedented peril to all nations, even those far removed
from the nuclear explosions, which would add immeasura­
bly to the previously known dangers of nuclear war,
Conscious of the urgent need to continue and develop
scientific studies to increase the knowledge and under standing of the various elements and consequences on cli­
mate, including nuclear winter,
83 Official Records of the General Assemh/y. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 27 (A/39/27), sect. 111.B.

I . Requests the Secretary-General to compile and dis­
tribute as a document of the United Nations appropriate
excerpts of all national and international scientific studies
on the climatic effects of nuclear war, including nuclear
winter, published so far or which may be published before
3 1 July 1985;
2. Urges all States and intergovernmental organiza­
tions, as well as non-governmental organizations, through
their intermediary, to transmit to the Secretary-General,
prior to the above-mentioned date, the relevant material
in their possession which may be useful for the above pur­
pose;
3. Recommends that the above-mentioned document
be examined at the fortieth session of the General Assem­
bly in connection with the item dealing with the preven­
tion of a nuclear war.

102nd plenary meeting
1 7 December 1 984
G
BILATERAL NUCLEAR-ARMS NEGOTIATIONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling that at its tenth special session, the first special
session devoted to disarmament, it approved by consensus
a Declaration, contained in section II of the Final Docu­
ment of the Tenth Special Session,79 in paragraph 27 of
which, inter a/ia, it proclaimed that, in order effectively to
discharge the central role and primary responsibility in the
sphere of disarmament which belong to the United
Nations in accordance with its Charter, the United
Nations should be kept appropriately informed of all steps
in this field, whether unilateral, bilateral, regional or multi­
lateral, without prejudice to the progress of negotiations,
Recalling also that at its twelfth special session, the sec­
ond special session devoted to disarmament, Member
States reiterated their solemn commitment to implement
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session, the
validity of which received their unanimous and categorical
reaffirmation,76
Regretting the interruption of the two series of bilateral
nuclear-arms negotiations begun on 30 November 198 1
and 29 June 1982, respectively, between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of Amer­
ica,
Deploring that, prior to such interruption, it had already
become evident that the negotiations were not producing
the desired results,
Bearing in mind that the General Assembly on several
occasions has requested the major nuclear-weapon States
to proclaim a freeze embracing, inter a/ia, a ban on all fur­
ther deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery
vehicles,
I . Requests the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Government of the United
States of America to inform the General Assembly, before
the closure of its thirty-ninth session, of the reasons for the
interruption of their negotiations, the present situation and
the prospects for their resumption;
2. Urges again the Governments of the two States
mentioned above to examine immediately, as a way out of
the present impasse, the possibility of combining into a
single forum the two series of negotiations which they had

80

General Assembly--Thirty-ninth Session

been carrying out and of broadening their scope so as to
embrace also the "tactical" or "battlefield" nuclear weap­
ons;
3. Invites those Governments to consider the advisa­
bility of conducting henceforward their bilateral negotia­
tions in a subsidiary body of the Conference on Disarma­
ment whose membership could be limited to themselves, a
possibility which was expressly contemplated when article
25 of the rules of procedure of the Committee84 - now the
Conference85 - on Disarmament was approved;
4. Reiterates once more its request to the two negotiat­
ing parties that they bear constantly in mind that not only
their national interests but also the vital interests of all the
peoples of the world are at stake in this question;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Bilateral nuclear-arms
negotiations".
102nd plenary meeting
1 7 December I 984

H

FUNCTIONS
1 . The Institute shall work on the basis of the provisions of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 79 the
first special session devoted to disarmament.
2. The work of the Institute shall aim at:
(a) Providing the international community with more diversified and
complete data on problems relating to international security. the arma­
ments race and disarmament in all fields, particularly in the nuclear field.
so as to facilitate progress, through negotiations. towards greater security
for all States and towards the economic and social development of all peo­
ples;
(b) Promoting informed participation by all States in disarmament
efforts;
(c) Assisting ongoing negotiations on disarmament and continuing
efforts to ensure greater international security at a progressively lower level
of armaments, particularly nuclear armaments, by means of objective and
factual studies and analyses;
(d) Carrying out more in-depth, forward-looking and long-term
research on disarmament, so as to provide a general insight into the
problems involved, and stimulating new initiatives for new negotiations.
3. The Institute shall take into account the relevant recommendations
of the General Assembly and shall be organized in such a manner as to
ensure participation on an equitable political and geographical basis.

Article Ill

UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTE FOR DISARMAMENT
RESEARCH

The General Assembly,
Considering the role of disarmament research as a
means to promote disarmament measures,
Recalling its resolution 37/99 K, section IV, of 1 3
December 1982,
I. Takes note of annex II to the report of the Secretary­
General of 4 October 1 984; 86
2. Approves the statute of the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research, annexed to the present resolu­
tion;
3. Takes note of the report of the Director of the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research;87
4. Renews the invitations to Governments to consider
making voluntary contributions to the Institute;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to give
the Institute administrative and other support;
6. Invites the Director of the Institute to report annu­
ally to the General Assembly on the activities carried out
by the Institute.
102nd plenary meeting
1 7 December 1 984

ANNEX
Statute of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research

Article I
PURPOSES
The United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (hereinafter
referred to as "the Institute") is an autonomous institution within the
framework of the United Nations, established by the General Assembly for
the purpose of undertaking independent research on disarmament and
related problems, particularly international security issues, and working in
close relationship with the Department for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat.
84 CD/8/Rev.2.
8 5 As from 7 February 1 984.

Article II

BOARD OF TRUSTEES
I . The Institute and its work shall be governed by a Board of Trustees
(hereinafter referred to as "the Board"). The Advisory Board on Disarma­
ment Studies, referred to in General Assembly resolution 3 7199 K, section
III, with the Director of the Institute (hereinafter referred to as "the Direc­
tor") as an ex officio member. shall function as the Board.
2. The Board shall:
(a) Establish principles and directives to govern the activities and oper­
ation of the Institute;
(b) Consider and adopt the annual work programme and the proposed
annual budget estimates;
(c) Recommend, if it considers necessary, a subvention from the regu­
lar budget of the United Nations in accordance with articles VII and VIII
of this statute;
(d) Review the financial situation of the Institute and make appropriate
recommendations with a view to ensuring the effectiveness of its opera­
tions and their continuity;
(e) Take such other decisions as are deemed necessary for the effective
functioning of the Institute;
if) Undertake the other functions specified in this statute.
3. The Board shall meet at least once a year.
4. Organs of the United Nations, specialized agencies and the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency may be represented as appropriate at meet­
ings of the Board upon invitation.

Article I V
THE DIRECTOR AND THE STAFF
I . The Director shall be appointed by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. after consultations with the Board.
2. The Director shall have overall responsibility for the organization.
direction and administration of the Institute, in accordance with general
directives formulated by the Board, and shall, inter a/ia:
(a) Prepare and submit the draft work programme of the Institute to
the Board;
(b) Prepare and submit a proposed annual budget to 1he Board in
accordance with articles VII and VIII of this statute;
(c) Execute the work programme and make the expenditure authorized
in the approved budget;
(d) Appoint and direct the staff of the Institute;
(e) Set up ad hoc consultative bodies as may be necessary;
if) Negotiate arrangements with Governments and international as
well as national, pubhc and private agencies with a view to offering and
receiving services related to the activities of the Institute:
86 AJ39i549.
8 7 A, 391553_ annex.

81

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
(g) Accept, subject to the provisions of article VII, paragraph 4, below,
voluntary contributions to the Institute:
(h) Co-ordinate the work of the Institute with that of other interna­
tional and national program mes in similar fields;
(1) Report to the Board, as appropriate, on the Institute's activities and
the execution of its work programmes;
(/) Submit to the General Assembly reports approved by the Board.
3. The staff of the Institute shall be appointed by the Director under
letters of appointment signed by him in the name of the Secretary-General
and limited to service with the Institute. The staff shall be responsible to
the Director in the exercise of their functions.
4. The terms and conditions of service of the Director and the staff
shall be those provided in the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations, subject to such arrangements for special rules or terms of appoint­
ment as may be proposed by the Director and approved by the Secretary­
General.
5. The Director and the staff of the Institute shall not seek or receive
instructions from any Government or from any authority external to the
United Nations. They shall refrain from any action which might reflect on
their position as international officials responsible only to the Organiza­
tion.
6. The Director and the staff of the Institute are officials of the United
Nations and are therefore covered by Article I 05 of the Charter of the
United Nations and by other international agreements and United Nations
resolutions defining the status of such officials
Article V

SENIOR FELLOWS, CONSULTANTS AND CORRESPONDENTS
I. The Director may designate each year, with the approval of the
Board and for a period not longer than one year at a time, qualified persons
to serve as senior fellows of the Institute. Such persons. who may be
invited to participate as lecturers or research scholars, shall be selected on
the basis of outstanding contributions they have made in fields germane to
the work of the Institute. They may receive honorariums and be paid travel
expenses.
2. The Director may also arrange for the services of consultants for the
purpose of contributing to the analysis and planning of the activities of the
Institute or for special assignments in connection with the lnstitutc's
programmes. Such consultants shall be engaged in accordance with policies
established by the Secretary-General.
3. The Director may appoint correspondents in countries or regions to
assist in maintaining contacts with national or regional institutions and in
carrying out or advising on studies and research.
Article VI

CO-OPERATION WITH OTHER BODIES
I . In addition to the close co-operation with the Department for Dis­
armament Affairs required by article I of this statute, the Institute shall
develop arrangements for active co-operation with the specialized agencies
and other organizations, programmes and institutions of the United
Nations system.
2. The Institute may also develop arrangements for co-operation with
other organizations and institutions active in the field of disarmament
research which may be of assistance in the performance of the lnstitutc's
functions.
A rticle Vil

FINANCE
I. Voluntary contributions from States and public and private organi­
zations shall form the principal source of financing of the Institute.
2. A subvention towards meeting the costs of the Director and the staff
of the Institute may be provided from the regular budget of the United
Nations. The actual amount of any subvention shall be determined in
accordance with article VJII of this statute; it may be less than, but shall
not exceed, an amount equivalent to one half of the assured income of the
Institute from voluntary sources in respect of the year for which a subven­
tion is being requested. The assured income shall be that which has already
been received or which has been pledged in writing by the time the level of
any subvention is being considered.
3. Specific activities which the General Assembly may request the
Institute to add to its regular work programme shall be paid for from the
regular budget of the United Nations in amounts to be determined at the
time the activities are requested
4. The Director may accept voluntary contributions to the Institute
that are unrestricted or that arc designated for the implementation of an

act1v11y approved by the Board. Other voluntary contributions may be
accepted only with the approval of the Board. which shall take into account
the comments of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
5. Voluntary contributions to the Institute shall be kept in a special
account to be established by the Secretary-General in accordance with the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.
6. The special account of the Institute shall be held and administered
solely for the purposes of the Institute. The Controller of the United
Nations shall perform all necessary financial and accounting functions for
the Institute, including the custody of its funds, and shall prepare and cer­
tify the annual accounts of the Institute.
7. The Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the
financial policies established by the Secretary-General shall apply to the
financial operations of the Institute. Funds of the Institute shall be subject
to audit b) the United Nations Board of Auditors.
.-lrticlc U//
BUDGET
I . The proposed annual budget of the Institute shall be based on the
proposed draft work programme of the Institute. It shall be prepared by the
Director in consultation with the Department for Disarmament Affairs and
the Office of Financial Services of the Secretariat.
2. The proposed annual budget, together with the comments and rec­
ommendations thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, shall be submitted to the Board for action in accor­
dance with article III, paragraphs 2 (b) and (c) of this statute.
3. A recommendation by the Board, under article III, paragraph 2 (c).
for a subvention from the regular budget of the United Nations shall be
transmitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly for
approval
A rllcle IX

ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER SUPPORT
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall provide the Institute
with appropriate administrative and other support in accordance with the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. The Institute shall
reimburse the United Nations for the costs of such support, as determined
by the Controller of the United Nations after consultation with the Direc­
tor.
,tr11c/c X
LOCATION
The Institute shall have its scat at Geneva.
Article XI

STATUS
The Institute, being part of the United Nations, enjoys the status, privi­
leges and immunities provided in Articles I 04 and l 05 of the Charter of
the United Nations and other relevant international agreements and
United Nations resolutions relating to the status, privileges and immuni1ics of the Organization.
Article XII
AMENDMENTS
Amendments to this statutt· may be made by the General Assembly.

I
COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAMME OF DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in paragraph 1 09 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,79
the Assembly called for the elaboration of a comprehen­
sive programme of disarmament encompassing all mea­
sures thought to be advisable in order to ensure that the
goal of general and complete disarmament under effective
international control becomes a reality in a world in which
international peace and security prevail and in which the
new international economic order is strengthened and con­
solidated,

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

82

Recalling also its resolution 38/ 1 83 K of 20 December
1 983, in which it urged the Conference on Disarmament,
as soon as it considered that the circumstances were propi­
tious for that purpose, to renew its work on the elaboration
of the comprehensive programme of disarmament previ­
ously requested, to submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session a progress report on the matter and to
submit to the Assembly not later than at its forty-first ses­
sion a complete draft of such a programme,
Having examined the progress report of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Comprehensive Programme of Dis­
armament,88 which is an integral part of the report of the
Conference on Disarmament on its 1 984 session,
Noting that in its report the Ad Hoc Committee stated
that it was agreed that circumstances were not conducive
to making progress towards the resolution of outstanding
issues and expressed the hope that maximum efforts would
be exerted to ensure that early the following year the cir­
cumstances would be such as to permit the resumption of
the work on the elaboration of the programme and its suc­
cessful conclusion,
l . Regrets that during the 1 984 session of the Confer­
ence on Disarmament it was not possible to renew the
work on the elaboration of the comprehensive programme
of disarmament;
2. Urges that all efforts be made so that the Conference
on Disarmament may resume its work on the elaboration
of the comprehensive programme of disarmament early in
its 1 985 session with a view to submitting to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session a complete draft of such
a programme;
3. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the pro­
gress of its work.
102nd plenary meeting
I 7 Decemher I 984
J
DISARMAMENT WEEK

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned over the escalating arms race, espe­
cially the nuclear-arms race, which represents a serious
threat to the very existence of mankind,
Stressing the vital importance of eliminating the threat
of a nuclear war, ending the nuclear-arms race and bring­
ing about disarmament for the maintenance of world
peace,
Emphasizing anew the urgent need for and the impor­
tance of wide and continued mobilization of world public
opinion in support of halting and reversing the arms race,
especially the nuclear-arms race, in all its aspects,
Mindful of the world-wide mass anti-war and anti­
nuclear movement,
Recognizing the important role of the mass media in
mobilizing world public opinion in support of disarma­
ment,
Noting with satisfaction the broad and active support by
Governments and international and national organiza­
tions of the decision taken by the General Assembly at its
88 Official Records of th,, General Assemhlr. rl11rty-mnth s,,.uion, Supple­
ment No. 27 (A/39/27), para. 1 26.
89 Resolution S- 1 0/2, para. I 02.
90 Official Records ()( 1he General -1 ,smihly, Twelhh Special Session.
Annexes, agenda items 9 tn I 3. docum,·nt A1s.. 1 2 32.

tenth special session, the first special session devoted to
disarmament, regarding the proclamation of the week
starting 24 October, the day of the foundation of the
United Nations, as a week devoted to fostering the objec­
tives of disarmament, 89
Recalling the recommendations concerning the World
Disarmament Campaign contained in annex V to the Con­
cluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 90 the second special session devoted to
disarmament, in particular the recommendation that Dis­
armament Week should continue to be widely observed,9 1
Recalling also its resolutions 33/7 1 D of 14 December
1 978, 34/83 I of 1 1 December 1 979, 37/78 D of 9 Decem­
ber 1 982 and 38/ 1 83 L of 20 December 1 983,
I . Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Sec­
retary-General92 on the follow-up measures undertaken by
governmental and non-governmental organizations in
holding Disarmament Week;
2. Expresses ils appreciation to all States and interna­
tional and national governmental and non-governmental
organizations for their energetic support of and active par­
ticipation in Disarmament Week;
3. Expresses serious concern over the continued escala­
tion of the arms race, especially the nuclear-arms race, and
the imminent danger of its extension into outer space
which gravely jeopardizes international peace and security
and increases the danger of outbreak of a nuclear war;
4. Stresses the important role of the mass media in
acquainting the world public with the aims of Disarma­
ment Week and measures undertaken within its frame­
work;
5. Recommends to all States that they observe Dis­
armament Week in 1 985 in close connection with the cele­
brations of the fortieth anniversary of the foundation of
the United Nations and the International Youth Year, as
well as with other commemorative dates;
6. Invites all States, in carrying out appropriate mea­
sures at the local level on the occasion of Disarmament
Week, to take into account the elements of the model pro­
gramme for Disarmament Week, prepared by the Secre­
tary-General; 93
7. Invites the relevant specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency to intensify activi­
ties, within their areas of competence, to disseminate
information on the consequences of the arms race, espe­
cially the nuclear-arms race, and requests them to inform
the Secretary-General accordingly;
8 . Also invites international non-governmental organi­
zations to take an active part in Disarmament Week and
to inform the Secretary-General of the activities under­
taken:
9. Further invites the Secretary-General to use the
United Nations mass media as widely as possible to pro­
mote better understanding among the world public of dis­
armament problems and the objectives of Disarmament
Week
I 0. Requests Governments to continue, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 33/7 1 D, to inform the
Secretary-General of activities undertaken to promote the
objectives of Disarmament Week;
1 1 . Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 33/7 1 D, to submit to the Gen91 Ibid., annex V, pa•·a 1 2.
4 2 A/39/493.
" 1 A/341 431>.

Ill. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

eral Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the imple­
mentation of the provisions of the present resolution.
102nd plenary meeting
1 7 December /984

K
CESSATION OF THE NUCLEAR-ARMS RACE AND
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in paragraph 11 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 79
the Assembly stated that the nuclear-arms race, far from
contributing to the strengthening of the security of all
States, on the contrary weakens it and increases the danger
of the outbreak of a nuclear war and that existing arsenals
of nuclear weapons are more than sufficient to destroy all
life on Earth,
Recalling also that, in paragraph 47 of the Final Docu­
ment the Assembly expressed the belief that nuclear weap­
ons pose the greatest danger to mankind and to the sur­
vival of civilization, that it is essential to halt and reverse
the nuclear-arms race in all its aspects in order to avert the
danger of war involving nuclear weapons, and that the
ultimate goal in this context is the complete elimination of
nuclear weapons,
Noting that, in the Political Declaration adopted at the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12
March 1983, it was declared that the renewed escalation of
the nuclear-arms race, both in its quantitative and qualita­
tive dimensions, as well as reliance on doctrines of nuclear
deterrence, had heightened the risk of the outbreak of
nuclear war and led to greater insecurity and instability in
international relations, and that it was also stated that
nuclear weapons were more than weapons of war, that
such weapons were instruments of mass annihilation,94
Believing that all nations have a vital interest in negotia­
tions on nuclear disarmament because the existence of
nuclear weapons in the arsenals of a handful of States and
the quantitative and qualitative development of such
weapons directly and fundamentally jeopardize the vital
security interests of both nuclear- and non-nuclear weapon
States alike,
Considering that it is necessary to halt all testing, pro­
duction and deployment of nuclear weapons and their
delivery systems as a first step in the process which should
lead to the achievement of substantial reductions in
nuclear forces, and welcoming in this context the Joint
Declaration issued on 22 May 1984 by the Heads of State
or Government of Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Swe­
den and the United Republic of Tanzania,80
Convinced of the urgent need to take constructive action
towards halting and reversing the nuclear-arms race,
l . Believes that efforts should be intensified with a
view to initiating, as a matter of the highest priority, mul­
tilateral negotiations in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to estab­
lish an ad hoc committee at the beginning of its 1985 ses­
sion to elaborate on paragraph 50 of the Final Document
and to submit recommendations to the Conference as to
how it could best initiate multilateral negotiations of
94 See A/38/1 32-S/ 1 5675 and Corr. I and 2, sect. I, para. 28

83

agreements, with adequate measures of verification, in
appropriate stages for:
(a) Cessation of the qualitative improvement and
development of nuclear-weapon systems;
(b) Cessation of the production of all types of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery, and of the produc­
tion of fissionable material for weapons purposes;
(c) Substantial reduction of existing nuclear weapons
with a view to their ultimate elimination;
3. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on its con­
sideration of this subject;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Cessation of the nuclear­
arms race and nuclear disarmament".
102nd plenary meeting
1 7 December 1984
L
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS AND
DECISIONS OF THE TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 28 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,79 in which
it affirmed that all the peoples of the world had a vital
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations, that,
consequently, all States had the duty to contribute to
efforts in the field of disarmament and that all States had
the right to participate in disarmament negotiations,
Recalling its resolution 38/ l 83 F of 20 December 1983,
in which it called upon the Governments of all States to
contribute substantially, inter alia, to halting and reversing
the arms race, particularly in the nuclear field, and thus to
reducing the danger of nuclear war,
Taking note of the fact that at the 1984 session of the
Conference on Disarmament, twenty-one States not mem­
bers of the Conference participated in its work,
I . Reaffirms the right of all States not members of the
Conference on Disarmament to participate in the work of
the plenary meetings of the Conference on substantive
questions;
2. Requests the States members of the Conference on
Disarmament not to misuse the rules of procedure of the
Conference so as to prevent States not members from par­
ticipating in the work of the plenary meetings of the Con­
ference.
102nd plenary meeting
1 7 December 1984

M
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION FOR DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Stressing again the urgent need for an active and sus­
tained effort to intensify the implementation of the recom­
mendations and decisions unanimously adopted at its
tenth special session, the first special session devoted to
disarmament, as contained in the Final Document of that
session 79 and confirmed in the Concluding Document of

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

84

the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly,90 the
second special session devoted to disarmament,
Recalling the Declaration on International Co-operation
for Disarmament of 1 1 December 197995 and General
Assembly resolutions 36/92 D of 9 December 198 1, 37/78
B of 9 December 1982 and 38/ 183 F of 20 December
1983,
Stressing the vital importance of eliminating the danger
of a nuclear war, halting the arms race and attaining dis­
armament, particularly in the nuclear field, for the preser­
vation of peace and the strengthening of international
security,
Deeply concerned over the continued nuclear-arms race
and the initiation of a new, quantitatively and qualita­
tively more dangerous round of that race, which has an
immediate negative impact on the development of the
international situation and international relations,
Bearing in mind the vital interest of all States in the
adoption of concrete effective disarmament measures,
which would release considerable financial and material
resources to be used for the economic and social develop­
ment of all States, in particular developing countries,
Considering the increased activity of peace and anti-war
movements against the arms race and for disarmament,
Convinced of the need to strengthen constructive inter­
national co-operation based on the political goodwill of
States for successful negotiations on disarmament, in
accordance with the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session,
Emphasizing the duty of States to co-operate for the
preservation of international peace and security, in accor­
dance with the Charter of the United Nations, as con­
firmed in the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, of 24 October 1970,96 the obligation to co-oper­
ate actively and constructively for the attainment of the
aims of disarmament being an indispensable part of that
duty,
Stressing that, within the framework of international co­
operation for the attainment of the aims of disarmament,
it is necessary to avert nuclear war by means of gradual
limitation and reduction of nuclear armaments up to a
complete liquidation of all their kinds on the basis of the
principle of equal security,
Expressing the conviction that concrete manifestations
of political goodwill, including unilateral measures, such
as an obligation not to make first use of nuclear weapons,
improve conditions for resolving disarmament issues in a
spirit of co-operation among States,
Stressing that proposals, relatively simple in their execu­
tion and at the same time effective, and agreements aimed
at eliminating the use or the threat of use of force, be it on
a world-wide or regional scale, contribute considerably to
that end,
Bearing in mind that the United Nations bears primary
responsibility and plays a central role in unifying efforts to
maintain and to develop active co-operation among States
in order to resolve the issues of disarmament,
I. Calls upon all States, in implementing the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, to make active use of the principles and ideas
contained in the Declaration on International Co-opera­
tion for Disarmament by actively participating in disarma­
ment negotiations, with a view to achieving concrete
9 5 Resolution 34/88.
9 6 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

9 7 Resolution 1 5 1 4 (XV).

results, and by conducting them on the basis of the princi­
ples of reciprocity, equality, undiminished security and the
non-use of force in international relations, and to refrain at
the same time from developing new channels of the arms
race;
2. Stresses the importance of strengthening the effec­
tiveness of the United Nations in fulfilling its responsibil­
ity for maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Emphasizes the necessity of refraining from war
propaganda, in particular nuclear war - global or lim­
ited - and from the elaboration and dissemination of any
doctrines and concepts endangering international peace
and justifying the unleashing of nuclear war, which lead to
deterioration of the international situation and to further
intensification of the arms race and which are also detri­
mental to the generally recognized necessity of interna­
tional co-operation for disarmament;
4. Declares that the use of force in international rela­
tions as well as in attempts to prevent the full implementa­
tion of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples97 is a phenomenon
incompatible with the ideas of international co-operation
for disarmament;
5. Expresses the firm conviction that, for effective inter­
national co-operation for the attainment of the aims of
disarmament it is inevitable that the policy of States, pri­
marily of those which dispose of nuclear weapons, be
directed to averting a nuclear war;
6. Appeals to States which are members of military
groupings to promote, on the basis of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session, in the spirit of international
co-operation for disarmament, the gradual mutual limita­
tion of military activities of these groupings, thus creating
conditions for their dissolution;
7. Calls upon all Member States to cultivate and dis­
seminate, particularly in connection with the World Dis­
armament Campaign,98 Iaunched by the General Assembly
at its twelfth special session, the ideas of international co­
operation for disarmament, in particular through their
educational systems, mass media and cultural policies;
8. Calls upon the United Nations Educational, Scien­
tific and Cultural Organization to continue to consider, in
order further to mobilize world public opinion on behalf of
disarmament, measures aimed at strengthening the ideas
of international co-operation for disarmament through
research, education, information, communication and cul­
ture;
9. Calls upon the Governments of all States to contrib­
ute substantially, while observing the principle of undi­
minished security, to halting and reversing the arms race,
particularly in the nuclear field, and thus to reducing the
danger of nuclear war.

102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

N
REPORT OF THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/83 B of II December 1979,
35/152 J of 12 December 1980, 36/92 F of 9 December
98 Official Records (>( the General Assembly, Twelfth SpeC1al Session.
f onexes, agenda item, 9 to 1 3. document NS- 1 2/32. annex V.

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1 981, 37/78 G of 9 December 1 982 and 38/183 I of 20
December 1983,
Recalling also the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 79 the first special session
devoted to disarmament, and the Concluding Document
of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly,90
the second special session devoted to disarmament,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Dis­
armament, 99
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the
single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament,
should play the central role in substantive negotiations on
priority questions of disarmament and on the implementa­
tion of the Programme of Action set forth in section III of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session,
Reaffirming that the establishment of ad hoc committees
offers the best available machinery for the conduct of mul­
tilateral negotiations on items of the agenda of the Confer­
ence on Disarmament and contributes to the strengthening
of the negotiating role of the Conference,
Deploring the fact that, despite the repeated requests of
the General Assembly and the expressed wish of the great
majority of members of the Conference on Disarmament,
the establishment of an ad hoc committee on the cessation
of the nuclear-arms race and on nuclear disarmament was
once again prevented during the 1 984 session of the Con­
ference,
Deploring also the fact that the Conference on Disarma­
ment has not been enabled to set up ad hoc committees
under item I of its agenda, entitled "Nuclear-test ban" , on
the cessation of the nuclear-arms race and nuclear dis­
armament, on the prevention of nuclear war and on the
prevention of an arms race in outer space,
I. Expresses its deep concern and disappointment that
the Conference on Disarmament has not been enabled,
this year either, to reach concrete agreements on any dis­
armament issues to which the United Nations has assigned
greatest ·priority and urgency and which have been under
consideration for a number of years;
2. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to
intensify its work, to further its mandate more earnestly
through negotiations and to adopt concrete measures on
the specific priority issues of disarmament on its agenda,
in particular those relating to nuclear disarmament;
3. Once again urges the Conference on Disarmament
to continue or to undertake, during its 1985 session, sub­
stantive negotiations on the priority questions of disarma­
ment on its agenda, in accordance with the provisions of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly and other relevant resolutions of the
Assembly on those questions;
4. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to pro­
vide the existing ad hoc committees with appropriate
negotiating mandates and to establish, as a matter of
urgency, the ad hoc committees under item I of its agenda,
entitled "Nuclear-test ban", on the cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament, on the pre­
vention of nuclear war and on the prevention of an arms
race in outer space;
5. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to under­
take, without further delay, negotiations with a view to
elaborating a draft treaty on a nuclear-weapon-test ban;
6. Also urges the Conference on Disarmament to inten­
sify its work en the elaboration of a draft convention on
the prohibition of the development, production and stock­
piling of all chemical weapons and on their destruction
99 Ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/39/27).

and to submit the preliminary draft of such a convention
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
7. Once again calls upon the Conference on Disarma­
ment to organize its work in such a way as to concentrate
most of its attention and time on substantive negotiations
on priority issues of disarmament;
8. Calls upon the members of the Conference on Dis­
armament that have opposed the negotiations on substan­
tive issues of disarmament to enable the Conference, by
adopting a positive stand, to fulfil effectively the mandate
that the international community has entrusted to it in the
field of negotiations on disarmament;
9. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit
a report on its work to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session;
IO. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Report of the Confer­
ence on Disarmament" .

102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1 984
0
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS AND
DECISIONS OF THE TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the implementation of the recommen­
dations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at
its tenth special session, 79 the first special session devoted
to disarmament, as well as the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly,90 the
second special session devoted to disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions S- 10/2 of 30 June 1978, 34/83
C of 1 1 December 1 979, 35/46 of 3 December 1 980, 35/
152 E of 1 2 December 1 980, 36/92 M of 9 December
198 1 , 37/78 F of 9 December 1982, 38/ 1 83 H of 20
December 1 983 and its decision S- 1 2/24 of 10 July 1 982,
Deeply concerned that no concrete results regarding the
implementation of the recommendations and decisions of
the tenth special session have been realized in the course
of more than six years since that session, that in the
meantime the arms race, particularly in its nuclear aspect,
has gained in intensity, that there has been further deploy­
ment of nuclear weapons in some parts of the world, that
the absence of constructive dialogue among the nuclear­
weapon States has reached unprecedented levels, that
annual global military expenditures are approaching the
staggering figure of $ 1 ,000 billion, that mankind is faced
with a real danger of spreading the arms race into outer
space, that urgent measures to prevent nuclear war and for
disarmament have not been adopted and that continued
colonial domination and foreign occupation, open threats,
pressures and military intervention against independent
States and violations of the fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations have taken place, posing the
most serious threat to international peace and security,
Expressing serious concern that even the limited negoti­
ations on arms reduction and disarmament which were
already under way have been stalled,
Convinced that the renewed escalation of the nuclear­
arms race, in both the quantitative and qualitative dimen­
sions, as well as reliance on nuclear deterrence and on the
use of nuclear weapons, has heightened the risk of the out-

86

General Assembly -Thirty-ninth Session

break of nuclear war and led to greater insecurity and
instability in international relations,
Further convinced that international peace and security
can only be ensured through general and complete dis­
armament under effective international control and that
one of the most urgent tasks is to halt and reverse the arms
race and to undertake concrete measures of disarmament.
particularly nuclear disarmament, and that, in this respect.
the nuclear-weapon States and other militarily significant
States have the primary responsibility,
Noting with great concern that no real progress in dis­
armament negotiations has been achieved for several
years, which has rendered the current international situa­
tion even more dangerous and insecure, and that negotia­
tions on disarmament issues are lagging far behind the
rapid technological development in the field of armaments
and the relentless growth of military arsenals, particular!)
nuclear arsenals,
Considering that it is more than ever imperative in the
present circumstances to give a new impetus to negotia­
tions in good faith on disarmament, in particular nuclear
disarmament, at all levels and to achieve genuine progress
in the immediate future, and that all States should refrain
from any actions which have or may have negative effects
on the outcome of disarmament negotiations.
Convinced that the success of disarmament negotiations.
in which all the people of the world have a vital interest.
can be achieved through the active participation of Mem­
ber States in such negotiations, contributing thereby to the
maintenance of international peace and security,
Reaffirming that the United Nations has a central role
and primary responsibility in the sphere of disarmament,
Stressing that the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, which was unanimously
and categorically reaffirmed by all Member States at the
twelfth special session as the comprehensive basis for
efforts towards halting and reversing the arms race, retains
all its validity and that the objectives and measures con­
tained therein still represent one of the most important
and urgent goals to be achieved,
l. Expresses its grave concern over the acceleration
and intensification of the arms race, particularly the
nuclear-arms race, as well as the continued, very serious
deterioration of relations in the world, and the intensifica­
tion of focal points of aggression and hotbeds of tension in
different regions of the world, which threaten international
peace and security and increase the danger of nuclear war;
2. Calls upon all States, in particular nuclear-weapon
States and other militarily significant States, to take urgent
measures in order to put an end to the serious aggravation
of the international situation, to promote international
security on the basis of disarmament, to halt and reverse
the arms race and to launch a process of genuine disarma­
ment;
3. Invites all States, particularly nuclear-weapon States
and especially those among them which possess the most
important nuclear arsenals, to take urgent measures with a
view to implementing the recommendations and decisions
contained in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Ses­
sion of the General Assembly, as well as to fulfilling the
priority tasks set forth in the Programme of Action con­
tained in section III of the Final Document;
4. Calls upon great Powers to undertake genuine nego­
tiations in a constructive and accommodating spirit and
taking into account the interest of the entire international
community in order to halt the arms race, particularly the
nuclear-arms race, and to achieve disarmament;

5. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to con­
centrate its work on the substantive and priority items on
its agenda, to proceed to negotiations on the cessation of
the nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament, on the
prevention of nuclear war as well as the prevention of an
arms race in outer space without further delay and to elab­
orate drafts of treaties on a nuclear-weapon-test ban and
on a complete and effective prohibition of the develop­
ment, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons
and on their destruction;
6. Calls upon the Disarmament Commission to inten­
sify its work in accordance with its mandate and to con­
tinue improving its work with a view to making concrete
recommendations on specific items on its agenda;
7. Invites all States engaged in disarmament and arms
limitation negotiations outside the framework of the
United Nations to keep the General Assembly and the
Conference on Disarmament informed on the status and/
or results of such negotiations, in conformity with the rele­
vant provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Spe­
cial Session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Implementation of the
recommendations and decisions of the tenth special ses­
sion".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
p
PREVENTION OF NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the survival of mankind posed
by the existence of nuclear weapons and the continuing
nuclear-arms race,
Deeply concerned by an increased danger of nuclear war
as a result of the intensification of the nuclear-arms race
and the serious deterioration of the international situation,
Conscious that removal of the threat of nuclear war is
the most acute and urgent task of the present day,
Reiterating that it is the shared responsibility of all
Member States to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of another world war, which would inevitably be a
nuclear war,
Recalling the provisions of paragraphs 47 to 50 and 56
to 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly79 regarding the procedures
designed to secure the avoidance of nuclear war,
Recalling also that at the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 1 2 March 1 983, it was stated that
nuclear weapons are more than weapons of war, they are
instruments of mass annihilation, 94
Recalling further its resolutions 36/8 l 8 of 9 December
1 98 1 and 37/78 I of 9 December 1 982 and, in particular,
its resolution 38/183 G of 20 December 1 983, in which it
requested the Conference on Disarmament to undertake,
as a matter of the highest priority, negotiations with a view
to achieving agreement on appropriate and practical mea­
sures for the prevention of nuclear war,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Dis­
armament on its 1 984 session, 99
Noting with grave concern that the Conference on Dis­
armament was once again unable to start negotiations on
the question during its 1 984 session,

111.

Taking into account the deliberations on this item at its
thirty-ninth session,
Convinced that the prevention of nuclear war and the
reduction of the risk of nuclear war are matters of the high­
est priority and of vital interest to all peoples of the world,
Also convinced that the prevention of nuclear war is a
problem too important to be left to the nuclear-weapon
States alone,
1. Notes with regret that despite the fact that the Con­
ference on Disarmament has discussed the question of the
prevention of nuclear war for two years, it has been unable
even to establish a subsidiary body to consider appropriate
and practical measures to prevent it;
2. Again requests the Conference on Disarmament to
undertake, as a matter of the highest priority, negotiations
with a view to achieving agreement on appropriate and
practical measures for the prevention of nuclear war and to
establish for that purpose an ad hoc committee on the sub­
ject at the beginning of its 1 985 session;
3. Expresses its conviction that, in view of the urgency
of this matter and the inadequacy or insufficiency of
existing measures, it is necessary to devise suitable steps to
expedite effective action for the prevention of nuclear war;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report
on steps to that effect which should be completed in time
to be transmitted to the Conference on Disarmament in
April 1985 and submitted to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
5. Invites all Governments to submit to the Secretary­
General, not later than I February 1985, their views on
steps to expedite effective action on the question of the
prevention of nuclear war so that they might be taken into
account in the preparation of the above-mentioned report;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Prevention of nuclear
war".
102nd plenary meeting
J 7 December 1984
Q
REVIEW OF THE DECLARATION OF THE I 980s AS THE

SECOND DISARMAMENT DECADE

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3 5/46 of 3 December 1980, by
which it adopted the Declaration of the 1 980s as the Sec­
ond Disarmament Decade,
Expressing its concern that the purposes and objectives
of the Decade are far from being realized,
Alarmed at the continued escalation of the arms race,
particularly the nuclear-arms race,
Also alarmed at the recent findings of the possible conse­
quences of a nuclear war under present circumstances, as
documented by competent scientists,
Deeply concerned at the continued dissipation of ever­
increasing human and material resources on the arms race,
Expressing its anguish that no negotiations are taking
place on the crucial issue of nuclear weapons,
Convinced of the urgent necessity for the resumption of
negotiations, both bilaterally between the Government of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Govern­
ment of the United States of America and multilaterally by
the Conference on Disarmament,
100 Ibid., Supplement No. 4.' (Ad9-421

87
-- ------- �---

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committet'-

1 . Decides to undertake at its fortieth session, in 1985,
a review and appraisal of the implementation of the Decla­
ration of the J 980s as the Second Disarmament Decade;
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission at its 1985
session to make a preliminary assessment of the imple­
mentation of the Declaration, as well as suggestions to
ensure progress, and to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
3. Calls upon the Disarmament Commission to
include in its assessment any relevant matters which, in
the view of any Member State, require such review;
4. Requests Member States to submit to the Secretary­
General their views and suggestions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary
assistance to the Disarmament Commission in imple­
menting the present resolution.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
R
REPORT OF THE DISARMAMENT COMMISSION

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament Com­
mission, wo
Emphasizing again the importance of an effective fol­
low-up to the relevant recommendations and decisions
contained in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Ses­
sion of the General Assembly, 79 the first special session
devoted to disarmament,
Taking into account the relevant sections of the Con­
cluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 90 the second special session devoted to
disarmament,
Considering the important role that the Disarmament
Commission has played and the significant contribution
that it has made in examining and submitting recommen­
dations on various problems in the field of disarmament
and in the promotion of the implementation of the rele­
vant decisions of the tenth special session,
Desirous of strengthening the effectiveness of the Dis­
armament Commission as the deliberative body in the
field of disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 H of 14 December 1978,
34/83 H of 11 December 1979, 35/152 F of 12 December
1980, 36/92 B of 9 December 1981, 37/78 H of 9 Decem­
ber 1982 and 38/183 E of 20 December 1983,
I . Takes note of the report of the Disarmament Com­
mission;
2. Notes that the Disarmament Commission has yet to
conclude its consideration of some items on its agenda;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue
its work in accordance with its mandate, as set forth in
paragraph 1 1 8 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, and with paragraph 3 of
resolution 37/78 H, and to that end to make every effort to
achieve specific recommendations, at its 1985 substantive
session, on the outstanding items on its agenda, taking into
account the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
as well as the results of its 1984 substantive session;
4. Requests the Disarmament Commission to meet for
a period not exceeding four weeks during 1985 and to sub­
mit a substantive report, containing specific recommenda-

88

General Assembly -Thirty-ninth Session

tions on the items inscribed on its agenda, to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Disarmament Commission the report of the Conference
on Disarmament,99 together with all the official records of
the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly relating
to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that
the Commission may require for implementing the present
resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Report of the Disarma­
ment Commission".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/149. Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace
The General Assembly.
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone
of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of 1 6
December 197 1, and recalling also its resolutions 2992
(XXVII) of 15 December 1 972, 3080 (XXVIII) of 6
December 1 973, 3259 A (XXIX) of 9 December 1 974,
3468 (XXX) of ll December 1975, 3 1 /88 of 14 December
1 976, 32/86 of 1 2 December 1 977, S- 1 0/2 of 30 June
1 978, 33/68 of 14 December 1 978, 34/80 A and B of II
December 1 979, 35/ 150 of 12 December 1 980, 36/90 of 9
December 198 1 , 37/96 of 1 3 December 1982 and 38/185
of 20 December 1 983, and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling further the report of the Meeting of the Litto­
ral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, 10 1
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace would be a substantial
contribution to the strengthening of international peace
and security,
Recalling its decision, taken at its thirty-fourth session
in resolution 34/80 B, to convene a Conference on the
Indian Ocean at Colombo during 1 98 1 ,
Recalling also its decision to make every effort, in con­
sideration of the political and security climate in the
Indian Ocean area and progress made in the harmoniza­
tion of views, to finalize, in accordance with its normal
methods of work, all preparations for the Conference,
including the dates for its convening,
Recalling further its decision, taken at its thirty-eighth
session in resolution 38/185, concerning the convening of
the Conference in the first half of 1 985,
Recalling the exchange of views in the Ad Hoc Commit­
tee on the Indian Ocean in 1 984, 1 02
Noting the exchange of views on the adverse political
and security climate in the region,
Notingfurther the various documents before the Ad Hoc
Committee,
Convinced that the continued military presence of the
great Powers in the Indian Ocean area, conceived in the
context of their confrontation, gives urgency to the need to
take practical steps for the early achievement of the objec­
tives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of
Peace,
Considering that any other foreign military presence in
the area, whenever it is contrary to the objectives of the
Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace and
IOI Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session. Supp/emem No. 45 (A/34/45 and Corr. I )
I02 See A/ AC. I 59/SR .238-242 244- 2 5 1 and 2 5 5 - 2 5 8 and A AC ! '\9
SR.229-262/Corrigendum.

the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, gives greater urgency to the need to take practical
steps towards the early achievement of the objectives of
the Declaration,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of peace in
the Indian Ocean requires the active participation of and
full co-operation among the littoral and hinterland States,
the permanent members of the Security Council and the
maJor maritime users to ensure conditions of peace and
security based on the purposes and principles of the Char­
ter, as well as on the general principles of international
law,
Considering further that the creation of a zone of peace
requires co-operation and agreement among the States of
the region to ensure conditions of peace and security
within the area, as envisaged in the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, and respect for the inde­
pendence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the litto­
ral and hinterland States,
Calling for the renewal of genuinely constructive efforts
through the exercise of the political will necessary for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Deeply concerned at the danger posed by the grave and
ominous developments in the area and the resulting sharp
deterioration of peace, security and stability which partic­
ularly seriously affect the littoral and hinterland States, as
well as international peace and security,
Convinced that the continued deterioration of the politi­
cal and security climate in the Indian Ocean area is an
important consideration bearing on the question of the
urgent convening of the Conference and that the easing of
tension in the area would enhance the prospect of success
being achieved by the Conference,
I . Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Indian Ocean 101 and the exchange of views in the
Committee;
2. Emphasizes its decision to convene the Conference
on the Indian Ocean at Colombo as a necessary step for
the implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace, adopted in 1 97 1 :
3. Takes note of the progress made by the A d 1/o,·
( ·ommittee during 1 984;
4. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee, taking into
account the political and security climate in the region. to
complete preparatory work relating to the Conference on
the Indian Ocean, in 1 985, in order to enable the opening
of the Conference at Colombo thereafter at the earliest
date in the first half of 1 986 to be decided by the Commit­
tee in consultation with the host country;
5. Decides that preparatory work would comprise orga­
nizational matters and substantive issues, including the
provisional agenda for the Conference, rules of procedure.
participation, stages of conference, level of representation.
documentation, consideration of appropriate arrange­
ments for any international agreements that may ulti­
mately be reached for the maintenance of the Indian
Ocean as a zone of peace and the preparation of the draft
final document of the Conference;
6. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee at the same time to
seek the necessary harmonization of views on remaining
relevant issues;
7. Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee to
consult the Secretary-General, at the appropriate time, on
the establishment of a secretariat for the Conference;
I OJ O(ficwl R,,cord.1 , ,(rhc ( il'llcral -1 ,scmhli·. Thirt_1·-m nth S"·" '""· Supf1/,·
,i1cnt Vo :!9 (A )9 2q1
1
