A /69/PV.51

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

51st plenary meeting

Friday, 14 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda items 13 and 115
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/69/L.6)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/201)
The President: In relation to the report of the
Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable
Development Financing, submitted under sub-item (a)
of agenda item 13 and agenda item 115, and circulated
in document A/69/315, a dedicated plenary meeting
will be held at a later date to consider the report.
Mrs. Daniel (Nauru): Nauru has the honour to
speak on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States
(AOSIS). We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Bolivia on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
At the outset, I would like to once again
congratulate the Government and the people of Samoa
on hosting the very successful Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States (SIDS).

We also acknowledge the leadership and efforts of
those who contributed to and played an instrumental
role in achieving a strong outcome document, the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
(Samoa Pathway). The Samoa Pathway has made its
place in the United Nations history books as the firstever United Nations conference to close its negotiations
in New York and thereby allow the time in Samoa to be
used to deepen discussions on partnerships.
As the General Assembly adopts the draft
resolution containing the outcome of the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States (A/69/L.6), allow me to highlight a few key
points. Despite progress in addressing our challenges,
SIDS still experience gaps in the implementation of
the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States. The Samoa Pathway,
if fully implemented, will set the course for a shift in
the way we collaborate on development.
The Samoa Pathway is a concise, focused and
action-oriented document that requires us to move away
from the business-as-usual approach. Providing a road
map and an implementable strategy is only a first step.
The question now is: How can we effectively implement
the Pathway and deliver on the commitments made to
SIDS? And how do we make sure that no SIDS are left
behind in the post-2015 development agenda?
First, meeting the sustainable development needs
of SIDS requires efforts from all of us. The theme of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-62672 (E)

*1462672*

A/69/PV.51

the Conference — the sustainable development of SIDS
through genuine and durable partnerships — highlighted
the fact that commitments have been made to
strengthen international cooperation at all levels. The
Conference stressed that such partnerships should be
based on mutual trust and accountability and that SIDS
should be equal partners in them. Genuine and durable
partnerships are key for supporting the implementation
of our concrete targets and goals. They must involve the
private sector, civil society, youth, women, persons with
disabilities and older persons. Capacity-building and
institution-strengthening for SIDS, rather than endless
workshops, are critical for SIDS to take ownership of
their sustainable development and build their resilience.
For our partners, more discipline will be required
to fulfil long-standing promises in the form of
commitments that give us the tools and resources
we need to plan for the future. For our part, we must
exercise more discipline when it comes to identifying
where we most need support and demonstrating that
investments are put to good use. The international
and regional systems must build an implementation
mechanism that ensures that our goals are met and that
makes corrections if we start to veer off course.
In the light of the foregoing, we welcome the
approximately 300 partnerships registered in Samoa
that address key SIDS priorities: sustainable economic
development, climate change and disaster risk
management, oceans, seas and biodiversity, social
development in SIDS, health and non-communicable
diseases, youth and women, sustainable energy, water
and sanitation, food security and waste management.
Secondly,
effective
implementation
requires
sufficient and predictable means, including financing,
capacity-building, technology transfer, data collection
and management, partnerships and technical
cooperation, and institutional support. The provision
of adequate means of implementation will help deliver
on all commitments. In this connection, we stress
the importance of including SIDS priorities in the
discussions and future outcome of the third international
conference on financing for development, which will
be one of the important inputs regarding means of
implementation for the post-2015 development agenda.
Thirdly, we need to track progress. We need a
robust global monitoring system that strengthens
accountability at all levels in the follow-up to the
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action,
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
2/12

14/11/2014

of the Barbados Programme of Action for Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, and
the Samoa Pathway.
The review of the United Nations system’s support
to SIDS, which was agreed in Apia, will most certainly
contribute to improving accountability and improving
the delivery of commitments made for the sustainable
development of SIDS. This will allow the United
Nations system to be more effective as a key partner
and may also require the SIDS to ready themselves
for global development shifts. We should prepare to
transform the Samoa Pathway into action including
through national sustainable development strategies
and goals. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on parameters for this review. The
role of the high-level political forum in the follow-up
to the implementation of the Samoa Pathway is critical.
We reiterate our strong request that the adequate time
of a full day be allocated to the follow-up on the Samoa
Pathway in the body’s meetings.
Lastly, the Samoa Pathway is a fundamental and
critical road map for us SIDS. However, it will not
deliver on its objective of achieving our sustainable
development if it is not integrated in the relevant
processes of the post-2015 development agenda. An
inclusive post-2015 development agenda must address
the needs and priorities of countries in particular
situations, such as SIDS. Not addressing climate
change or ocean degradation, which are two of the main
development inhibitors for SIDS, will result in leaving
many behind.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate our sincere
gratitude to our colleagues and partners who have heard
SIDS’ concerns throughout the process and have made
efforts in reaching consensus. It is my sincere hope
that the next international conference of SIDS will not
include a section entitled “Implementation gaps”.
Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I am honoured to be
speaking on behalf of the 12 Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS) present at the United Nations,
namely, the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
Kiribati, the Republic of Marshall Islands, Nauru,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country Tonga.
At the outset, the Pacific SIDS would like to align
themselves with the statement just delivered on behalf
of the Alliance of Small Island States.

14-62672

14/11/2014

I take this opportunity to profoundly thank
and congratulate the Government and people of the
Independent State of Samoa on the memorable hosting
of the Third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, in September this year. Also, as the
region that played host to the Conference for the first
time ever, we are particularly proud of its success. Our
gratitude also extends to the co-Chairs, New Zealand
and Singapore, the members of the bureau, the United
Nations Secretariat and all participants that contributed.
The SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway), which we look
forward to adopting, reaffirms the special case of SIDS
and the vulnerabilities and challenges they face with
regard to the effects of natural disasters and climate
change, among other things, and stresses the continued
importance of the support of the international
community in pursuit of sustainable development.
The Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States is a
crucial blueprint for broad-based improvements to the
welfare of populations in all islands. It recognizes that
for sustainable development to be possible, islands must
take requisite actions in all three dimensions — social,
environmental and economic. The plan elaborates a
detailed road map — based on actions across 20 different
headings, from climate change to marine resources,
tourism to trade, and health to culture — that is one of
the more detailed and valuable outputs that has resulted
from cooperative action among small island developing
States in all regions.
However, Pacific SIDS acknowledge that
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy has at times
been uneven. Some islands especially affected by the
global economic recession have regressed. In spite of
the considerable efforts of Pacific States, many have
been unable to attain internationally agreed goals
and targets, including those set out in the Millennium
Development Goals. These shortfalls are best
understood as a reflection of the enormous challenges
faced by Pacific SIDS and by SIDS globally. With low
agricultural capacity, a small base of natural resources
and some unique infrastructure challenges, often
compounded by geographic remoteness, SIDS face a set
of additional hurdles in efforts to promote sustained,
inclusive, and equitable economic growth. And these
challenges are compounded by the reality of escalating
adverse impacts of climate change. Extreme weather

A/69/PV.51

events, rising sea levels and ocean acidification, among
other impacts, will make it harder to accomplish gains
in sustainable development.
These issues were emphasized by the International
Conference in Samoa, whose theme was “The
sustainable development of small island developing
States through genuine and durable partnerships”.
The Samoa Pathway follows the Mauritius Strategy
in specifying actions that SIDS, together with their
partners, can undertake in a variety of areas to further
all three pillars of sustainable development. As the
theme of the SIDS Conference stressed, partnerships
and the support of the international community are
critical to success. Pacific SIDS welcome the annual
adoption by consensus of resolutions on this topic as an
important signal of that continued genuine and durable
partnership.
Now the time for implementation has come.
Already we are working in the Second Committee to
follow up on three key areas: first, how to monitor the
success of the partnerships announced in Samoa, as
well as future partnerships; secondly, how to continue
the conversation in future United Nations deliberations,
including the high-level political forum; and thirdly, how
United Nations support for SIDS can be strengthened.
How we define the follow-up will determine how the
commitments made will be translated to success on the
ground.
Finally, we Pacific SIDS reiterate our commitment
to taking ownership and leadership and to working
with relevant stakeholders at all levels in ensuring
that the Samoa Pathway attains the success that it
deserves, while also laying a solid foundation that will
serve as a springboard that complements the pursuit
of the sustainable development goals set by the global
community.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM). CARICOM aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Nauru on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.
At the outset, CARICOM wishes to reiterate its
gratitude to the Government of Samoa for hosting the
successful Third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States. The pride of the Samoan
people permeated every aspect of the Conference in
Apia. We wish also to acknowledge the support of

14-626723/12

A/69/PV.51

Member States and the United Nations system during
the preparatory process and the Conference itself.
The unique and particular vulnerabilities faced
by small island developing States (SIDS), which
constrain our development, are well known. As such,
the international community recognized SIDS as a
special case for sustainable development in Agenda 21.
That recognition is echoed in the Barbados Programme
of Action, the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, and now
the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway (Samoa Pathway).
For CARICOM, the Third International Conference
on Small Island Developing States and its outcome
document, the Samoa Pathway, embody a renewed
global commitment to supporting SIDS in their efforts
to achieve sustainable development. The outcome
document, by building on the lessons learned since
the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy, provides SIDS with a renewed vision and
road map for sustainable development. Accordingly,
the need for the full and effective implementation
of the Samoa Pathway cannot be overstated. In that
regard, CARICOM member States look forward to
working with stakeholders at the national, regional
and international levels. We also look forward to the
creation of the partnership framework, as called for in
paragraph 101 of the Samoa Pathway, which will play
an integral role in ensuring the effective follow-up and
review of the 300 partnerships and initiatives registered
in Samoa, with a total value of $1.9 billion reflected in
pledges.
The adoption of the Samoa Pathway comes at
a critical moment for us, as we find ourselves on the
cusp of deliberations on the elaboration of a post2015 development agenda that must set the world on a
sustainable development course for current and future
generations. That agenda must be underpinned by a
strong commitment to an inclusive, transformative,
people-centred development agenda with poverty
eradication at its core. The post-2015 development
agenda must also recognize the differences among
countries and the need to accommodate those
differences within the context of the new development
agenda.

4/12

14/11/2014

CARICOM firmly believes that the Samoa Pathway
constitutes a foundational input to shape the post2015 development agenda, taking into consideration
the unique and particular challenges that SIDS face,
including areas such as access to concessional financing
for development, debt relief, poverty eradication, the
scourge of non-communicable diseases, challenges
in the development and management of statistics and
statistical systems, climate change adaptation and
mitigation, and technology transfer and capacitybuilding. We call on Member States to integrate
SIDS priorities into the elaboration of a post-2015
development agenda.
CARICOM also recognizes the role of the highlevel political forum on sustainable development in
providing oversight for the SIDS agenda. In that regard,
we reiterate the call for priority to be given to SIDS
issues on the forum’s agenda and for the forum to
provide the necessary monitoring and follow-up of the
Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy
and the Samoa Pathway.
Mr. Neo (Singapore): At the outset, Singapore aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Nauru on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States
(AOSIS).
Just over two months ago, Samoa hosted the
highly successful Third International Conference
on Small Island Developing States, in Apia, from
1 to 4 September. Our warmest congratulations and
heartfelt thanks go to the Government and people of
Samoa for their wonderful hospitality and for ensuring
that the Conference was a resounding success.
The adoption of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway) by the
Conference was the culmination of many months of
hard work by all stakeholders involved. It was also a
testament to the goodwill and spirit of international
cooperation that were so evident during the negotiation
process. As co-Chair of the Preparatory Committee
of the Conference, Singapore was privileged to play
a small role by ensuring that the negotiations on the
Samoa Pathway were concluded in a timely fashion in
New York, ahead of the Conference itself.
Now that the Conference is over, we need keep
up the momentum to focus on the full implementation
of the Samoa Pathway and the many partnerships
launched at the Conference. In that regard, Singapore

14-62672

14/11/2014

sees the adoption of the Samoa Pathway by the General
Assembly as a crucial milestone. It will signal the
international community’s continuing commitment and
resolve to ensure the full implementation of the Samoa
Pathway.
Singapore is happy to do its part to implement
the Samoa Pathway and has prepared a dedicated
three-year technical cooperation package for small
island developing States (SIDS) under the Singapore
Cooperation Programme. The package will provide
further customized technical assistance and fellowships
in areas that are relevant to the capacity-building
needs of SIDS. That includes customized programmes
for senior SIDS officials in areas such as sustainable
development and climate change, disaster management,
public health and non-traditional security. Singapore
will also offer 150 civil aviation fellowships for courses
at the Singapore Aviation Academy and 30 fellowship
awards for the Maritime Public Leaders’ Programme
conducted by the Maritime and Port Authority of
Singapore. We hope that those programmes will make
a meaningful contribution to the implementation of
the Samoa Pathway through capacity-building and
increased resilience. Singapore stands ready to work
with our fellow SIDS and our partners in making the
Samoa Pathway a reality.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome the outcomes of the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, in Apia. We thank the Government and people
of Samoa for their superb organization of that important
meeting and for their hospitality. We view the outcome
document of the Conference, the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa
Pathway), as a key benchmark for international efforts
to ensure the sustainable development of that category
of countries and as a much-needed contribution to
intergovernmental negotiations on the post-2015
development agenda.
Guided by friendly relations and responsible
partnership, the Russian Federation has consistently
increased its donor assistance to small island
developing States. Our overall assistance to that
category of countries for the past four years stands at
about $20 million. We focus our assistance on existing,
critically important areas, in particular modernizing
infrastructure, strengthening public administration
mechanisms, developing trade potential, improving
educational systems and health care, ensuring

A/69/PV.51

energy security and enhancing resilience to natural
disasters. Our goal is to draw on existing capacities
and experience in practical cooperation to ensure
the effective implementation of the Samoa Pathway
programme. As a first step, we are currently exploring
the possibility of collaborating with the United Nations
Development Programme on a major long-term project
to improve disaster preparedness for small island
developing States.
To conclude, allow me to say that we support the
adoption by the General Assembly of draft resolution
A/69/L.6, on the Samoa Pathway.
Ms. Chen Yingzhu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the Third International Conference
on Small Island Developing States (SIDS), which was
successfully held from 1 to 4 September in Apia. We
also welcome the adoption of the outcome document,
the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway (Samoa Pathway). We would like to express our
appreciation to the United Nations and the host country
Samoa for their work.
We support the proposal adopted at the Conference
on the establishment of effective long-term partnerships
to promote the sustainable development of small island
developing States (SIDS) and focus attention on the
development concerns of SIDS. In China’s view, looking
forward, we should concentrate on the following areas.
First, we should take on the challenge of climate change
together. Secondly, we should formulate the post-2015
development agenda as scheduled. Thirdly, we should
earnestly implement our commitment to international
cooperation for development. Fourthly, we should
establish a more rational international system of
governance.
In recent years China has furthered its practical
cooperation with SIDS and has proved itself an honest,
lasting and reliable partner for them. Since the beginning
of this year China has provided 23 SIDS with 235
assistance projects amounting to a total of ¥1.5 billion.
In November 2013, our Government announced that it
would provide ¥1 billion in concessional loans to SIDS
of the region. Meanwhile, the China Development
Bank has announced a $1-billion special loan to
support infrastructure development, water supply
facilities, small hydropower stations, ecological farms
and bio-gas technologies in SIDS. We are focusing
on helping these countries remove the bottlenecks in
their sustainable development. In the future China will
work with the countries concerned on implementing

14-626725/12

A/69/PV.51

14/11/2014

the Samoa Pathway and will continue with its efforts to
help them achieve sustainable development.

of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States”.

The President: We have heard the last speaker
in the debate on these items. We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/69/L.6.

The Assembly would request the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs to continue to maintain
a partnerships platform focused on the small island
developing States and to regularly convene the
inter-agency consultative group to report on the full
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action,
the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway, with
adequate and timely analysis based on relevant targets
and indicators relevant to small island developing
States, in order to ensure accountability at all levels.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/69/L.6, entitled “SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway”,
I wish to put on the record the following statement
of financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 101, 119 and
124 (b) of the outcome document, which is annexed to
draft resolution A/69/L.6, the General Assembly would
request the Secretary-General, in consultation with
Member States, to present recommendations, including
through the use of intergovernmental mechanisms, for
a partnership framework to monitor and ensure the full
implementation of pledges and commitments through
partnerships for small island developing States (SIDS).
The framework should ensure that partnerships focus
on the priorities of small island developing States,
identify new opportunities to advance the sustainable
development of and ensure the full implementation
of the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius
Strategy and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway). The
recommendations should be presented to the General
Assembly for consideration and action at its sixty-ninth
session.
The Assembly would request that the SecretaryGeneral conduct a comprehensive review of the United
Nations system’s support for small island developing
States with a view to enhancing the overall effectiveness
of such support and the respective roles in supporting
the development of small island developing States, and
would invite the General Assembly, at its sixty-ninth
session, to determine the parameters of the review.
The Assembly would also request the SecretaryGeneral, building on previous reports, to provide to the
Assembly at its seventieth session the findings of the
review and his recommendations thereon in his regular
report entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation

6/12

The Samoa Pathway calls on the United Nations
system to continue to support small island developing
States in pursuing their sustainable development and
implementation of the Samoa Pathway. It assigns
enhanced responsibilities to the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs (DESA). While interdepartmental
collaboration will be pursued whenever possible, the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs will take
the lead in coordinating implementation and followup to the outcome document, keeping Member States
informed, through solid analysis and data, as well as
monitoring and reporting on implementation and the
partnerships that were announced before and during the
Samoa Conference.
Pursuant to paragraph 101 of the outcome
document, DESA is undertaking the necessary
consultations with Member States. At the end of 2014,
it will conduct a survey to elicit Member States’ views
on the kind of partnership framework that would best
enable monitoring and ensure the full implementation
of commitments made through partnerships. It will
also consult other stakeholders engaged in partnerships
through expert group meetings and other channels.
In September 2015, the General Assembly is
expected to provide further guidance on the framework,
based on the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral. The framework is expected to include, among
other elements, a Web-based partnerships platform,
for which the Department has already developed a
prototype. Linking the follow-up to partnerships from
Samoa with the track following up on the 2012 United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) will allow the SIDS partnership framework
to benefit from lessons learned and synergies with the
Rio+20 partnership follow-up.

14-62672

14/11/2014

With regard to the request contained in paragraph
119, the General Assembly is invited to determine the
parameters of the review of United Nations system
support to SIDS at its sixty-ninth session. It should
be noted that in paragraph 9 of draft resolution
A/C.2/69/L.24, which is under consideration by the
Second Committee, the Assembly would request the
Joint Inspection Unit to provide recommendations to
assist the Assembly in determining the parameters
of the review. Given that consultations regarding the
partnership framework and the system-wide review
are ongoing among Member States, it is not possible at
this stage to determine the resource requirements for
paragraphs 101 and 119. When the consultations with
Member States are completed and the parameters of
the review have been identified, the Secretary-General
will revert to the General Assembly with budgetary
implications, if any, in accordance with established
procedures.
Pursuant to operative paragraph 124 (b), DESA
will, first, develop a road map for implementation of
the Samoa Pathway; secondly, support and coordinate
the development of targets and indicators for the
outcome document and, thirdly, carry out research and
analysis of national, regional and international actions
being undertaken by a range of stakeholders. The work
on targets and indicators will focus on the specific
provisions contained in the Samoa Pathway. It will also
be closely related to the targets being identified by the
General Assembly for the follow-up to the post-2015
development agenda.
The work on developing targets and indicators,
as well as further in-depth, analytical and researchoriented work, will allow DESA to ground policy
recommendations on SIDS, on behalf of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
high-level political forum, in scientific analysis and
sound data. DESA will mobilize its various divisions with
expertise in SIDS, data and statistics, and vulnerability.
It will work in collaboration with the Office of the High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States and experts in the United Nations
system and beyond, seeking complementarity with
other ongoing processes.
In order to implement the requests contained
in paragraph 124 (b) of the outcome document,
DESA will need to undertake substantial analytical,
quantitative and coordination work. The additional

A/69/PV.51

requirements arising from the additional mandate will
involve developing appropriate targets and indicators
for Samoa Pathway implementation, with emphasis on
data and evidence-based reporting, and ensuring the
science-policy interface. That will include developing
a number of targets and indicators to assess progress
on the main provisions of the Samoa Pathway. Those
targets and indicators will need to be consistent with the
targets and indicators being developed in the context of
the post-2015 development agenda.
In that regard, a new sustainable development
officer post at the P-4 level in the SIDS Unit would
be required to undertake substantive analysis and
research on thematic issues, with emphasis on data
and evidence-based reporting and ensuring the
science-policy interface, including the development of
targets and indicators for each relevant paragraph of the
Samoa Pathway.
The substantive analytical work, which will be
undertaken on a recurrent basis, will ensure support
to the effective follow-up, monitoring and reporting
on the implementation of the Samoa Pathway, filling
a critical gap in the support for SIDS with respect to
the development of quantitative targets and indicators
for each thematic chapter of the Pathway, leading up
to the mid-term review in five years. The cycle will
then continue until the convening of the next SIDS
conference, which, based on the current cycle, will be
in 10 years.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.6, additional resources in the total amount of
$470,100 would be required for the establishment of
one temporary post, starting 2016, at the P-4 level,
under section 9, “Economic and Social Affairs”, to
the amount of $358,000; section 29D, “Office of
Central Support Services”, to the amount of $73,500;
and section 37, “Staff Assessment”, to the amount of
$38,600, for which consideration will be made in the
context of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/69/L.6 would not give rise to any financial
implications for the programme budget for the biennium
2014-2015.
The President: The Assembly shall now take a
decision on draft resolutions A/69/L.6, entitled “SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt it?

14-626727/12

A/69/PV.51

Draft resolution A/69/L.6 was adopted (resolution
69/15).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Robl (United States of America): The United
States would like once again to thank the Government
and people of Samoa, and the United Nations offices
and agencies and the intergovernmental organizations
that have worked in partnership with Samoa to host
a very successful conference. We were very pleased
to be closely involved in the negotiations at United
Nations Headquarters, in New York, that produced
the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway (Samoa Pathway), which we have just adopted
(resolution 69/15, annex), and we join in applauding it.
While we are pleased to hear that there are no
programme budget implications for the current budget
cycle, we find the Secretariat’s oral statement in that
regard to go beyond what is needed to support the
outcome document, and we question the rationale for the
numbers, as they have not been adequately considered
by Member States in any appropriate forum. We request
that the Secretariat evaluate its resources and staffing
in light of budgetary constraints among Member States,
and the imperative to work smarter and more effectively
as we face development and other challenges. We look
forward to discussions in the appropriate forums, and
thus our adoption of the resolution should not be read
as an endorsement of the anticipated budget estimates.
Separate from the budgetary issues, the United
States has submitted a written statement, already
included in the formal record of the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States,
explaining its position on a few other aspects of the
outcome document.
As we pause today and remember fondly the
hospitality and leadership of Samoa and the impressive
success of the Conference, the United States takes this
opportunity again to emphasize that it deeply values
its long-standing relationship with the small island
developing States (SIDS) and that we are committed to
working in partnership with all stakeholders to promote
the sustainable development of SIDS in all regions
through the implementation of the SAMOA Pathway.

8/12

14/11/2014

Mr. Sekiguchi (Japan): My delegation would like
to make an explanation of position after the adoption of
resolution 69/15.
First, I would like to express our appreciation to
the co-Chairs and co-facilitators of the Preparatory
Committee for their hard work throughout the process.
I also extend my gratitude to the host country, Samoa,
for its hospitality and diligent work.
Japan is determined to continuously support
the efforts of the small island developing States
(SIDS) to implement the outcome document of the
SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway (Samoa Pathway). Japan is pleased to join
the consensus on the Samoa Pathway on achieving
sustainable development through genuine and durable
partnerships. This is a priority to which Japan attaches
great importance.
It is, however, deeply regrettable that the estimates
on the proposed programme budget 2016-2017 were
not issued until last evening. Japan believes that cost
information should be made available to Member States
well in advance of the adoption of a resolution. My
delegation has many questions and reservations about
the oral statement, including the basis of its estimations
regarding paragraph 124 (b) of the outcome document.
Let me clarify that the costs related to the resolution
should be considered in the process of the consideration
of the programme budget of the next biennium, in due
course. The oral statement is not by any means binding
on Japan.
Ms. Wierenga (Canada): Canada welcomes
the adoption of the important outcome document
of the Third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States (resolution 69/15, annex).
However, with regard to the oral report on budgetary
implications, we are concerned with the Secretariat’s
interpretation of resource requirements, which goes
beyond what we understood was needed to support the
outcome document. Furthermore, Canada is disquieted
by the approach taken by the Secretariat in raising this
request. We ask that the Secretariat carefully analyse its
resource requirements on the basis of what the General
Assembly needs and introduce them in the approach
forum at the appropriate time. We would stress that the
adoption of today’s resolution is no way an endorsement
or commitment to the financial requirements mentioned
in the oral statement.

14-62672

14/11/2014

Mr. Neelam (Australia): Australia was pleased and
proud to support the Third International Conference on
Small Island Developing States in Samoa in September
this year and to contribute to the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa
Pathway) outcome document (resolution 69/15, annex).
At the outset, Australia would like to once again thank
and congratulate the Government and the people of
the Independent State of Samoa for hosting such a
successful conference.
Although Australia is not a small island, most of our
neighbours are. The interests of small island developing
States (SIDS) are vitally important to my country, in
particular because Australia sees the stability and
prosperity of SIDS in our region as integral to that
of our own, but also because we want to see all small
islands in the Pacific and beyond thrive and prosper
and realize their full potential for the benefit of their
peoples.
Critical to that prosperity is the promotion and
realization of economic growth and the sustainable
management of oceans. One of the strengths of the
Samoa Pathway is the prominence it gives to those vital
issues. We are also very pleased with the focus in the
Samoa Pathway on women’s equality and economic
empowerment and the importance of sound governance.
Those priorities align well with those of Australia’s aid
programme, built as it is on the experience of decades
of work with SIDS partners.
As we move forward, we need to work together in
partnership to implement this important document. We
also need to forge a post-2015 development agenda that
takes action on issues identified in the Samoa Pathway,
including economic growth, oceans, women’s equality,
peaceful societies and effective institutions. Australia
is pleased to warmly welcome the formal adoption of
the Samoa Pathway, and we look forward to working
together in partnership with SIDS towards its effective
implementation.

A/69/PV.51

our commitment to supporting SIDS’ efforts aimed
at achieving their sustainable development, including
through the full and effective implementation of
the Samoa Pathway, in particular the setting up of a
partnership framework.
The European Union and its member States are
proud of our long-standing tradition of partnership
with SIDS. We have long supported their efforts to
address their specific vulnerabilities. We have been,
and remain, a leading donor and key trading partner for
SIDS. The time has come for the EU and SIDS to move
our traditional donor-recipient relationship forward
towards a more comprehensive relationship.
The Samoa Conference was an opportunity for us
to strengthen existing partnerships and help establish
new ones founded on SIDS ownership, mindful of the
local context, inclusive of all relevant stakeholders, and
based on trust, mutual respect, transparency and mutual
accountability, while pursuing measurable objectives
and tangible results. We also express our profound
gratitude to the Government and the people of the
Independent State of Samoa for the excellent facilities,
staff and services provided, for the arrangements made
in hosting the Conference, and for the hospitality
extended to the participants.
We were very surprised, however, to be presented
with an oral statement from the Programme Planning
and Budget Division on resolution 69/15. We see no
justification for generating an oral statement and
disagree with some of the rationale given. We understand
that the numbers were only estimates presented in
accordance with an extensive interpretation of rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.

The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position. I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.

We stress that the estimates presented today do
not prejudge the Secretary-General’s submission to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Question and the Fifth Committee on a proposed budget
for the 2016-2017 biennium. We also believe that some
estimates can factually be excluded from consideration
as requirements under the present resolution. Overall,
these estimates should not be perceived as having been
endorsed by Member States today.

Mr. Devanlay (European Union): The European
Union (EU) and its member States are pleased to join
the consensus on the outcome document of the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway). We reiterate

We are particularly concerned that those estimates
came unexpectedly, long after negotiations were
over and on the eve of the adoption by the General
Assembly. They do not seem to fully reflect the spirit
of negotiations, especially as regards paragraph 124 (b).
That paragraph was negotiated in good faith, and at the

14-626729/12

A/69/PV.51

time of the informals no reference was made to the
need for additional Department of Economic and Social
Affairs resources so that it could “continue to maintain
a partnerships platform... and to regularly convene the
inter-agency consultative group”.
Finally, we strongly believe that increased
transparency regarding estimate budgetary figures
for the current or upcoming budget cycles should
be provided during the negotiation process, in full
accordance with the relevant rules of procedure.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Communications and Information Technology of
Samoa.
Mr. Aveau (Samoa): On behalf of the Government
and the people of Samoa, it is my privilege and honour
to place on record our deepest appreciation to you,
Sir, for your sterling and considerate leadership in
providing an avenue, in our Assembly’s busy agenda,
for facilitating the adoption of the Small Island
Developing States Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway). On behalf of all
small island developing States (SIDS), our partners and
the whole membership of the Organization, we thank
you for your support and understanding, as evidenced
in today’s adoption by consensus of the Samoa Pathway
(resolution 69/15, annex). Further, the bureaux of the
preparatory meetings and of the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States
deserve special mention for steadying and guiding our
deliberations efficiently and with professionalism.
But our thanks would not be complete without
mentioning the unwavering support of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who is always advocating
for SIDS issues and leading by example. The Conference
would not have achieved the success it enjoyed, were
it not for the steadfast leadership of the Conference
Secretary-General, Mr. Wu Hongbo, and the supportive
secretariat he ably led. And to all who contributed to
turning the Samoa Pathway into to what it is today, we
offer our deepest admiration.
The adoption by the General Assembly of the
Samoa Pathway is a momentous occasion and a high
point in the enduring efforts of small island developing
States to focus world attention on their sustainable
development needs as a United Nations-recognized
group facing special circumstances and having
inherent vulnerabilities, not of their choice but due to
factors completely outside of their control. But every

10/12

14/11/2014

journey in life has a point of reference. Today, we are
celebrating another chapter in SIDS’ evolving existence
that began 29 months ago, when the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, “The future we want” (resolution 66/288,
annex), called for the convening in 2014 of the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States.
That call was not lost on Samoa’s Prime Minister,
who, in his statement to the Rio Conference on 22 June
2012, offered Samoa to host the SIDS conference.
According to his vision, hosting a global conference
is a rare privilege that comes once a decade, but the
real honour and motivation lies in the opportunity to
have the spotlight of international attention fall on
SIDS’ challenges and realities and to share with the
international community Samoa’s story about the
primacy and importance of successful partnerships
firmly rooted in mutual trust and respect, which, for
over five decades, have been the foundational pillars
of Samoa’s journey as an island nation. It was also
important to demonstrate that being SIDS or least
developed countries should not discourage poor and
vulnerable nations from stepping forward to achieve
economic, social and political progress.
When we started the process, it was a leap of faith
into uncharted waters. Useful signposts along the
way included General Assembly resolution 67/207 of
December 2012, welcoming Samoa’s offer to host the
Conference; the Assembly’s decision 67/558 of May
2013, on the dates for the Conference; the Assembly’s
subsequent endorsement of the modalities, in December
2013, in resolution 68/238; and the approval of the
outcome document by the Preparatory Committee in
July 2014, seven weeks before the Conference. To cap
it all, the Conference adopted the SAMOA Pathway
outcome document on 4 September.
At times, those milestones appeared untenable, farfetched and unachievable. Some of us at home began
to question whether we had made the right decision to
host the Conference in the first place, and there was
always a lingering doubt about whether we had the
perseverance and determination to pull off that national
undertaking. But persevere we did, determined we
were, and compromise we practiced. Flexibility became
the norm, but being resolute and principled became our
moral compass.
True to our collective sense of obligation to Pacific
countries for their trust in us as the host for our region,
14-62672

14/11/2014

to our SIDS constituency for its continuous support,
and to our partners for their confidence by rallying and
rendering every assistance imaginable to ensure that no
one felt let down, we continued to navigate our way
through and to tell our story as truthfully as we saw it,
untroubled by whether people thought foul of us and
our motives. But there was no ulterior goal at all other
than to share the truth with the rest of the world about
our special case, our challenges and realities, and the
imperative to build and enhance our overall resilience.
After all, some of our islands have the high moral
ground to insist on having their stories told from the
lens of their experiences, untainted by power politics,
world agendas, misplaced assumptions and unfounded
concerns.
Looking back now, any doubts we might have had
about a successful outcome are truly water under the
bridge. We have the benefit of hindsight and actions
about which we can speak. Through the unanimous
adoption of resolution 69/15 today, the General
Assembly has rewarded the SIDS’ resolve with its trust
and repaid our fortitude with its confidence and faith.
For those partners who believed and stood by us from
day one through the thick and thin of the negotiations
and the almost endless logistical preparations, no
reward suffices, because none is expected. In the
Assembly, Samoa and SIDS have found genuine and
durable friends.
Resolution 69/15 is brief, but it belies the level
of detailed discussions necessary to arrive at such an
outcome. The Samoa Pathway is a finely balanced
intergovernmental agreement that has the zeal and
stamp of approval of the United Nations membership.
It is the blueprint for SIDS sustainable development
for now and in the immediate future. We hope that
the increased understanding and appreciation of SIDS
issues and challenges gained at the Conference will
not be forgotten or relegated in priority due to the
competing agendas of more influential Member States.
The international community has a very full
agenda. The follow-up to the SIDS Conference will
be part of that agenda and we hope that, amid all
the demands — political, economic and other — the
realities of SIDS so clearly spelled out in the Samoa
Pathway will be able to retain the attention of the
wider international community. We took seriously the
commitments given for SIDS at the Conference, and we
will remain deeply mindful of how those commitments
are turned into actions.

A/69/PV.51

So as we approach the new post-2015 development
agenda, we must ensure that, while a single-framework
approach is important, it does not equate to one-size-fitsall for purposes of implementation, monitoring and
evaluation. It is important that the agreed sustainable
development goals and post-2015 development agenda
take into account groups like SIDS so as to ensure that
the indicators developed are also applicable to their
situations. Similarly, we want the upcoming United
Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction,
to be held next year in Japan; the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, to be held
in Lima; and the United Nations Climate Change
Conference, to be held in Paris, to use our Samoa
Pathway as an authoritative source from which to draw
inspiration for their respective outcomes.
I cannot resist restating what my Prime Minister
said in his closing remarks at the SIDS Conference in
Apia:
“I hope the Samoa Pathway will not be viewed
as an end in itself to be used only as a reference point
until the next SIDS conference. Much investment
in genuine goodwill by SIDS and their partners
went into agreeing to the SAMOA Pathway as the
blueprint for SIDS sustainable development for
now and the immediate future.”
We need a comprehensive review of the SIDSspecific United Nations institutions responsive and
supportive to SIDS in our collective efforts to address
their sustainable development aspirations in the post2015 development agenda and beyond. We also call for
the establishment of a robust global monitoring system
that will strengthen accountability at all levels and
ensure an adequate and timely analysis and update of
the implementation of the Samoa Pathway.
As composer of the Conference theme song “There
Is Hope”, I appeal to all Member States to help us turn
SIDS island voices into global choices so that there will
indeed be hope for SIDS today, tomorrow and in the
future. Let me reminisce and admit that Samoa will
never be the same again, because we invited close to
4,000 representatives to our shores, and at the end we
had to say good-bye to 4,000 genuine friends of Samoa.
An enduring momento that will live on forever with
our people is the fact that when the Secretary-General
arrived, he was Mr. Ban Ki-moon, yet when he left
he was bestowed the Samoan princely title of Afioga
Tupua Ban Ki-moon.

14-6267211/12

A/69/PV.51

To conclude, I say to all those who made it to
Samoa, our people were privileged to be the host for
the SIDS Conference. We continue to treasure the
memories of their presence in our small paradise, and
it is my sincerest wish that their memories of their brief
sojourn in my country be as pleasant as ours.

12/12

14/11/2014

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 13 and its
sub-item (a) and of agenda item 115.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

14-62672
