S/PV.8884

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8884th meeting

Wednesday, 20 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Omamo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . .
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Brophy
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2021/836)
Letter dated 13 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/874)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-29700 (E)
*2129700*

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2021/19.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I now give the floor to Mr. Huang Xia.

The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2021/836)
Letter dated 13 October 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/874)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Huang Xia,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region; His Excellency Mr. João Samuel Caholo,
Executive Secretary of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region; and Mrs. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa,
Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
Peace Operations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/836, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region; and
document S/2021/874, which contains a letter dated
13 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
Kenya to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
2/32

20/10/2021

Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): First of all,
Madam President, allow me to wish you a happy
National Heroes’ Day — Happy Mashuuja Day! I would
then like, Madam President, to congratulate you on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month of October and to thank you
for having convened this high-level meeting devoted
to the Great Lakes region. This initiative, like others
planned this month under the auspices of your country,
is a testament — as if one were still necessary — of
Kenya’s commitment to the region and to the major
issues of concern to the African continent.
Allow me also, just this once, to say a word about
an important cultural event and to share the Council’s
celebration of the good news from Stockholm. Members
will have noted that, on 7 October, the Nobel Committee
awarded the 2021 Nobel Prize for Literature to the
Tanzanian novelist Abdulrazak Gurnah. I extend my
warm congratulations to the winner of that prestigious
award, who, through his work, invites us to take a
clear-eyed and compassionate look at the situation of
thousands of refugees. While this literary news throws
a harsh light on a painful question for the region, it is
also an opportunity to celebrate the intellectual and
artistic wealth of East Africa and the Great Lakes and
of its writers, the privileged witnesses of our time.
The theme of our meeting today — “Supporting
the renewed commitment of the Great Lakes countries
in seeking sustainable solutions to the root causes and
drivers of conflict” — is meaningful and timely. It is
meaningful because it reminds us that the countries of
the region remain committed to peace and development,
and timely because it calls on the international
community to support these efforts, taking into account
both the progress made and the challenges that persist.
That is the spirit that guides me in carrying out my
mandate. It is also the common thread of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on the implementation, over the
past six months, of the Framework for Peace, Security
and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region (S/2021/836). I wish to highlight
here some salient features.
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

First, I would like to highlight the ongoing political
dialogue among the countries of the region. Ministerial
consultations and the increase in State visits have given
impetus to bilateral relations between the countries
of the region, as evidenced by the revitalization of
cooperation frameworks in areas as varied as security,
trade, infrastructure, transport, natural resources and
energy. We have thus witnessed an acceleration of
efforts towards opening and rapprochement, together
with a series of encouraging political and symbolic
gestures. I am thinking of the bilateral meetings
between the President of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and his counterparts from Burundi, Kenya,
Rwanda and Uganda; the various tours undertaken in the
region by the President of Burundi and the President of
Tanzania; and of course, the tireless commitment of the
President of Angola, current Chair of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), to
support national reconciliation efforts in the Central
African Republic, alongside his peers. Furthermore, I
welcome the peaceful conduct of elections in Zambia
and the smooth handover of power between the outgoing
President and the incoming President.
I would also like to welcome the progress made in
security cooperation in order to overcome the armed
groups, the so-called negative forces, that are rampant
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I take this
opportunity to express, Madam President, my sincere
gratitude to your country, Kenya, for the deployment
of troops within the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).
An important aspect of those efforts at the regional
level is the launching of the Contact and Coordination
Group, which is responsible for coordinating the
implementation of non-military measures to complement
military operations against negative forces. I would
like to recall that that initiative, which my Office
supports alongside the other guarantor institutions
of the Framework agreement, involves Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda
and Tanzania. In concrete terms, those measures aim
at the concerted implementation of incentives for the
surrender and voluntary disarmament of negative forces
operating in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Those measures will complement the
efforts led by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through its Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme. That is why my

S/PV. 8884

Office is working with MONUSCO and other entities
to deploy an operational cell in Goma, which will be
responsible for coordinating those promising initiatives
on the ground.
Despite that progress, challenges remain. The
ongoing activities of armed groups continue to be the
main threat to peace and stability in the region. We see
an upsurge in attacks by armed groups, whether it be by
the Allied Democratic Forces in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or those launched
by the Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi
against the airport in Bujumbura in September. That
violence continues to have serious consequences on the
already fragile humanitarian situation as well as on the
socioeconomic stability of the affected areas.
Those negative forces also remain involved in the
illicit exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources, the
revenues of which finance their arms procurement and
recruitment. How to put an end to that is obviously an
old question that haunts anyone interested in the region.
It is with a view to renewing our collective thinking on
this difficult issue that, working with the ICGLR and
the Government of the Sudan, my Office co-organized
a workshop on natural resources in Khartoum from
31 August to 2 September.
The workshop resulted in 31 recommendations,
both ambitious and realistic, aimed in particular at
breaking the link between the smuggling of certain
high-value minerals and the financing of armed groups.
In addition to actions for greater national ownership
over the ICGLR Regional Initiative against the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources, participants from
across the region and beyond proposed that my Office
and the Executive Secretariat of the ICGLR undertake
political advocacy to make transit and destination
countries aware of the issue of smuggled minerals in
order to support the efforts of the region. I have no
doubt that the members of the Security Council will
also make important proposals as part of our discussion
today that could inform the efforts of the region.
I cannot talk about the challenges affecting the
region without saying a word about the persistence of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which
to some extent is contributing to the exacerbation of
pre-existing socioeconomic vulnerabilities. According
to the World Health Organization, only 36 million doses
of vaccine have been administered to date in a region
of nearly 450 million people. I therefore reiterate the

21-297003/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

appeal launched by the Secretary-General for greater
solidarity with developing countries to facilitate access
to vaccines and strengthen existing health systems
and structures.
Responding effectively to those challenges while
supporting the positive efforts under way will require
a concerted approach from the States of the region,
civil society, regional organizations, international
partners and the United Nations. That is the rationale
behind the plan of action for the Strategy for Peace
Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region, which my Office
developed in July during broad consultations. That
inclusive approach, which also gives pride of place to
the involvement of women and young people, will be
maintained throughout the implementation of the plan
of action so as to foster alignment with the priorities of
the States and the peoples of the region.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate my
commitment to working closely with all the United
Nations entities concerned in the region as well
as with the Peacebuilding Fund to ensure the full
implementation of the plan of action. I would also like
to call on the Council, and the international community
more broadly, to support us in order to enable us to
contribute effectively to consolidating the positive
momentum in the region through the initiatives set out
in the plan of action.
When we look closely at recent developments in the
region, we see that that positive momentum is the result
of initiatives that fully meet the goals of the Framework
agreement and the 2006 ICGLR pact. It is therefore
essential that the countries of the region implement the
bilateral agreements signed recently and also continue,
at the regional level, to fulfil the commitments made
under regional and international instruments.
It is in that spirit that I welcome the upcoming
important summit meetings, and in particular the
commitment of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to host the tenth summit of the Framework agreement
Regional Monitoring Mechanism in Kinshasa in
December. The summit will be an opportunity for the
leaders of the region to evaluate together the progress
made since the previous summit, held in Kampala in
2018, to see how to consolidate the recent achievements
and to provide guidance on the measures to be taken for
more stability and development in the region.
4/32

20/10/2021

I would like to conclude by recalling that the
Great Lakes region is at a crossroads. The COVID-19
pandemic, which has further exacerbated existing
weaknesses, has nevertheless served to reveal
the resilience of the region’s societies. Bilateral
and regional initiatives reflect the emergence of a
community looking towards the future that is aware of
the added value of dialogue and cooperation as a tool
to foster good-neighbourliness. It is more necessary
than ever to consolidate the region’s achievements in
a lasting way, all the while resolutely addressing the
ongoing challenges. The success of such an approach
entails drawing the lessons of the past and showing
imagination to support the peoples of the Great Lakes
region in building a better today and a better future.
The President: I thank Mr. Xia for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Caholo.
Mr. Caholo: I would like to start by congratulating
the Government and the people of the Republic of Kenya
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council.
I have no doubt that the Republic of Kenya will once
again rise to the challenges of the coveted and onerous
responsibility of leading the Security Council. I am
also honoured to participate in this high-level briefing
on the Great Lakes region, under theme “Supporting
the renewed commitment of the Great Lakes countries
in seeking sustainable solutions to the root causes and
drivers of conflict”.
The Great Lakes region has made progress with
regard to peace, stability and development despite
the challenges related to heinous criminal activities,
including the illegal exploitation and trade of natural
resources and the increase in conflict-related sexual
violence against women and children being committed
by the armed groups and negative forces actively
operating in the region, especially in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.
We have also witnessed the negative impact of
the coronavirus disease and climate change on the
livelihoods of our people in the region. In the past 10
months, we have had three mini-summits convened
under the able leadership of the Chairperson of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), the President of the Republic of Angola, His
Excellency Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, in
order to address the security and political crisis in the
Central African Republic.
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

As a result, we witnessed last weekend the unilateral
political will demonstrated by the Government in the
ceasefire declaration by His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic and Head of State. As a region, we have
witnessed the strengthening of mutual trust and the
normalization of relations between and among Member
States, notably between Burundi and Rwanda, thanks to
the ICGLR, which has unequivocally become a regional
platform to address inter-State tensions and suspicions.
In addition, the region has witnessed the
organization of peaceful and credible elections in
Burundi, Uganda, Tanzania, the Congo and Zambia.
We note with delight the growth of the involvement
of women in peacebuilding processes through
negotiations and mediation. There is also an increase
in the participation of women in political governance
and involvement in decision-making bodies through
nominative and elective positions.
Furthermore, we have witnessed the removal of
Burundi from the agenda of the Security Council and
the closure of the mission of the African Union human
rights observers and military experts. That shows
the serious commitment of the ICGLR to deepen and
consolidate democracy in the region.
Allow me now to turn to the specific aspects of this
briefing.
With regard to the specific roles that peacekeeping
missions can play as a resource in those countries to
prevent the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and disrupt criminal networks, the ICGLR is of the
view that missions have a fundamental role to play.
We believe that peacekeeping missions have a broadranging mandate to keep the peace and help stabilize
countries after conflict and to promote democracy and
human rights.
The missions equally have a fundamental role to
play in reducing the criminal exploitation of natural
resources. Peacekeeping missions play a role in
contributing to stability, stimulating employment
for youth and women, and economic recovery for the
countries concerned. We are of the strong view that
peacekeeping missions play a role in supporting the
enhancement of the technical capacities of national
authorities and local security forces in their management
of natural resources. Specifically, missions, through
direct cooperation with national authorities and security
forces, could monitor and inspect mineral consignment

S/PV. 8884

at production sites, transportation and trading hubs,
and the prevention of child labour and child trafficking.
We are aware that such an effort was unsustainable
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, largely owing
to limited capacity and financial resources, as well as
poor cooperation at the local level in enforcing national
laws. However, that is an outcome that rebels and
militias welcome because it allows them to continue
to maintain control over mining sites in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That situation
should not be allowed to continue where revenues to
finance conflict are easily generated within the country
using resources that would have otherwise benefited
the peaceful local people.
Peacekeeping missions could conduct joint security
operations with national security forces to extend
State authority over mining sites by dislodging militia
groups. However, we should ensure that mining sites
are placed under the control of Government institutions,
not national security forces. We should also learn from
history. One lesson learned is that extending State
control by national security forces over high-value
resource areas can have unintended consequences in
situations where there is a weak chain of command,
poor discipline and limited Government oversight.
Nevertheless peacekeeping missions should avoid
being involved in the mineral trade and benefiting in
any way from mining activities. Several accusations
against individual members of those peacekeeping
missions being involved in and/or facilitating mineral
smuggling and trafficking in the Great Lakes region
have been recorded. Peacekeeping missions in the
Great Lakes region should be aware of the regional
and international mineral due diligence standards and
principles that we are striving to put in place.
With regard to the role that the countries of the
region and the international community can play in
strengthening cross-border security and supporting
the fight against transborder crime and terrorism,
we underscore the need for cross-border cooperation
among countries of the region, as a condition to
strengthen security and fight crime and terrorism in the
Great Lakes region.
With the support of the international community,
as the ICGLR, we are working towards establishing
and operationalizing an early-warning system for the
region to share information in real time at all borders.
The porosity of our borders has led us to conduct

21-297005/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

joint verification missions and patrols of the borders.
The ICGLR has advanced in that process through
the expanded joint verification mechanism and the
Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network. Those
mechanisms need to be supported and strengthened by
both member States and the international community.
The sharing of best practices in addressing investigation
and prosecution challenges is also fundamental.
On the question of how the region and the
international community can ensure sustained means
to ensure long-term, sustainable national and regional
coordination
for
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
reintegration
and
resettlement
programmes, we believe that such initiatives should be
nationally owned and an integral component of longterm national development plans and annual budgets.
There should be a holistic and systematic approach
taken to the management of such programmes. Intensive
peace education and economic empowerment for excombatants is of paramount importance. However,
the international community could provide funding
and technical support since national capacities in the
Great Lakes region are typically weak given the large
numbers of ex-combatants. It should be noted that
such programmes focus on the provision of alternative
sources of livelihood to ex-combatants. Hence the
initiatives depend on reliable funding streams to ensure
funding that is both timely and adequate.
As the ICGLR, we emphasize that such
programmes should be based on a careful assessment of
the situation in a member State to identify combatants
and types and numbers of weapons as well as areas of
return. It also includes the identification of suitable
livelihood opportunities, the determination of
appropriate vocational training and extension services,
and the provision of resettlement and reintegration
opportunities and services.
That approach calls for high levels of transparency
and coordination among stakeholders of the programmes
involved. It also calls for comprehensive and effective
monitoring and evaluation systems to ensure that
targeted communities benefit from the programmes and
equally prevent the recurrence of conflict. In addition,
it calls for disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement programmes to be
linked to a wider and broader national reform to
promote national socioeconomic involvement and
strengthen the security sector and the promotion of
transnational justice.
6/32

20/10/2021

Allow me to mention that the disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
reintegration
and
resettlement programmes, costly as they are, have had
positive effects in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Sudan, Burundi and the Central African Republic
in engaging ex-combatants in productive activities and
building social cohesion. But more could have been
achieved in the Great Lakes region had resources and
coordination among stakeholders been enhanced.
We encourage the international community to
support civil-society organizations involved in the
implementation of the action plan of the Contact
and Coordination Group on non-military measures
to complement the military efforts by countries in
the Great Lakes region. As the Council is aware,
the mission of the Contact and Coordination Group
is to provide a comprehensive and evidence-based
approach to identifying and implementing non-military
measures in complement to enhancing military action
by the ICGLR member States. The Group focuses
on the facilitation of disarmament and the process
of repatriating negative forces through an approach
involving local communities and civil society and the
reinforcement of cross-border cooperation, with a view
to generating economic opportunities, particularly for
young people and women.
On the particular aspect of how the region and
the international community can provide support in
strengthening the capacity of key State institutions,
particularly the national security and customs structure,
to ensure the effective control and management of
natural resources, I wish first to reiterate my call for the
international community to support the implementation
of the ICGLR Regional Initiative against the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources, an initiative that
was adopted by the Heads of State and Government
in Lusaka in 2010. The international community must
support the enhancement capacities of that programme
in implementing countries and those that are actually
adhering to the programme.
In that framework, specifically the artisanal gold
strategy, there are components that aim to enhance the
capacities of member States’ customs organizations
to strengthen import and export mechanisms and also
control the artisanal gold trade at all levels, including
the transit and destination countries.
Regarding the question of how the region can
increase the participation of international financial
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

institutions and the private sector in funding projects
and programmes in the mining and extractive sector,
we are of the view that the States and Governments
of the region should design legal frameworks and
policies that aim to create an environment that is
conducive to investment. That should be accompanied
by the development of regional infrastructure that
promotes forward and backward linkages. The joint
regional infrastructure initiatives in energy, transport
corridors and telecommunication are possible areas
for consideration. Furthermore, member States should
provide knowledge linkages to foster innovation,
creativity, skills and the capacity for citizens to benefit
from the vast array of natural resources. There is a need
to enhance the technical and vocational capacities of
youth to provide a ready supply of skilled labour in the
real sector.
As regards the role that all stakeholders can play
to transform the productivity of natural resources
in the Great Lakes region in directly contributing to
post-conflict recovery, mutually shared socioeconomic
development and global prosperity, allow me to propose
the following.
First, all stakeholders should help to attract
investment in the region by participating and supporting
investment for the forthcoming Great Lakes Investment
and Trade Conference scheduled for November
in Kigali.
Secondly, programmes and projects should be
designed aimed at creating youth employment. That
could be done through the promotion of value addition.
I am pleased to inform the Council that the ICGLR
member States are resolved to promote mineral value
addition through the creation of refineries and smelters
within their boundaries. That is happening in Uganda
and in Rwanda. We hope that we can introduce the
same programme in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as well. That is possible given the enhancement
of inter-State cooperation and mutual trust. There
is a need for continual support to member States to
strengthen governance institutions so as to monitor
the adherence of member States to constitutionalism,
the promotion of the rule of law and respect for human
rights. The international community, especially mineral
destination countries, should support the due-diligence
efforts being implemented in the ICGLR.
In conclusion, I would like to restate that the ICGLR
Pact in support of peace and stability in the region,

S/PV. 8884

set up 15 years ago for the purpose of transforming
the region into a conflict-free area enveloped by
sustainable peace, security and stability, remains very
relevant today. The experience of the last 15 years has
demonstrated that the political, social and economic
transformation of the Great Lakes region can be
achieved only through enhanced ownership of practical
programmes, the involvement of ICGLR member
States and reliable diplomatic, financial and technical
support by the international community. Sustainability
of our efforts depends on the extent to which we have
effectively responded to the regional challenges with
regionally driven solutions.
The President: I thank Mr. Caholo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Pobee.
Mrs. Pobee: I wish to begin by expressing thanks
to the Kenyan presidency of the Security Council for
convening today’s high-level debate on supporting the
renewed commitment of the Great Lakes countries
in seeking sustainable solutions to the root causes
and drivers of conflict. Today’s meeting takes place
at a time when the United Nations has taken steps to
reconfigure its presence in the region to best address
remaining challenges to peace and security in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
My briefing today will focus on a few priority areas
where the Council’s support would be most needed. As
Special Envoy Huang Xia has provided elements of
the broader picture, I would like to devote particular
attention to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
First and foremost, persistent insecurity in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains one of
the main challenges facing the region today. National
and foreign armed groups still operate in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and continue to
perpetrate deadly attacks against civilians, further
deteriorating the already dire humanitarian situation.
Since the beginning of this year, at least 1,043 civilians
have been killed, including 233 women and 52 children.
The insecurity in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo shed light on underlying causes of the
conflicts in the region, ranging from the presence of
foreign armed groups, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, land and border disputes, intercommunal
tensions, limited State presence in remote areas to
persistent inequalities borne out of marginalization
and exclusion, youth unemployment and poverty. The

21-297007/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

central question of our debate today is how we can
support the countries of the region in their efforts to
harness the full potential of their human and natural
resources to build sustainable peace and development.
Addressing the various challenges facing countries
of the Great Lakes region requires a comprehensive
approach rooted in an enhanced political engagement
that
encompasses
military
and
non-military
interventions, fosters economic cooperation across
the borders and builds trust between neighbours and
among communities. In this regard, we are encouraged
by the improvement of bilateral relations between the
neighbouring countries and the signing of agreements at
the regional level in such various areas as security, trade
and economic cooperation. This rapprochement creates
a momentum for the evaluation and revitalization of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, enabling
us to refocus our efforts on supporting member States
of the region.
As we move forward, we welcome the holding in
the coming months of the tenth summit of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism, which will be hosted by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as an opportunity for
countries in the region to reaffirm their commitments
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
and take concrete actions to advance peace and security
in the region.
Governments of the region continue to prioritize
military operations as part of their efforts aimed at
addressing the threat posed by armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We therefore
welcome President Tshisekedi Tshilombo’s decision to
establish an operational centre in Goma, with a view
to further enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo in the conduct of intelligence-driven operations
against armed groups in Ituri and North Kivu provinces,
where the state of siege remains in place. I would like to
underscore in this regard that these military operations
should be conducted in strict compliance with the
human rights due-diligence policy and ensure civilianharm mitigation, so as to avoid additional suffering for
the population we aim to protect.
However, it is also important that the primacy of
politics remains the umbrella under which all initiatives
translate into actions. In that regard, I wish to welcome
8/32

20/10/2021

the adoption of a three-year action plan of the Contact
and Coordination Group aimed at neutralizing the
“negative forces” through a non-military approach.
MONUSCO and the Office of the Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region have collaborated well in this
approach and will continue to provide their support for
the operationalization of this Contact and Coordination
Group through the establishment of an operational
cell hosted in Goma, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
A comprehensive and coordinated regional approach
to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration will
also be also an important tool for creating incentives
for former combatants not to rejoin the ranks of armed
groups, while excluding the possibility for the latter to
automatically join the armed forces, and for preventing
the recruitment of youth in vulnerable communities
and curbing the illicit flows of weapons in the region.
In this context, I commend the Congolese authorities
for their commitment to providing adequate resources
for the functioning of the disarmament, demobilization,
community recovery and stabilization programme
that was recently established. Success of this national
programme will contribute tremendously to sustainable
peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I call on international partners and donors
to also support these efforts while ensuring that the
participating member States remain committed to, and
in charge of, this process.
While armed group activity is a symptom of
insecurity in the region, the enabling conditions should
be addressed upstream. Among the main root causes
of conflict, as we all know, are the illegal exploitation
and regional trafficking of natural resources, which
not only contribute to financing armed group networks
but also create parallel economies at the expense of
States’ budgets whose revenues continue to diminish.
The recent workshop on natural resources hosted
in Khartoum, co-hosted by the Office of the Special
Envoy, is a testament to the commitment of countries
of the region to addressing this issue through the
strengthening of border controls, the extension of State
authority and improvement of joint border-management
cooperation in their common border areas.
The path towards sustainable peace and
development in the region also requires the meaningful
participation of women, youth and the private sector.
From that perspective, the Action Plan for the United
Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes
Region provides an opportunity to make progress in that
area. For their part, MONUSCO and the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region will continue to ensure the participation
of women and young people in local political and peace
processes and work with the United Nations country
team to support peacebuilding and stabilization efforts
within the framework of the peace-developmenthumanitarian nexus.
As I conclude, I wish to reaffirm the continued
engagement of the United Nations with countries of
the region to support efforts towards peace, security
and development. The region counts on the Security
Council’s full support to put an end to the recurring
cycle of violence and to provide the necessary resources
to reach that goal.
The President: I thank Mrs. Pobee for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya.
May I begin, as I should, by thanking my colleagues
Ministers from Ireland and Angola, who have kindly
joined us at this important debate. I also express my
gratitude to the Special Envoy the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region, the Executive Secretary
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa
for their insightful briefings.
Few parts of our world exemplify the notion of a
paradox than Africa’s Great Lakes region. Home to our
world’s second largest rainforest and a critical lung for
our planet, the region is the catchment area for Africa’s
largest rivers and lakes and a habitat of impressive
biodiversity. Importantly for our discussion today,
the Great Lakes region is endowed with a vast and
unmatched array of precious and rare minerals, as well
as a rich pool of oil reserves and other hydrocarbons.
The potential of the region to be Africa’s breadbasket,
its source of green and clean energy, its engine of
industrialization and its pathway to economic growth
and social transformation seem patent and obvious; yet
the contrary is true.
A great disconnect exists between the region’s riches
and its promise and the reality of pervasive poverty,
underdevelopment and instability that has plagued that
area for centuries. That is in part due to an incessant
cycle of brutal extraction, illicit exploitation, pillage

S/PV. 8884

and trafficking of the region’s natural resources, which
has enabled the outbreak, escalation and continuation
of armed conflict. The scramble for the region’s natural
resources has contributed to external interference
in the region, fuelled inter-State rivalries, weakened
State institutions, spawned political instability and
compromised the management of intra-State diversity
at a great cost in terms of human suffering, particularly
of women and children.
The capacity of some States of the region, especially
those in the throes of transition and reconstruction,
to exercise full control over their territories, manage
resources, provide basic public goods, including
security and law and order, advance democracy and
tackle the proliferation of armed groups is also severely
stretched by the pressures posed by other threats,
such as natural calamities, climate-change shocks,
pandemics such as the Ebola virus and the coronavirus
diseases, and other humanitarian crises, as well as the
emergence of terrorist-affiliated groups in the region.
It is our judgment and belief that the strengthening of
State capacity and agility, coupled with the buttressing
of regional institutions, is an essential tool for the
delivery of the promise of the Great Lake region and
what it offers for Africa and, indeed, the world. That
promise must include the safety and prosperity of
women and protect them against gender-based violence,
particularly in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We are here today to reinvigorate and renew the
Security Council’s commitment to supporting the
Governments of the region in seeking solutions to
sustainably address the root causes and drivers of
rampant conflict in the region, with a special focus on
positively harnessing the region’s natural resources for
social and economic transformation.
It is important to applaud progress, and progress
has indeed been made. The region has remained
resilient and determined to surmount its challenges and
march forward. The power of regional solutions cannot
be overemphasized. In that regard, the recent highlevel regional diplomatic interventions to improve and
bolster bilateral relations in order to end the pervasive
cycles of hardship and conflict are commendable.
We also commend the work of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region under the
leadership of Angola in its efforts to promote

21-297009/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

20/10/2021

constructive dialogue and the resolution of conflicts
through peaceful means and regional cooperation.

improved security, especially around mining regions,
transit routes and border points.

Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the recent
establishment of the Contact and Coordination Group
as a significant step in regional efforts to identify and
implement non-military solutions to cross-border and
conflict drivers. There is a need for sound African
solutions to such uniquely African problems.

Thirdly, it is critical to create platforms for inclusive
dialogue in order to rebuild trust and confidence
among mining communities, local authorities, security
agencies, extraction entities and merchants in natural
resources. There must be real investment in those
communities, including job creation, training and the
provision of alternative livelihoods.

In addition, we register our full endorsement of the
continued efforts to implement the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region and the 2006 Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes region.
My delegation also appreciates the support of the
United Nations through the Peacebuilding Commission
in fostering regional and socioeconomic cooperation as
a key component of building and sustaining peace and
fostering sustainable development.
It is instructive that the sustainable development of
natural resources is one of the priorities of the three-year
action plan to operationalize the implementation of
the United Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation,
Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the
Great Lakes Region, on which the Special Envoy
elaborated for us today.

Fourthly, countries of the region should cooperate
to deploy, in a coordinated manner, a range of military
and non-military options to comprehensively address
the challenge posed by armed groups. Non-military
measures may include disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for ex-combatants. Kenya is
pleased to have provided its forces in the furtherance of
peace in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Fifthly, there is a need to strengthen regional
cooperation that deepens the economic integration of
the affected countries, with special focus given to the
productive utilization of national resources. Regional
cooperation is also critical for the implementation of
the Addis Ababa Framework agreement and other
regional tools to fight illegal exploitation and trade in
natural resources.

We strongly believe that the region must proceed
with courage and alacrity to harness its natural resources
for the benefit of its people, especially its youth, so as
to guarantee its peace and prosperity. There must be a
shift away from the pattern of unregulated extraction
and exploitation to a model that favours investment in
people, capacity-building, value addition, job creation
and infrastructure development.

We conclude by reaffirming Kenya’s commitment,
as a Great Lakes region country, to supporting the
transformation of our region through the better
management of our natural resources for our shared
prosperity. Let us move forward with tenacity; let us
move forward with courage and hope.

Natural resources must be extracted and traded
in a transparent, accountable and sustainable manner
and utilized to drive positive change for our people.
Accordingly, we propose five action points.

I call on the Minister of State for Overseas
Development Aid and Diaspora of Ireland.

First, assistance, including capacity-building,
ought to be provided to resource-endowed countries in
the Great Lakes region so as to enable the development
and implementation of appropriate policies, strategies
and mechanisms for the management of the extraction
of natural resources.
Secondly, enhanced support should be provided
to national security and law enforcement agencies for
10/32

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Mr. Brophy (Ireland): I would like to thank Kenya
for hosting this important debate. I also wish to thank
our briefers: Special Envoy Xia, Ambassador Caholo
and Assistant Secretary-General Pobee. I would also
like to recognize our colleagues from Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I am very pleased that the Security Council today
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2021/19 on this
important issue. It is only by addressing the root causes
of conflict and drivers of instability that it is truly
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

possible to build sustainable and lasting peace. I wish
to make three points in our debate today.
First, regional cooperation is essential in addressing
the root causes of conflict and drivers of instability
in the Great Lakes region. Ireland recognizes the
progress achieved by countries of the region in
improving and enhancing regional cooperation across
political, security and economic sectors. Sustainable
peace can be achieved only through close cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations and
international partners.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation (PSC)
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remains crucial. It provides the
foundation for building a shared vision of regional
peace, security and socioeconomic development.
Ireland looks forward to the tenth high-level meeting
of the PSC Regional Oversight Mechanism, to take
place by the end of the year. We hope that meeting will
maintain momentum and help translate recent progress
into shared prosperity for the people of the Great
Lakes region.
The establishment of the Contact Coordination
Group between key stakeholders in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
in order to focus on the use of non-military measures to
address conflict and instability is an important and very
welcome development. The United Nations will continue
to play an important role in supporting the region, and
Ireland welcomes the Strategy for Peace Consolidation,
Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the
Great Lakes Region. Its implementation will require
the continued concerted efforts of national, regional
and international partners.

S/PV. 8884

Good governance is essential to ensuring that the
region’s abundant natural resources become the
basis of inclusive and sustainable economic growth
and development.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on the
implementation of the Framework for Peace, Security
and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region (S/2021/836) notes progress in that
regard, and we commend ongoing efforts by countries
of the Great Lakes, regional organizations and partners
to develop a holistic approach to natural-resource
management. We look forward to seeing progress in
implementing the recommendations from the recent
high-level workshop in Khartoum aimed at curbing
illicit exploitation and the trade in natural resources.
Ireland will continue to play its part through ongoing
participation in, and advocacy for, the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme and the implementation
of the European Union Conflict Minerals Regulation.
Through our membership in the Intergovernmental
Forum on Mining, Minerals, Metals and Sustainable
Development, Ireland will continue to engage with
partners to share best practices and to work together
to limit the negative impacts of mining and ensure that
it contributes to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals.

Secondly, the illegal exploitation of, and trade in,
minerals and natural resources is a significant driver of
conflict in Africa, and in particular in the Great Lakes
region, where competition for control of resource-rich
areas fuels hostilities and violence. Such activities
have a multiplier effect on other drivers of instability.
Climate change, population displacement, extreme
poverty, hunger, socioeconomic inequality and the
lack of opportunities for young people exacerbate the
challenges across the entire region.

Thirdly, the development of long-lasting and
sustainable solutions requires the promotion and
protection of human rights and the rule of law,
coupled with a coherent, coordinated response to the
humanitarian crises facing the region. With 15 million
displaced people and rising levels of food insecurity and
acute malnutrition — particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the cycle of conflict and
hunger has been compounded by drivers of instability
such as climate change — the region is contending
with one of the most severe humanitarian crises in
the world. Action to address that crisis and protect the
most vulnerable requires a collective response, and
we urge all parties to ensure the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance. All parties must adhere
to international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

Ireland supports national, regional and international
efforts to ensure that lawful, transparent and effective
controls are available to support the management of
natural resources and prevent their illegal exploitation.

For too long, women and youth have borne the
worst of the hardships resulting from conflict and
insecurity. For Ireland, it is clear that the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in national,

21-2970011/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

regional and international efforts is essential for
developing sustainable solutions to the root causes of
conflict and the drivers of instability. Those solutions
include effective natural-resource management
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes across the region. Advancing gender equality
and ensuring meaningful youth engagement drives
transformation and accelerates progress on peace,
security and development.
The root causes of conflict and drivers of instability
are shared challenges and require shared solutions.
Those solutions need to be delivered through the active
role of the nations of the region. Those efforts must be
supported at the regional level through strengthened
collaboration between neighbours and regional
organizations. Clearly, at the international level, we
have a shared interest in the development of a peaceful
and prosperous Great Lakes region that serves the
needs of its people.
To address these issues, we must renew our
support for the implementation of the PSC Framework
and regional initiatives to enhance coordination and
cooperation. We must ensure that effective governance
and controls are in place to enable the lawful and
transparent management of natural resources. We must
work collectively to respond to urgent humanitarian
needs, and we must uphold our commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights and the rule
of law. At the same time, we must also keep the women
and peace and security agenda and the youth, peace and
security agenda at the fore in our efforts to develop and
implement long-lasting and sustainable solutions for
the region.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the briefers for their briefings. I welcome you, Madam
President, to today’s meeting. I also welcome today’s
important debate, convened by Kenya.
I will focus on three points.
First, enhanced regional cooperation must
be translated into specific benefits for people.
Rapprochement must ensure the protection of civilians,
including humanitarians workers who are still the
victims of armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of Congo.
France welcomes the establishment of the Contact
and Coordination Group for the implementation
of non-military measures. It should build trust
12/32

20/10/2021

and accelerate the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration process. It is also
important to monitor coordination among security
actors themselves on the ground, and between them and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
The new regional dynamics must support
sustainable development that benefits people. To that
end, the finalization of several bilateral agreements
on trade, investment and infrastructure and the
development of regional frameworks to respond to
the coronavirus disease pandemic are all positive
developments. The Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region must continue guiding the States of
the region. Ensuring the holding of the tenth highlevel meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework is a
matter of urgency, as it will be an important marker in
verifying its implementation.
Secondly, it is imperative to curb one of the main
causes of instability — the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. It helps fund armed groups and criminal
networks, fuels conflicts and heightens tensions among
States. Trade in some minerals, such as tantalum, tin and
tungsten, is subject to more regulation. However, gold
mining is still not sufficiently monitored and should
be subject to stricter regulation. The recommendations
that emerged from the workshop on natural resources,
held in Khartoum, must be followed up with action.
We must redouble our efforts to implement the
Regional Certification Mechanism of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region. Harmonizing
fiscal regimes, strengthening the judicial cooperation
networks of the Great Lakes region and developing
regional databases on the flow of minerals are areas that
can help support transparency and combat impunity.
Beyond the region, all States, in particular transit
and destination countries, must build a responsible
value chain. In January, the European Union developed
new rules and regulations on combating trafficking
in minerals. It will also help the Democratic Republic
of the Congo restore its sovereignty over its own
resources. The Security Council must also act by
sanctioning individuals and entities involved in the
illegal exploitation of resources.
Lastly, the United Nations Strategy for Peace
Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Resolution in the Great Lakes Region must be fully
supported by the region and its partners. The action
plan for implementing the Strategy outlines a series of
targeted steps, which will require, first and foremost,
very strong mobilization by the States of the region.
In the months ahead, the implementation process must,
in particular, promote transitional justice and national
human rights institutions. So long as violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
continue, the region will not see lasting peace.
Humanitarian needs are increasing, food insecurity
is growing and the Ebola virus is re-emerging. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is the State with
the highest number of displaced persons in Africa.
Under the action plan, lasting solutions are urgently
needed for safe and dignified voluntary resettlement
and repatriation.
Investment in the region must support local
development, the participation of young people and
women and respect for the environment. Those priorities
should be at the centre of discussions at the conference
on investment and trade, currently being organized.
As MONUSCO’s transition is under way, United
Nations agencies should enhance their presence in
the Great Lakes region. Donors should mobilize to
support the implementation of the regional strategy
and meet humanitarian needs. Full support from the
Peacebuilding Fund will be required.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Envoy
Huang Xia, Executive Secretary Caholo and Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Pobee for their briefings.
I will also focus on three points today.
First, we recognize the positive advances in
cooperation in the Great Lakes region. The bilateral
diplomatic outreach and high-level visits within the
region are a testament to that. We also see stronger
security cooperation and coordination of military and
non-military actions against armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is encouraging,
especially given the violence, human rights violations
and abuses and dire humanitarian crisis in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is vital that the
United Nations system and the international community
support efforts to address the situation, including
through regional cooperation and coordination.
Secondly, the adoption of the United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention

S/PV. 8884

and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region and
its accompanying action plan is a good starting point
for fostering closer regional cooperation. The action
plan’s focus on involving key financial partners, such
as the World Bank, the African Development Bank and
the European Union, will be helpful in delivering on
promises. We also welcome the intensified activity of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and planned actions on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) within the Peacebuilding Fund.
We commend the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
applying a gender-sensitive approach to DDR in the
recent transition plan. We look forward to working with
the Special Envoy and all relevant actors, including
civil society and women, to ensure the implementation
of those important initiatives.
Thirdly, the illicit trade in national resources
generates hundreds of millions of dollars per year. It
is the root cause of conflict and must be addressed. It
fuels intercommunal violence in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, contributes to the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons and hampers the
consolidation of peace and security. Furthermore, it
strengthens armed groups, leading to the additional
suffering of the civilian population. The illicit trade in
gold, timber and other natural resources also leads to
a loss of public revenue for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region. That, in turn, has serious
consequences for States’ ability to protect their
populations and provide essential services.
The cross-border dimension of the illicit
trade cannot be overlooked. In that respect, it was
encouraging to see the recommendation from the highlevel workshop on natural resources, held in Khartoum,
in August. We must enhance ownership of such regional
initiatives. The endorsement of the recommendation
by Heads of State and Government at the upcoming
Extraordinary Summit of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), together with
the existing mechanism under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region and the ICGLR, may
further contribute to curbing the revenue of armed
groups and advance the transparent and sustainable
management of natural resources in the region. Norway
encourages all stakeholders to work together to ensure
implementation.

21-2970013/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

In conclusion, we welcome the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2021/19 today. Norway
reiterates its support for the work of the Special Envoy
and the ICGLR. Their efforts are crucial to ensuring
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We thank Kenya for convening today’s timely debate.
We also thank you, Madam President, for the vivid
description of the Great Lakes region and for reminding
us of what is possible for the region and the entire
continent.
We welcome the comprehensive briefings provided
by our briefers this morning.
Over the past few years and despite ongoing
challenges, the countries of the Great Lakes region have
made commendable progress, including concrete steps
towards peaceful transfers of power, the normalizing of
bilateral relations and the continued implementation of
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. To that end, we recognize the role played
by regional and subregional organizations, namely the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, in fostering coordination and
cooperation among the States of the region in their
efforts to combat ongoing conflicts.
We also take this moment to laud the efforts
made towards improving the visibility, representation
and empowerment of women in the region within
the framework of the women and peace and security
agenda. We urge continued strides to ensure women’s
full, equal, and meaningful participation in all stages
of political processes, peacebuilding and development.
That notwithstanding, we remain concerned over
the volatile security situation in areas of the region,
including the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where armed groups continue to carry out
attacks that impact the civilian population and have
wide-reaching destabilizing consequences for the
region. While the situation in the country remains
tenuous, we welcome President Touadera’s unilateral
declaration of a ceasefire as a fundamental step towards
the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and
call on all parties to follow and respect those efforts.
The humanitarian situation across the region is
also of great concern. In the Central African Republic,
14/32

20/10/2021

violence continues to contribute to the internal
displacement of a significant number of people, with
many experiencing food insecurity. Against the
backdrop of ongoing political and diplomatic efforts to
address the situation in the region, it is crucial for the
international community to sustain its support for the
people of the region, including through contributions to
the relevant humanitarian response plans.
Sustained support by the international community
for the efforts of the countries in the region towards
peace is key. That includes support for State institutions
and the implementation of relevant frameworks, as well
as regional efforts towards combating illegal trade
and the exploitation of natural resources, in order to
transform them into catalysts for economic growth
and development.
We are hopeful that the United Nations Strategy for
Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region will be successful
in supporting the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework and the nexus between
peace and security, justice and development in the
region. That whole-of-system approach, which outlines
the priorities of the United Nations in the region over
the next few years, demonstrates the Special Envoy’s
commitment to long-term regional peace. We urge the
international community to support its implementation.
In order to achieve sustainable peace and
development, we must address the complex web of root
causes and drivers of endemic violence, particularly the
illegal exploitation and trade of natural resources. We
underscore that that approach must be allied with the
efforts of key partners to build the capacity of countries
in the region to anticipate, manage, mitigate and resolve
emerging conflicts.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
affirms its support for the countries and peoples of the
region and avails itself of every opportunity to support
the work of regional and subregional organizations,
reiterating the importance of African solutions to
African challenges. We welcome the ongoing work of
the United Nations, including that of the Special Envoy,
and all efforts undertaken to guarantee peace, security,
and socioeconomic development of the region.
Finally, we join in welcoming the presidential
statement on the Great Lakes region to be issued later
(S/PRST/2021/19).
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation thanks Kenya for convening
this debate and we welcome you once again, Madam
President, to the Council. We also thank Special Envoy
Huang Xia, Mr. João Samuel Caholo and Mrs. Martha
Pobee for their briefings and express our greetings to
the representatives of Angola, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda.
Mexico welcomes the positive results of regional
diplomacy, including, inter alia, the normalization
of relations between Burundi and Rwanda and the
strengthening of ties between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda. We highlight the positive
effect that those regional dynamics have on peace and
security, for example, the revitalization of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
The 2021-2023 action plan for the implementation
of the United Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation,
Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the
Great Lakes Region is most welcome. We recognize the
value of that instrument not only in identifying priority
areas for the region, but also as a programming and
evaluation mechanism.
Alongside the progress made, we note that
significant challenges remain, primarily arising from
the activities of armed groups, which translate into
security and humanitarian assistance access issues.
Addressing the root causes of violence must be made
a priority, as that is the only rational and effective way
to contain it.
In that regard, I would like to briefly highlight
four points.
First, the exploitation and trafficking of natural
resources continue to be a major challenge in the region.
Firm measures are needed to curb that criminal cycle.
The harmonization of legislation in that area and the
strengthening of judicial and fiscal systems exemplify
some timely and tangible measures.
Secondly, insecurity and violence are multiplied
by the illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons.
There is a link between the financing obtained from
the illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
acquisition of those types of weapons. It is therefore
essential to implement more specific measures to
combat that scourge. The objective in that regard is to

S/PV. 8884

reduce the activities of armed groups, as identified in
cluster 2 of the action plan.
We consider it extremely important to develop
weapons and ammunition management policies and
programmes that complement the broader disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) strategy. That
would also certainly go a long way towards achieving
Sustainable Development Goal 16.4. However, the
success of DDR programmes depends, to a large extent,
on opportunities and alternatives for ex-combatants,
hence why the socioeconomic development of the
region is essential.
Thirdly, as was mentioned earlier, the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the extremely
inequitable distribution of vaccines continue to
have adverse effects in the region and other parts
of the world, both in terms of public health and
socioeconomic development. We reiterate that me must
now unconditionally accept the fact that COVID-19
vaccines must be considered as a global public good so
as to guarantee their universal access.
Lastly, it must be said that the impetus given to the
women and peace and security agenda in the context of
the region has been valuable, and it is important. We
welcome the increasing participation of women in the
political arena as well as their inclusion in mediation
and peacebuilding processes.
In conclusion, I underscore that it is imperative
that the Council continue to accord the attention due
to the situation in the Great Lakes region, as achieving
sustainable peace in a significant part of the African
continent depends on it. We therefore commend the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2021/19 at
this meeting.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Howang Shia, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region; Mr. João Samuel
Caholo, Executive Secretary of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region; and Mrs. Martha
Ama Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa, for their valuable briefings. I also thank you,
Madam President, for presiding over this meeting in
which Ministers are participating, and I thank Kenya
for choosing today’s theme.
The Great Lakes region is faced with many
political, security and economic challenges with direct
effects on security, peace, stability and development

21-2970015/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

for the countries concerned. The coronavirus disease
pandemic deepened those situations and exacerbated the
difficulties of those challenges and their implications,
particularly on the humanitarian situation.
As far as the security dimension is concerned,
the countries of the region are still under the threat
of armed groups that continue to target security and
stability, as well as of their activities in the field of
the illegal exploitation of, and trafficking in, natural
wealth, while trading in weapons to finance their
operations. That has led to exacerbating the suffering
of the local population, worsening the phenomenon of
forced displacement and refugee flows at home and
abroad, as well as continued violations of human rights
and sexual and gender-based violence.
In the face of those threats, it is necessary to adopt
a common regional approach to put an end to them and
their direct influence on security and stability in the
region, making the wealth of the Great Lakes Region an
incentive for development and a factor for strengthening
security and stability for the various peoples of the
region, rather than remaining a source of funding for
armed groups and fuelling conflicts and violence.
The full and effective implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework by all signatories
is of great importance to achieving peace, stability and
development in the Great Lakes region. In that context,
we value the efforts of the signatory States to fulfil their
commitments, just as we value the support of regional
and subregional organizations along that path.
We also welcome the results of the third minisummit of Heads of State of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region, held in Luanda
on 16 September, in particular with regard to ways of
promoting peace, security and stability in the region
and addressing the humanitarian challenges faced by
their countries.
Despite the difficulties ahead, the Great Lakes
region has an important opportunity to achieve peace,
security, stability and sustainable development,
through the concerted efforts of their countries, to
be supported by the international community, which
will facilitate the implementation of the political and
security aspects of the Framework in parallel with
the development and economic aspects that are a key
element of lasting peace and stability. Improving
living conditions, especially in border areas, as well
as trade cooperation relations, fighting corruption and
16/32

20/10/2021

managing natural recourses and wealth will strengthen
confidence-building and positively affect the situation
of the peoples of the region.
I cannot but to commend the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region and his team in promoting peace and security
in the region through their good offices, mediation
and preventive diplomacy, as well as strengthening the
capacities from which the countries of the region can
mutually benefit. We also welcome the efforts of the
Special Envoy in addressing the long-term challenges
related to the illegal exploitation of, and trade in,
natural resources, while also underscoring the role of
the United Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation,
Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the
Great Lakes Region and the relevant action plan that
has been launched.
In conclusion, we commend the important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission and its main partners,
such as the World Bank and other international
financial institutions, as well as the Peacebuilding Fund
in supporting cross-border cooperation in the region
through efforts to strengthen security cooperation,
reconciliation, social cohesion, good governance and
the reintegration of former combatants, while finding
lasting solutions for the issue of displaced persons.
Tunisia reaffirms its support for the efforts
of regional and subregional organizations, chief
among them the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the East
African Community, and all other partners to further
the gains made in implementing the Agreement and
promote regional cooperation, which will inevitably
lead to long-term peace and sustainable development in
the region. We also endorse the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2021/19 at today’s meeting.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Kenya for
hosting today’s debate, and I appreciate the Kenyan
commitment to deal with this topic as a high priority.
I also thank the briefers for their presentations, and I
welcome the representatives of countries of the region
for joining us today.
We are well aware that the root causes and endemic
conflicts in the Great Lakes region are multiple and
complex. For more than two decades, the insecurity,
most notably in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, has been one of the destabilizing
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

factors in the region that has been characterized by
day-to-day attacks and killings of civilians by various
negative forces.
We regret to note that another prominent feature
of the conflict — behaviour unworthy of human
beings — is the conflict-related sexual violence,
accompanied by grave violations against women
and children. The ongoing conflict in turn has left
the population of the region at a critical level of food
insecurity and in a dire humanitarian situation. It is
inconceivable that approximately 15 million people in
the region are subjected to forced displacement. That
should not happen to populations in our time.
The illegal exploitation of natural resources, which
is the focus of today’s debate, is a longstanding driver
of insecurity and conflict in the region. We need to
ensure that those resources serve the well-being of the
population of the region.
In that respect, I would like to highlight three
principal areas that are fundamental to address this
driver of conflict.
First, we are confident that successful regional
cooperation is an essential tool to consolidate greater
control over conflict minerals and mining sites. We
welcome the efforts by the countries of the region
to strengthen their common dialogue and regional
cooperation in the fight against illegal exploitation
and illicit trade in natural resources. In that regard, we
encourage the countries of the region to facilitate the
implementation of the common regional initiatives in
that area, most notably with regard to the implementation
of the regional database on mineral flows, the Regional
Certification Mechanism and the harmonization of
regional regulations. We also believe that there are great
opportunities for women and youth to be involved in
the mining sector that would offer them an alternative
to being involved in the armed conflict.
Secondly, we are of the view that strengthening the
national disarmament, demobilization and stabilization
programme would provide prospects for disrupting
the weapons supply to armed groups. It is particularly
important to ensure the sustainable and transparent
management of national stocks of weapons and
ammunition to prevent them from falling into the hands
of negative forces. In that connection, we commend
the efforts of signatory countries in establishing the
Contact and Coordination Group and the commitments
to implement its action plan that would allow for the

S/PV. 8884

reduction of threats posed by negative forces. We
likewise appreciate the important role of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in providing its
good offices and strategic and technical advice.
Thirdly, we underline the important role of
investigative authorities and courts in the region in
addressing the issue of accountability for the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. Accordingly, we
encourage the countries of the region to fight impunity
for serious crimes under international law and other
serious human rights violations and abuses. We are
confident that the implementation of the Nairobi
Declaration on Justice and Good Governance will chart
the right course and increase the confidence of the
population in the justice system and the rule of law.
Finally, I thank the Special Envoy for his tireless
efforts in contributing to the implementation of the
regional strategy and his unwavering support for the
signatory countries in addressing the root causes of
the conflict.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your participation, Madam
President, in this meeting in your capacity as President
of the Security Council. We are grateful to the Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia; to
the Assistant Secretary-General, Martha Pobee; and to
the Executive Secretary of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), Mr. João Samuel
Caholo. We thank them for the views they expressed.
We also welcome the representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola, Burundi,
Rwanda and Uganda. We appreciate the fact that
the Kenyan presidency convened this debate on the
issue of the Great Lakes region. Our view is that the
discussion today will enable us to exchange views and
find common denominators and guidelines for our
future efforts aimed at stabilizing the situation in that
important region.
A determining influence on the region continues
to be exerted by the situation in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which remains quite
challenging. We have witnessed some stabilization in
Tanganyika and Kasai, but a strong threat to security
remains in the provinces of Ituri and North Kivu, where
the Allied Democratic Forces continue to be active,
along with other armed groups. The goal remains of
making mineral extraction more orderly in order to

21-2970017/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

prevent mineral smuggling from benefiting illegal
armed groups.
We are convinced that the exclusive use of military
means would preclude a lasting normalization in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We followed
very closely the efforts made by the authorities to
restore control over the security sphere, improve
the humanitarian situation, promote socioeconomic
development, resolve border disputes with neighbours,
resolve intercommunal conflicts, and implement the
programme for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.
Against the background of all those issues in the
area of security and the difficult humanitarian situation,
and taking account of the coronavirus disease factor, we
note the heightened diplomacy conducted by the States
of the region so as to build good-neighbourly relations.
We welcome that determination to develop cooperation
in order to overcome existing challenges, including
doing so through collective formats. That applies to the
pooling of efforts to combat armed groups, strengthen
borders and develop trade relations.
We note the numerous contacts at various levels
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda and Tanzania, and we
think that the fact that the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Tshisekedi, will chair
the African Union this year will attract additional
attention to the issue of the Great Lakes region. We
also appreciate the role played by the ICGLR under the
Angolan presidency.
Finally, the list of positive initiatives includes an
agreement on steps to implement the road maps on
stabilizing the Central African Republic, which was at
the basis of the decision made by President Touadera to
declare a ceasefire.
All the achievements that I have just listed have one
factor in common. All initiatives that help stabilize the
situation will be viable only when they are developed
and agreed by the direct participants and supported at
the regional level. That is also in line with the principle
that we all agree on: that African solutions are required
to African problems. We are firmly convinced that
this is a necessary precondition for success and shows
once again how nefarious it can be when ready-made
formulas are imposed, when national initiatives and
sovereignty are suppressed and when open attempts to
interfere are made from outside.
18/32

20/10/2021

It is our view that the role of the international
community and the Security Council consists of
supporting regional actors’ initiatives. In that regard,
we welcome the work conducted by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General. We deem necessary
that all countries implement the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
We are convinced that the United Nations United
Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict
Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes
Region will give fresh impetus to the collective efforts
deployed by regional actors. We also note that the
action plan under that strategy has now begun to be
implemented. We support the good offices of Mr. Huang
Xia in his efforts to promote dialogue, strengthen trust
and normalize relations among the countries in the
region, and his in-depth, comprehensive approach to
the root causes of crisis situations.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
Russia, also in its capacity as a member of the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region, intends to continue
to extend its support for the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the stabilization
of the region as a whole.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Madam President,
and your country, Kenya, for having convened this
important debate on the Great Lakes region. I wish to
commend all briefers for the perspectives they have
provided. I also wish to commend the presence of the
Irish and Angolan ministers and of the countries of the
region at this debate.
The search for lasting solutions to the root causes
and drivers of conflict in the Great Lakes region, the
theme of our debate today, is indeed a relevant choice
because it raises the timely question of the stability
of peace and prosperity of the countries of the region
in particular and of the African continent as a whole.
In this regard, Niger welcomes the intensification
in recent years of diplomatic efforts by the region’s
leaders to revive cooperation in the areas of security,
exploitation of natural resources, refugee flows and
judicial assistance.
The diplomatic thaw between Rwanda and Burundi,
which materialized through visits by senior officials
from both counties, the high-level contacts of President
Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo of the Democratic
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Republic of Congo with his neighbours aimed at
reducing armed-group activity, and the management of
the consequences of the Ebola and coronavirus disease
crises and the eruption of the Nyiragongo volcano, are
all encouraging signs that are undoubtedly contributing
to the normalization of relations among the countries of
the region.
The Niger encourages the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
adopted in Addis Ababa on 24 February 2013, which
constitutes the main road map in the search for
stability, strengthening of governance and democratic
institutions and the reinforcement of cooperation
among the countries of the Great Lakes region.
On the political front, the Niger welcomes the
holding of elections in several member countries of
the Framework, such as the Central African Republic,
the Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Zambia. The
political progress made in the Democratic Republic
of Congo since the last elections, which marked the
country’s first-ever peaceful political changeover, the
various economic measures taken and the ongoing
reorganization of the Independent National Electoral
Commission are all salutary steps towards the
consolidation of good governance and democratic
institutions, which should be encouraged. We commend
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the steps it has also taken to meet the objectives set
forth in the benchmarks of the transition plan of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
those related to the disarmament, demobilization and
community rehabilitation programme.
In the same vein, we encourage the Government
of the Central African Republic to continue its efforts
to strengthen the inclusiveness and transparency of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
under way in the country. The recent ceasefire decided
by President Touadera is an act of political courage that
should be commended.
While we welcome the progress made in terms of
rapprochement and the revival of cooperation between
the countries of the Great Lakes region, the security
situation in the region remains worrying, particularly
in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo and in
the Central African Republic. The resurgence of attacks
by allied armed forces, which led to the abduction

S/PV. 8884

and death of several dozen civilians, human rights
violations, violence, sexual violations against women
and young girls, the targeting of minority group leaders
by the Allied Democratic Forces and other armed
groups, including the recent assassination of an imam
in Beni in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the targeted attacks against Muslims and the Fulani in
the Central African Republic, are sad illustrations of
this.
All these attacks and acts of violence against
civilians, which we strongly condemn and deplore, must
stop. We therefore welcome the efforts of the States
in the region to put an end to the activities of armed
groups. The cessation of violence is crucial to enabling
countries in the region to effectively address the issue
of forced displacement and facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
While military action cannot be ruled out to
address the region’s insecurity, we believe that the
implementation of non-military measures to address
the root causes and drivers of conflict will create
an environment conducive to peacebuilding. These
measures include the promotion of transparency in
the exploitation and trade of natural resources. The
implementation of the Kimberley Process regional
initiative on natural resources and the policy
recommendations agreed at the high-level workshop
in Khartoum at the beginning of last month will go a
long way to ensuring that these resources can be used
for the development of the countries of origin of these
minerals and thus the well-being of their people.
My delegation commends the continued good
offices and preventive diplomacy of Special Envoy
Huang Xia and all United Nations officials in the
region, in particular the holistic approach promoted by
the Special Envoy involving all stakeholders, including
recipient countries, to curbing the illicit trade and
smuggling of precious and strategic minerals in the
region. The issue of the illicit circulation of small arms,
which fuels the mineral trade and exacerbates crises,
must be resolutely addressed. We also appreciate the
support of the Office of the Special Envoy for the
empowerment of women and youth as agents of peace
and the promotion of their participation in the political
and economic life of their countries.
The search for peace and the fight against the root
causes of instability in a region as vast and rich in diverse
natural resources as the Great Lakes region require not

21-2970019/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

only the re-establishment and strengthening of bilateral
relations between countries, but also coherence
and synergy of action among the many subregional
organizations to which they belong. In this respect, the
positive role played by the Economic Community of
Central African States and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region in supporting peace efforts
in member countries is to be commended.
The unilateral ceasefire announced last Friday by
President Touadera in the Central African Republic is
the result of the collective efforts of successive minisummits convened under the leadership of Angola
to revitalize the political and peace agreement in the
country. For their part, the United Nations, its regional
representatives and specialized agents must continue to
work together to provide the necessary support for the
full implementation of the Great Lakes region strategy
and its action plan. In this regard, we encourage the
implementation of the United Nations Strategy for
Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region, as well as its
action plan, which provide for the launch of the Contact
and Coordination Group to oversee the implementation
of the non-military strategy.
In conclusion, and in support of the presidential
statement just adopted (S/PRST/2021/19), Niger
encourages all countries of the region, in particular
the signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, to redouble their efforts to sustain the
dividends of the current positive dynamic by showing
more openness and commitment at the bilateral and
subregional level so that peace and stability reign in the
Great Lakes region.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Special Envoy
Huang Xia, Ambassador João Samuel Caholo and
Mrs. Martha Pobee for their informative briefings.
I welcome the participation of the representatives
of Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda in today’s meeting.
First of all, let me begin by emphasizing the
vitally important role that regional cooperation plays
in conflict prevention and resolution. My delegation
therefore fully supports the presidential statement just
adopted under the leadership of the Kenya presidency
(S/PRST/2021/19), to renew our efforts aimed at
addressing the root causes and drivers of conflict in the
region.
20/32

20/10/2021

We are pleased to note the continued commitment
of signatory States in implementing the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. Regional
cooperation undoubtedly plays a central role in
addressing common challenges, including illegal
activities of armed groups, illicit exploitation of and
trade in natural resources, adverse impacts of natural
disasters and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The efforts and role played by regional
and subregional organizations, including the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and Southern African Development Community
are therefore irreplaceable.
We welcome the high-level engagement among
countries of the region to reinvigorate and deepen
relations at bilateral and multilateral levels, particularly
the steps taken by the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The recent adoption of the
Luanda joint road map, which has led to critical
steps towards revitalizing the peace process in the
Central African Republic, is highly commendable. We
encourage sustained efforts within the framework of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism, as well as the Contact
and Coordination Group, to enhance coordinated
measures against negative forces in the region.
In the meantime, the humanitarian situation in the
region remains worrisome, especially in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo due to the
deteriorated security situation. While welcoming the
gradual return of refugees to Burundi, my delegation
continues to be troubled by the plight of millions of
displaced people and refugees in the region. We are
also concerned over the world’s highest number of
food-insecure people in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, with more than 27 million facing crisis
level — Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
phase 3 — or worse.
The compounding COVID-19 pandemic is
further exacerbating socioeconomic difficulties
and the hardship of the vulnerable population. The
precarious situation of the people in the region requires
comprehensive and pragmatic measures to address the
root causes of instability.
In that regard, we encourage the continued
intensification of cooperation to implement the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

strengthen the management of natural resources,
tackle threats posed by armed groups, create equal
development opportunities for regional countries,
et cetera.
To that end, continued international assistance
is key. Resource mobilization to support countries of
the region remains pivotal, with a view to preserving
the hard-won achievements and further promoting
stability in the Great Lakes region. My delegation
highly appreciates the contribution of regional and
international partners and the active engagement of the
Special Envoy and the Peacebuilding Commission in
assisting the region.
It is our strong belief that the United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention
and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region,
with its action plan for the period of 2021 to 2023,
will be an excellent platform to channel efforts to
assist the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
Let me conclude by stressing the need to ensure
the synergy and complementarity of the support
of the international community and regionally and
nationally owned and led efforts, with the full and
active participation of women and young people, for
sustainable peace and development for the people in
the region.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I too want to thank you, Madam President,
for Kenya’s initiative to highlight the conflict in
the Great Lakes region as part of its presidency of
the Security Council this month. We share Kenya’s
concern regarding armed groups and violence in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo, as
well as its optimism regarding the prospects for peace,
reconciliation and development, which could serve as
an economic motor to transform the entire subregion.
I also thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/836) and
for his briefing. I also want to thank the Executive
Secretary of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR), Mr. Caholo, for his efforts at
the ICGLR and Assistant Secretary-General Pobee for
her briefing. We enthusiastically welcome the regional
partners here with us today. Their role is key to the
success of the region.
The United States supports the principles set out in
the United Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation,

S/PV. 8884

Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the
Great Lakes Region, adopted a year ago, the road
map announced this summer and the September
recommendations of the Khartoum workshop on
natural resources, particularly regarding the gold trade.
We are confident that the Special Envoy will act swiftly
on the regional strategy through high-level shuttle
diplomacy with the region’s leaders to support the full
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We welcome the work towards holding
the next meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism.
It is time to push such commitments forward.
Today we particularly welcome Kenya’s focus
on the illegal exploitation of natural resources, such
as minerals, wildlife and timber, by armed groups,
corrupt State actors and criminal commercial networks.
We concur with the ICGLR Executive Secretary’s
comments on that issue today. Such actions clearly fuel
conflict in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. They help terrorist groups, and they pose
a danger to the entire region. We must do something
about that, and we need to do it now.
To start, we urge regional Governments to uphold
their commitments as ICGLR member States. The
Executive Secretary’s presence again highlights
his commitment to that. That means treating the
responsible management of natural resources as vital to
the economic, social and governance development of the
region. In addition, the private-sector supply chain must
demand due diligence from private-sector operators in
the extractive sectors, consistent with the guidelines
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development. The due diligence should adhere to the
highest standards possible to ensure the sustainable use
of such resources, and the parties should work closely
with international financial institutions to develop
national frameworks that reinforce such commitments.
While armed groups and others continue to profit
from minerals, especially gold, smuggled illegally
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we must
pursue greater cooperation across borders on supplychain standards, traceability, tariff standardization and
tax harmonization. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
often referred to as the Allied Democratic Forces, has
previously funded its activities through illegal taxes on
gold producers in Beni. That is why due diligence is
so important.

21-2970021/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

To those ends, the United States welcomes the recent
meetings among regional Governments on military
and non-military measures. Those meetings should
pay extra attention to how the smuggling of Congolese
gold affects the national security of neighbours of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The recent planned
ISIS-Democratic Republic of the Congo attacks in
Rwanda and Uganda highlight the heightened risk of
that illegal gold trade for all countries in the Great
Lakes region.
In addition, strategies for the reintegration of
former fighters must be coordinated, developed and
fully implemented to counter the threat of violent
extremism over the long term. The Great Lakes region
has wealth in natural resources, and it has talented
personnel, to fund such efforts on its own, if State
actors work together to ensure a legal, productive trade
that benefits all the people of the region. The difference
would be extraordinary. It is entirely possible to put
an end to the smuggling and bring greater peace and
prosperity to the region.
With that in mind, I again thank Kenya for hosting
today’s important debate, and I urge countries of the
region to uphold their commitments to addressing
the smuggling that is driving so much of this
terrible conflict.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Allow me to welcome
you, Madam President, as you preside over today’s
meeting. Let me thank Kenya for organizing this
important debate on the Great Lakes region, which
has the potential to become an engine of growth for
the African continent and beyond. Today’s initiative
and deliberations will contribute positively to the
ongoing efforts to implement the commitments under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. In
that regard, we welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2021/19 under Kenya’s leadership.
I thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing
on the developments in the Great Lakes region. I also
thank Ambassador João Caholo, Executive Secretary
of the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), and the Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa, Mrs. Martha Pobee, for their insights.
I also welcome the participation of the Foreign
Minister of Angola, the High Representative of the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
22/32

20/10/2021

and the representatives of Uganda and Rwanda in
today’s meeting.
The political developments in the region during the
past six months have remained on track, thus aiding
the implementation of the Framework. The region
was witness to peaceful elections in the Republic of
the Congo, the Central African Republic and Zambia.
Those events reflect the peoples’ faith in democratic
institutions and elections. The leaders have pursued
the path of dialogue and have been instrumental in
strengthening bilateral relations. That is evident in
the purposeful engagements among the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda. The
African Union Peace and Security Council has also
decided to remove Burundi from its agenda, reflecting
the improved situation. The regional and subregional
organizations have also held several important
meetings, including the ICGLR summit and the
Southern African Development Community summit.
We welcome these developments.
While political stability is a necessary condition
to address common challenges, the interlinkages of
security and socioeconomic factors cutting across the
region need a sustained and well-coordinated approach.
In that regard, let me make some observations.
First, threats from armed groups remains the main
cause of insecurity in many countries of the region,
particularly in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Terrorist groups have also begun exploiting the
vulnerability of armed groups. This issue requires the
serious consideration of the international community.
We believe that it can be addressed only through the
extension of effective State authority and institutions
promoting the rule of law. Towards that end, the
strengthening of security and police forces remains
critical. The onus lies predominantly with the concerned
Member State that bears the fundamental responsibility
to protect its citizens. The international community and
the United Nations should continue assisting the efforts
of these countries to address the security challenges.
The porous international border in the region
remains a major impediment in combating the armed
groups. It is well known that illegally exploited natural
resources are traded across borders, and weapons are
brought in exchange. Given the nature of the problem,
security cooperation between countries is important. In
that regard, we welcome high-level regional diplomacy
and the reinvigoration of bilateral mechanisms to
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

strengthen border control, as well as the sharing of
information and intelligence and the development of
border infrastructure. We also note the progress in the
ICGLR’s Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism and
look forward to the convening of the tenth Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation (PSC) Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region.
The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation and resettlement (DDRRR) of former
combatants have delivered mixed results so far.
Slow movement on that front can demoralize and
disincentivize prospective combatants. Therefore, the
implementation of DDRRR programmes need to be
expedited. In that context, we welcome the efforts of
the Contact and Coordination Group, under the PSC
Framework, to identify and implement non-military
measures in order to address the problem of
armed groups.
The DDRRR process presupposes a political
understanding or agreement between State authorities
and armed groups, which in turn depends on the level
of trust and confidence. The door for inclusive dialogue
in a spirit of reconciliation must always be kept open.
We welcome the announcement of a ceasefire by the
Government of the Central African Republic and
look forward to an inclusive process. We particularly
commend the persistent role played by the ICGLR,
under the chairmanship of President of Angola, in
shaping a positive outlook in the Central African
Republic through its mini-summits — which serves as
a useful model for regional mediation efforts.
The illicit exploitation, trafficking and trade of
natural resources have contributed to armed conflict
in many parts of the resource-rich Great Lakes region.
We believe that existing systems and efforts at the
regional level need be strengthened further in order
to address the issue. The effective implementation
of the ICGLR Regional Initiative against the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources, which includes a
regional certification mechanism for minerals, must be
supported and expanded. In that regard, we welcome
the high-level regional workshop on natural resources,
held recently in Khartoum. Institution-building and
regulatory compliance need to be emphasized and
pursued at the local and regional levels. That is how
international partners and the United Nations can
support ICGLR efforts. It may be difficult to discuss
investment and participation of the private sector

S/PV. 8884

and international financial institutions in the mining
and extraction sector without addressing these
fundamental issues.
Lastly, an overarching element related to this
discussion is livelihood. The abundance of natural
resources in the region should provide an immediate
solution. Unfortunately much more remains to be done
in that regard.
The Great Lakes region is at the cusp of a potential
transformation. The countries of the region are
making sustained and determined efforts to overcome
these challenges and need steady support from the
international community. The international community
and the United Nations need to work with them in line
with their national priorities.
India has close bilateral relationships with all
countries in the Great Lakes region. A key driver of
those relationships is the people-to-people contact
that has existed for many years, with a large Indian
diaspora in the region. We have collaborated through
expert exchanges and training and capacity-building
programmes, and have enhanced support for postconflict reconstruction in the region. India is cognizant
of the importance of peace and security in the
region’s development, and we remain steadfast in our
commitment to the region.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Kenya for using its presidency to shine a
spotlight on the Great Lakes region and for encouraging
renewed commitments from the Security Council to
seek sustainable solutions to the drivers of conflict
in the region. Let me also thank Special Envoy
Xia, Ambassador Caholo and Mrs. Pobee for their
briefings today.
I will focus my intervention on three issues:
regional relations, the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and natural resources.
First, the United Kingdom remains deeply
committed to promoting long-term peace and stability
in the Great Lakes. All parties should prioritize
promoting dialogue and strengthening trust in order
to reduce the threat of armed groups in Great Lakes.
We strongly welcome improved bilateral relations
between the States of the region and encourage the
continuation of regular bilateral communication,
including at the level of Heads of State and with the
United Nations, particularly around insecurity in the

21-2970023/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United
Kingdom thanks Special Envoy Xia for his work and
stands ready to assist him in supporting dialogue
processes and confidence-building. In that regard,
we urge regional leaders to attend relevant meetings
in person whenever possible in order to enable frank
exchanges on the common challenges facing the region.
Secondly, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned about the security and humanitarian
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which continues to deteriorate despite the state
of siege in North Kivu and Ituri provinces. I reiterate
our call on the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to ensure that the state of siege remains
transparent and time-limited and that it is implemented
with respect for human rights and humanitarian law. The
United Kingdom recognizes the launch of the Contact
and Coordination Group on non-military measures
as an important step towards enhanced security
cooperation in the region. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Group’s operational
cell be established swiftly in order to ensure effective
implementation of its action plan.
Thirdly, the concept note (S/2021/874, annex)
for today’s meeting and its many interventions have
identified the illegal exploitation and trade in natural
resources as a driver of conflict and instability. We
thank Kenya for successfully leading on the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2021/19 on this issue.
We also congratulate the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, the Office of the Special Envoy
and the Government of the Sudan on convening the
high-level workshop in Khartoum, where participants
agreed on a coherent approach to addressing the illegal
exploitation and trade in natural resources. The United
Kingdom encourages regional Governments to play their
part by ramping up national efforts to tackle corruption
and improve the rule of law and domestic taxation.
We are deeply concerned that the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
on hold since August. That has prevented the Group
from providing their concrete and actionable reporting
on illicit smuggling of natural resources in the region,
which is of enormous value to regional and international
actors dedicated to tackling that issue.
In conclusion, in addition to continuing to focus
on natural resource exploitation, let me highlight
the importance of also discussing and addressing
24/32

20/10/2021

other priority areas, including human rights, good
governance, freedom of expression and civil liberties,
in order to reduce conflict and promote peace in the
Great Lakes region.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I welcome you, Foreign Minister Omamo, as you
preside over today’s meeting, and thank Special Envoy
Huang Xia; Executive Secretary Caholo and Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee for their briefings.
I also welcome Mr. António, Foreign Minister of
Angola; Mr. Ibalanky Ekolomba, High Representative
of the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the representatives of Uganda, Burundi and
Rwanda to today’s meeting.
The overall situation in the Great Lakes region has
been improving for some time now. Several countries
have held general elections and progress has been
made in the peace processes in the Central African
Republic, the Sudan and South Sudan. Burundi has
been successfully removed from the agendas of the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Cross-border security incidents in
the region have been on the decline. Rapprochement
and enhanced cooperation have gained momentum.
There is now a window of opportunity for peace and
development in the region.
As a good friend and partner of the countries
of the Great Lakes region, China welcomes that
development and congratulates those countries. We
hope that all parties will build consensus and continue
to deepen cooperation in an effort to implement the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
with a view to achieving broad-based and lasting peace,
development and prosperity as soon as possible.
I would like to underscore the following points.
First, it is important to maintain cooperation
efforts and to continue to improve relations among the
countries of the region. Enhancing mutual political
trust and strengthening relations are effective ways
to improve the situation in the Great Lakes region.
Countries of the region have recently conducted
intensive, high-level consultations and signed a number
of cooperation agreements. They are now striving to
build good-neighbourly relations, which are welcomed.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda have held meetings
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

of security and intelligence services and established
the contact and coordination group on non-military
measures, thereby making major headway in the area of
regional security cooperation. China deeply appreciates
the efforts of the countries of the region and encourages
all parties to continue to deepen cooperation in order to
provide high-level guidance and political assistance in
an effort to improve the situation in the region.
We look forward to the upcoming tenth high-level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, which
provides an important opportunity to promote the
implementation of the Framework document.
Secondly, it is essential to adhere to a developmentoriented approach and strive to eliminate the root
causes of conflict. Poverty and underdevelopment lead
to tensions over resources and trigger conflicts and
confrontation, which are major drivers of protracted
wars in the region. Countries of the region should
strictly regulate the exploitation and utilization of
natural resources, strengthen regional cooperation
so as to combat their illegal exploitation and trade,
and cut off sources of illicit profit for armed groups.
China supports the countries of the region in
turning their resource advantages into development
advantages by helping their people gain employment,
eradicating poverty, accelerating industrialization and
modernization, enhancing the capacity for independent
development and innovation and promoting peace with
development, all in a legal way.
China welcomes the positive outcome of the
Khartoum workshop on natural resources and looks
forward to the successful holding of the second Great
Lakes Investment and Trade Conference, coordinated
by the Special Envoy.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has had a severe
impact on the region. The current regional vaccination
rate stands at only 6 per cent. The International Monetary
Fund estimates that it will be difficult for countries
of the region to restore their pre-pandemic per capita
income before 2025. China calls on the international
community to increase vaccine assistance to countries
of the region and to take pragmatic debt relief and
development assistance measures in order to support
the pandemic response and speed up reconstruction.
Since the outbreak of the pandemic, China has provided
several batches of anti-epidemic supplies and vaccines
to the Great Lakes region. Some 12 countries in the
region use Chinese vaccines.

S/PV. 8884

Thirdly, we must strengthen coordination for
action and jointly implement the new United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention
and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region and
action plan. China welcomes the fact that the Special
Envoy has formulated a new strategy and action plan
after fully considering the views of countries of the
region, which we believe will guide the United Nations
in its comprehensive response to regional challenges.
The international community must provide the
necessary financial support for the implementation
of the new Strategy and action plan. United Nations
agencies on the ground, the African Union and the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region
must cooperate closely in that regard and, together,
transform the vision into practical results.
China welcomes the establishment of the high-level
Senior Policy Group by United Nations agencies in the
region and believes that it will help build synergies.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
is currently implementing its drawdown strategy.
China encourages the Office of the Special Envoy and
MONUSCO to strengthen coordination and cooperation
on the implementation of the two strategies, eliminate
drivres of regional instability through comprehensive
measures and build a solid foundation for the realization
of lasting peace in the region.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
External Relations of the Republic of Angola.
Mr. António (Angola): I would like to acknowledge
the presence today of our dear friend the Minister of
Overseas Development Aid and Diaspora of Ireland, as
well as of my dear brother Claude Ibalanky Ekolomba,
High Representative of the President of the Democratic
Republic of Congo.
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Madam President, and, through you, the Government
of the Republic of Kenya on the country’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October.
On behalf of His Excellency Mr. João Manuel
Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the Republic of
Angola, in his capacity as Chair of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region, I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the Council for
the invitation extended me to participate in today’s
important high-level ministerial Security Council

21-2970025/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

debate on the theme “Supporting the renewed
commitment of the Great Lakes countries in seeking
sustainable solutions to the root causes and drivers of
conflict”. We wish the Council fruitful deliberations
aimed at finding lasting solutions to the problems of
the Great Lakes region.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes region, my dear friend
Huang Xia, while joining my voice to his appeal for
more vaccines in the region.
I would also like to thank the Executive Secretary
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), Mr. João Samuel Caholo, and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, my dear
sister Mrs. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee, for their very
informative briefings touching on pertinent and critical
realities in the Great Lakes region.
The Republic of Angola assumed the chairmanship
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region on 20 November 2020 and embarked on a path
of redynamizing and strengthening the Conference to
enhance its capacity to address the challenges of peace,
security, stability and development in the region, with
the support and collaboration of bilateral as well as
multilateral partners, namely, the African Union, the
European Union and the United Nations.
The Angolan chairmanship’s strategic plan
is anchored on the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes region of 15 December
2006 and governed by the principles of international
law, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and the Constitutive Act of the African Union. In that
context, the Government of Angola remains committed
to a regional approach for the effective implementation
of its strategic plan, as well as the United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention
and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region,
in line with the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We believe that the full implementation
of that agreement is a sine qua non condition for
resolving the deep-seated causes of the conflicts and
obstacles that continue to undermine progress towards
socioeconomic development and regional integration.
That being said, and as aptly pointed out in the
concept note prepared for this debate (S/2021/874,
annex), we cannot help but note and welcome the
notable progress made in the Great Lakes region over
26/32

20/10/2021

the past few years, occasioned by the peaceful transfers
of power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi, including the signing and implementation
of peace agreements in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan and the Sudan.
However, despite the achievements under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework agreement, some
challenges still need to be overcome. Those include the
illicit exploitation of natural resources, tense relations
between some countries of the region, a high number
of refugees and internally displaced persons, violations
of human rights, humanitarian issues and the growing
terrorist threat in the subregion.
Angola remains strongly committed to the central
role that preventive diplomacy plays in conflict
resolution in the Great Lakes region and the urgent need
to place the Great Lakes region on the path of sustainable
development through the promotion of investments and
the increased participation of international financial
institutions and the private sector in order to improve
the livelihood of the people.
Angola, as Chair of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, convened, respectively, on
20 April and 16 September, the second and third minisummits for the revitalization of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. At the second summit, it was decided that a
working group, co-chaired by the Foreign Ministers of
Angola and Rwanda, would be created to implement, in
collaboration with the Central African authorities, the
recommendations from the second summit following
consultations with armed groups and the Government
of the Central African Republic.
During the third mini-summit, the Heads of State
approved a joint road map for peace in the Central
African Republic. That road map includes, among
other issues, the continuation of consultations with
the leaders of armed groups to renounce violence, a
ceasefire declaration by the Government of the Central
African Republic and the launch of the activities of
the working group created at the second summit. As
a result of the road map adopted at the Luanda minisummit, His Excellency President Faustin Archange
Touadera announced a unilateral ceasefire across the
country on 15 October. We urge all parties to respect
the ceasefire and constructively engage, through an
inclusive political dialogue, in the implementation of
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV. 8884

the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic signed in 2019.

to bear in the formulation of adequate responses and
mitigation measures.

We also take this opportunity to recall the request
made to the Security Council by His Excellency
Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of
the Republic of Angola, in his capacity as Chair of the
ICGLR, at its 8802nd meeting held on 23 June (see
S/PV.8802) regarding the need to lift the arms embargo
on the Central African Republic.

In that regard, the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which has one of the highest
concentration of minerals and precious metals,
represents a multidimensional challenge for the
economic and human development of affected countries
and the region as a whole. A renewed commitment
is therefore required to put the Great Lakes region
back on the path to sustainable development. Strong
leadership, political will, strong and viable institutions
and State-building are essential prerequisites to ensure
the effective participation of citizens and communities
in socioeconomic and political choices, the choice of
decentralization service providers, transparency in the
public sector and financial management. Sustaining
peace is an important objective to be achieved through
open dialogue among all stakeholders.

(spoke in French)
While we believe that President Gonçalves
Lourenço’s request remains valid, we are concerned by
the existence in the region of fragile State institutions,
including defence and security forces, at a time when we
are witnessing the proliferation of terrorism throughout
Africa and the illicit trafficking of natural resources,
which constitutes a major source of financing for
armed groups.
(spoke in English)
As part of the high-level diplomatic initiatives in the
region to strengthen cooperation in security matters, a
Contact and Coordination Group has been established
by Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda. The Group is tasked
with coordinating the implementation of non-military
measures to complement military operations against
negative forces in the region.
The establishment of the Contact and Coordination
Group is the result of a consensus between the military
and civilian intelligence services of countries of the
Great Lakes region on the need for a comprehensive
approach in the fight against illegal armed groups.
We are confident that that initiative is an important
step towards reducing the threat posed by armed
groups. It cannot be overemphasized that the success
of the Contact and Coordination Group will depend
on the level of commitment and engagement of all
countries involved.
The Great Lakes region has been plagued by
conflict and political instability for decades. Evidence
points to the illicit exploitation and trade of natural
resources as one of the key drivers of instability.
Angola joins its voice to those speakers who have
already elaborated profoundly on that very issue. It is
therefore of fundamental importance that the nexus
between natural resources and conflict be brought

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that Angola
will continue its efforts under its chairmanship of the
ICGLR to consolidate peace and conflict prevention
and resolution in the Great Lakes region, while working
in close cooperation, consultation and coordination
with all stakeholders, to promote a shared vision in
addressing the complex challenges of peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region.
The President: I now call on the High Representative
of the President of the Republic and Coordinator of the
National Monitoring Mechanism of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ibalanky Ekolomba (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to perform the pleasant duty of conveying to you,
Madam President, my delegation’s satisfaction to see
the Security Council presided over for the month of
October by the Republic of Kenya — a country with
which the Democratic Republic of Congo enjoys
excellent relations, characterized by mutual trust and
esteem. I thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this important Security Council meeting on
the implementation of Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, also known as the Addis Ababa
Framework agreement. This meeting provides us with
a propitious opportunity to share our views on the
Framework agreement and concur on the necessary
measures for achieving the goals of peace, stability and

21-2970027/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

development for the benefit of the peoples in this region
of Africa.
I welcome the report of the Secretary General
(S/2021/836), published on 30 September, pursuant
to resolution 2556 (2020), of 18 December 2020, on
the implementation of the commitments under the
Addis Ababa Framework agreement. I also welcome
the briefing by Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, on the
ongoing situation in the region, the persistent challenges,
the difficulties and obstacles that must be overcome and
the immense opportunities for achieving peace, which
the Security Council and all stakeholders must take
advantage of so that all the people of the Great Lakes
region can reap the benefits of peaceful coexistence.
I also thank His Excellency Mr. João Samuel Caholo,
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICLGR); Mrs. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa;
and my friend and boss, Mr. Téte António, Minister for
External Relations of the Republic of Angola, for their
participation and respective briefings at this meeting.
I would like to assure them of the importance that
my country attaches to the Addis Ababa Framework
agreement. My presence at this meeting is a reflection
of that importance and attests to the deep-seated
political will and firm resolve of the leadership of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to fully implement
all my country’s commitments under the agreement.
Despite the fact that challenges to be addressed remain,
outstanding efforts have been made and significant
results have been recorded in the implementation of
reforms emanating from national commitments.
As the Council is aware, my country continues
to confront the activities of local and foreign armed
groups, which pose a serious threat to peace and
stability in the region. In order to advance all efforts to
undo the systemic insecurity of more than 25 years in
the eastern part of the country, His Excellency President
Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo decreed a state of
siege, which has been in force since 6 May in Ituri and
North Kivu provinces. Pursuant to the constitutional
state of emergency, or state of siege, the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo are assuming
full responsibility for the administration and security
management of the provinces concerned, while at the
same time undertaking military operations.
28/32

20/10/2021

Significant progress has been made thanks to
the stage of siege, in particular the neutralization
of several hundred militia members; the surrender
of many members of the armed groups; the recovery
of weapons and munitions by Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo; the dismantling of
several networks involved in the illicit trafficking in
weapons, munitions and minerals and the resupply of
various products to the armed groups; the reclaiming
of several areas in the eastern part of the country
that were once occupied by rebels; the release of
many hostages previously held by the armed groups,
including the Allied Democratic Forces; the reopening
of several major roads previously under the control of
negative forces; and a significant decrease in raids on
the civilian population.
My country advocates a combination of military
and non-military measures to eradicate insecurity. We
take this opportunity to call on the Security Council
for its unequivocal support for the current state of siege
and other concurrent peace initiatives, including the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme, the effectiveness of the
implementation of which requires the support of both
bilateral and multilateral partners.
Council members will agree with me that building
peace in the eastern part of the country requires
addressing the root causes of armed violence, in
particular by combating the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and the trafficking in arms in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That requires the mobilization of the countries of the
region and the entire international community for more
meaningful implementation by stakeholders and parties
to the Framework agreement.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
determined to work with all the countries of the Great
Lakes region, which we would like to see live in
peace, stability and prosperity. To that end, in recent
months President Tshisekedi Tshilombo has engaged
the country in a dynamic of economic and security
cooperation, in particular with Uganda, Burundi and
Rwanda, as mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral before us. It is a matter of promoting economic
incentives for the sake of peace.
A rigorous analysis of the Addis Ababa agreement
brings to light the state of gridlock that must be
overcome in order to achieve its political goals and
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

related technical reforms, particularly as concerns
national commitments. That has prevented significant
progress in the fight against insecurity in the east of
my country.
In order to better focus on the political goal of
the Framework agreement and to promote clarity with
respect to the processes aimed at the achievement
of that goal, the Addis Ababa agreement national
oversight mechanism, which is under the authority of
the Head of State of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, has established peacebuilding and stabilization
programmes in the east of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region, generally known as road
maps. The goals of the programmes include, first, to
identify and tackle the root causes of recurrent armed
conflict; secondly, to strengthen local, provincial and
national capacities for conflict management; thirdly,
strengthen national cohesion; and, fourthly, strengthen
regional and international cooperation.
The peacebuilding and stabilization programmes
comprise two major fronts, namely, the resolution
of open and latent conflicts and peacebuilding. Here
we wish to call for the support of the international
community for the programme for peacebuilding and
stabilization in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region, which will be the
subject of broad-based consultations held on the basis
of an inclusive and participative approach.
Before concluding, I wish to reassure the Council
of my country’s determination to host the tenth highlevel meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of
the Framework agreement on 8 December, which will
be a hybrid meeting, held both in person in Kinshasa
and by video-teleconference. My country hopes that the
meeting will be not only ceremonial but will provide
fresh momentum to promote greater ownership of
the commitments undertaken under the Addis Ababa
Framework agreement.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
resolved to fully implement all its commitments. My
country calls for a strengthening of the dialogue so
as to ensure a better synchronization of the efforts to
be made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
bordering countries, regional partners and the rest of the
international community. That will make it possible to
lend greater momentum to the Addis Ababa agreement
and to ensure that it remains relevant.

S/PV. 8884

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): At the outset, Uganda
congratulates the Republic of Kenya on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. Allow me to extend regards from your
colleague, My Minister, the Honourable Jeje Odongo,
who could not be here. He sends his regards and assures
you, Madam President, of Uganda’s support for both
your presidency this month and your entire tenure on
the Council.
Let me also express my appreciation for the
briefings delivered by Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region,
with whom Uganda has been working closely;
Ambassador João Samuel Caholo, Executive Secretary
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
region; and my sister Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, for their very
insightful briefings.
Peace, security and stability in the Great Lakes
region is of vital interest to Uganda. Since the signing
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
in February 2013, the region has made a lot of progress
in advancing peace, security and stability. That is
illustrated by the recent positive developments in the
political transitions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi, and the implementation of peace
agreements in South Sudan, the Sudan and the Central
African Republic.
We need to seize this moment of optimism and build
on it to further improve bilateral relations and deal with
the root causes of conflict in the Great Lakes region.
The countries of the region and the wider international
community will find Uganda a willing partner in this
renewed optimism of cooperation and mutual trust in
our region.
Allow me to give an example of the relationship
between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as mentioned by the high representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has
significantly improved the normalization of bilateral
relations, increased trade, cross-coordination in dealing
with negative forces, especially the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), the official representative of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham in the Great Lakes region.
His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has found

21-2970029/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

a willing partner in his counterpart, His Excellency
Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi, to not only address security
challenges but to also invest in physical infrastructure
along our common borders, which has laid the
groundwork for the socioeconomic transformation
of that region, which is known for conflict. Our
President believes that improving infrastructure will
lead to improved trade, not only between Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo but the entire
region, and would be a catalyst for peace in the region.
Despite that notable progress, security challenges
remain, including, as I mentioned earlier, the ADF,
which has continued to commit terrorist acts against
the population of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its peacekeepers and remain a threat to the entire Great
Lakes region and the southern African region.
The Security Council is uniquely positioned to
decisively address that threat with a renewed focus on
total elimination and stopping the proceeds from the
illicit exploitation of, and the trade in, natural resources
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which gives
oxygen to that group and other negative forces.
It is critical that the United Nations, especially the
Council, recognize the key role played by subregional
and regional mechanisms in sustaining peace in the
Great Lakes region. I will mention the East African
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), in which Uganda
actively participates.
I wish also to recognize the vital role being played
by Angola as the Chair of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region not only in peacemaking
and promoting confidence among member States but
also in laying a solid foundation for socioeconomic
development. Angola can count on the support of
Uganda during its transformative chairmanship.
Let me emphasize the role that investments play in
our region. In that regard, Uganda supports the planned
investment conference set to take place in Kigali.
That is not a new idea. It was started when the former
President of Ireland, Mrs. Robinson, was the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We are glad
that we are finally seeing the fruits of this investment
conference, which, in mobilizing resources within the
region and beyond it, will be a catalyst for sustainable
peace in the region.
30/32

20/10/2021

Finally, Uganda is a strong supporter of regional
initiatives against the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. It is a signatory to the ICGLR Pact in
support of peace and stability in the region, which
contains the Protocol Against the Illegal Exploitation
of Natural Resources, and has ratified both the
Pact and the Protocol. The latter is a central tool for
establishing a regional certification mechanism whose
implementation is critical. Nevertheless, the Security
Council and the Panel of Experts should take note of
legitimate and legal cross-border trade.
Once again, Uganda congratulates Kenya, which
can count on our continued support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on the way in which you are presiding over
this meeting. At the same time, I would like to convey
the apologies of His Excellency Mr. Albert Shingiro,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Development
Cooperation of the Republic of Burundi, who
was prevented at the last minute from attending
today’s debate.
We would particularly like to thank Kenya for
convening this very important meeting. We would also
like to thank all the States members of the Security
Council for having removed Burundi from the Council’s
agenda. We take this opportunity to inform the Security
Council that Burundi has returned to peace and security
and that the Government that emerged from the 2020
elections has put in place a national programme to
capitalize on peace and social stability and promote
economic growth, a programme that is inspired by the
2018-2027 national development plan, which focuses
mainly on the six main priorities of the President of
the Republic, namely, good governance, public health,
agriculture and livestock, youth employability, social
protection, and peace and national reconciliation.
One of the major problems in the Great Lakes region
is the lack of funding to support economic development
programmes. We would like such funding, as there
is a very strong link between peace and development
in the region. But it should also be noted that climate
change is likely to negatively affect all peace efforts
by the United Nations, the African Union and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
21-29700

20/10/2021

The situation in the Great Lakes region

All efforts should therefore be focused on the search
for funding.
We welcome the efforts made by the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, which is based
in Bujumbura, to stabilize the region. Accordingly, we
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for all the work he is doing to achieve lasting
peace in the Great Lakes region. In particular, we
welcome the approach that has been used to develop the
regional strategy and its action plan. The participatory
process in its drafting predisposes the region to obtain
very positive results and, in the end, to restore peace
and security to it. We therefore support all the efforts
of the Special Envoy and call upon the international
community to also provide assistance so that his action
plan can be easily implemented.
Before concluding, we would like to promote the
Burundian model of reconciliation for a lasting peace.
We would also like to inform Council members that
Burundi is willing not only to contribute to peace
operations missions but also to serve in rapprochement
processes or in good offices missions to try to use its
peace-restoration model not just in the subregion, but
wherever the need for it arises.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Rwanda congratulates
the Republic of Kenya and you, Madam President, for
Kenya’s presidency of the Security Council during
this month and, more importantly, for organizing
today’s very important Council debate on supporting
the renewed commitment of the countries of the Great
Lakes region in seeking sustainable solutions to root
causes and drivers of conflict.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of Mr. Vincent Biruta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Rwanda, who could not
join today’s important debate owing to unavoidable
circumstances.
I thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa,
Mrs. Martha Pobee, the Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia, the Executive Secretary
of the International Conference of the Great Lake
Region (ICGLR), Mr. João Samuel Caholo, for their
very insightful briefings.

S/PV. 8884

I also wish to acknowledge the representatives of
the countries of the region and welcome in particular
the presence today of His Excellency Mr. Téte António,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola and, through him,
salute the leadership of Angola as the current President
of the ICGLR and the impressive efforts that Angola
has been making in support of peace and security in
the Great Lakes region. I also wish to acknowledge the
presence in this Chamber of the High Representative
of the President of the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Mr. Claude Ibalanky Ekolomba.
Today’s debate is taking place at a time when
the countries of our region are facing the full-blown
social and economic impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Despite these circumstances,
foreign and domestic “negative forces” operating in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo continue
to remain active. The recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/836) indicates that grave human rights
violations continue to take place in the Great Lakes
region, including in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Rwanda has faced as number of cross-border
attacks from negative forces that are illegally operating
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The most
recent attack occurred on 27 August, when members
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
crossed the border into Rwanda through the Rubavu
district before being neutralized. The illicit flows of
arms and ammunition and the ongoing recruitment of
new members by negative forces, as well as the illegal
exploitation of mineral resources, mean that those forces
are still able to organize and recruit new combatants,
supply equipment and continue to cause instability and
terrorize the local populations.
In that regard, we welcome the unilateral ceasefire
that was announced earlier this week by His Excellency
President Faustin Touadera. We heard from him earlier
this week regarding the insecurity and human rights
violations that continue to be caused by armed groups
that are still operating in the Central African Republic.
We hope that all goodwill partners, as well as the armed
groups that are parties to the peace agreement, will join
in respecting and supporting the ceasefire.
I wish to make the following three points to the
members of the Security Council.
First, for the Great Lakes region to realize its
potential for development and prosperity, peace and

21-2970031/32

S/PV.8884

The situation in the Great Lakes region

security remain the foundation. Unless the negative
forces operating in the region are neutralized, lasting
peace, development and prosperity will continue to be
either elusive or simply not sustained. Rwanda remains
committed to making its optimum contribution to peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region in
close cooperation with all members of the region.
Secondly, the strengthening and revitalization of
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation, as well as resettlement, of combatants
is central to achieving lasting peace in the region
and severing the networks of supplies of equipment,
including arms and ammunition, that continue to fuel
the armed groups and negative forces.
Thirdly, increased security and development
cooperation among States members of the Great
Lakes region will make an immense contribution.
The good news is that that is happening, and it
should be encouraged and supported practically and
effectively by the Security Council, as well as the
international community.

32/32

20/10/2021

An important part of regional cooperation on
socioeconomic development, as well as security, is
cross-border trade and investment, which promote
confidence-building and trust, while enabling
peacebuilding efforts to take root. In that regard,
Rwanda is set to host the second Great Lakes Investment
and Trade Conference, which will take place in Kigali
on 22 and 24 November under the theme “Navigating
a COVID-impacted world — fostering resilience and
sustainability through cross-border investment, trade
and accelerated regional integration”. The Great
Lakes Investment and Trade Conference is a followup to another conference that was held in Kinshasa in
2016. The objective remains to mobilize private-sector
investment in the region to harness the extensive natural
resources and domains of the region and the existing
economic opportunities. Private-sector investment
has the potential to contribute to the collective
efforts towards the sustainable peace, stability and
transformation of the Great Lakes region. Legitimate
trade and investment are possible in the Great Lakes
region if we all work together.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

21-29700
