A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/190
4 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 97 (e)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/628/Add.5)]
52/190. Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/177 of 16 December 1996, in which it endorsed the Istanbul Declaration on
Human Settlements1 and the Habitat Agenda,2 adopted by the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) at Istanbul, on 14 June 1996,
Cognizant of the importance of maintaining the momentum already generated at the national, regional
and international levels for the implementation of measures designed to address the economic, social and
environmental consequences of rapid urbanization,
Stressing the need to improve conditions of shelter, access to safe drinking water, adequate sanitation
and basic social services in both rural and urban areas,
Recalling paragraph 218 of the Habitat Agenda, in which the Conference requested the General
Assembly to consider holding a special session in the year 2001 for an overall review and appraisal of the
implementation of the outcome of Habitat II, and paragraph 15 of resolution 51/177, in which the Assembly
reaffirmed that a decision on the matter should be taken at its fifty-second session,
Noting the delay in the submission of the report of the Secretary-General on the final comprehensive
and in-depth assessment of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) with a view to its
revitalization, as called for in paragraph 19 of resolution 51/177, and stressing that that has constrained
consideration by the Assembly of those issues,

1

A/CONF.165/14, chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.

2

Ibid., annex II.

98-76597

/...

A/RES/52/190
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 51/225 of 3 April 1997, and noting with concern the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services,3 in which serious concern is expressed about the financial irregularities in the
Centre, and recognizing that the serious management and financial situation at the Centre should be addressed
as a matter of urgency,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Commission on Human Settlements on its sixteenth session4 and
on the implementation of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000,5 and the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II);6
2. Requests the Secretary-General to address urgently the serious management and financial situation
at the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to meet its responsibilities in the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda,2 in accordance with Commission on Human Settlements resolution
16/8;7
3. Urges the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to take
further action towards the reform of the administrative and financial management of the Centre pursuant to
the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services,3 as well as the relevant reports of the
United Nations Board of Auditors and Commission on Human Settlements resolutions 16/8 and 16/19,7 and
decisions 16/28 and 16/29;8
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at its fifty-third session the comprehensive and indepth assessment of the Centre with a view to its revitalization called for in paragraph 19 of resolution
51/177, taking into account Commission resolution 16/8 and other relevant resolutions adopted by the
Commission at its sixteenth session;
5. Urges all Governments and other actors concerned with human settlements and urban management
issues, such as local authorities, relevant intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations,
parliamentarians, the private sector, trade unions, academicians and other community groups, to implement
fully and effectively the Habitat Agenda;
6. Invites Governments to consider, where appropriate, including in their delegations to future sessions
of the Commission, in accordance with the specific conditions of each country, representatives of local
authorities and the relevant actors of civil society, particularly the private sector, non-governmental
organizations and research organizations, in the field of adequate shelter for all and sustainable human
settlements development;
7. Affirms that, in a rapidly urbanizing world, the pivotal role of local authorities in the implementation
of the Habitat Agenda should be recognized and enhanced;

3

A/52/339, annex.

4

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/52/8).

5

Ibid., Supplement No.8 (A/52/8/Add.1).

6

A/52/181-E/1997/77.

7

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/52/8), annex I,
sect. A.2.
8

Ibid, sect. B.
/...

A/RES/52/190
Page 3

8. Requests all relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, including the regional
commissions, and invites the Bretton Woods institutions, to support fully the effective implementation of the
Habitat Agenda, at all levels, and to enhance their cooperation for that purpose, with a view to promoting
an integrated, interrelated and coherent implementation of, and coordinated follow-up to, the outcomes of
United Nations conferences;
9. Stresses that the full and effective implementation of the Habitat Agenda, in particular in all
developing countries, especially those in Africa and the least developed countries, will require the
mobilization of additional financial resources from various sources at the national and international levels and
more effective development cooperation in support of national efforts in order to promote assistance for
shelter and human settlements activities;
10. Invites all Governments and the international community to consider providing further support to
the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation in its activities, taking into account the need
to continue to improve its effectiveness;
11. Invites the Commission on Human Settlements to promote the use of a set of key indicators to be
developed further by the Centre and used by Governments, as appropriate, for national and local monitoring
and evaluation of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;
12. Decides to hold a special session of the General Assembly in the year 2001 for an overall review
and appraisal of the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II), the modalities of which will be decided on at its fifty-third session;
13. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider devoting one high-level segment before the
year 2001 to human settlements and the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the sub-item entitled
"Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)".
77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
