S/2015/579

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 July 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UNMIK,
and developments related thereto, from 16 April to 15 July 2015.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo in
line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political developments
3.
The main political developments in Kosovo during the reporting period
revolved around the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina at prime ministerial level, important legislative processes and the eventual
failure of the Assembly of Kosovo to approve a constitutional amendment for the
establishment of a specialist court.
4.
Further progress was made in the implementation of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April 2013, although full
implementation of some of its key provisions remained pending.
5.
A constitutional amendment aimed at enabling the establishment of a specialist
court was submitted to the Legislative Committee of the Kosovo Assembly, and
forwarded to the Assembly for adoption on 13 May. The court will try cases
investigated by the European Union Special Investigative Task Force in the context
of war crimes and organized crime allegations contained in the report of January
15-12661 (E)

100815

*1512661*

S/2015/579

2011 of the Special Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human
Rights of the Council of Europe, Dick Marty. An Assembly session was first
convened on 29 May to take action on the proposed amendment, but was postponed
to 19 June, when the government submitted, for information purposes, two related
draft laws. At that time, the government informed the Assembly that the draft laws
would be formally submitted upon the adoption of the constitutional amendment.
On 26 June, the amendment was put to a vote in the Assembly, and received
75 votes in favour, short of the required two -thirds majority of 80 votes (including
two thirds of non-majority community representatives); seven members voted
against and two abstained. The negative votes and abstentions were cast by
members of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, led by the Deputy Prime Minister,
Hashim Thaçi. Opposition parties took part in the lively debate but chose not to
participate in the vote. The Prime Minister, Isa Mustafa, the European Union and
representatives of most of the key recognizing countries expressed disappointment
at the Kosovo Assembly’s failure to adopt the amendment. By the end of the
reporting period, uncertainty prevailed on the timing and outcome of a possible
further vote, while consultations were continuing to enable a successful repeat vote.
6.
Belgrade and Pristina continued their high-level engagement in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue, their representatives meeting in Brussels on 21 April,
23 June and 29 June, under the auspices of the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica Mogher ini. The parties
discussed mutual progress in implementation, including on the integration of the
judiciary and civil protection personnel. Arrangements were also made for the
creation of two new administrative boundary line crossing points, as well as for the
harmonization of vehicle insurance policies. The discussions also covered extant
issues in the areas of telecommunications and energy, and examined possible
agreement on the use of the main bridge in Mitrovica for vehicular traffic. Progress
was also made towards the establishment of the association/community of Serb majority municipalities, although differences remained on the legal framework and
the range of functions of the community/association. Both parties reaffirmed their
commitment to maintaining efforts to resolving these differences.
7.
On 23 April, following political discussions with Kosovo Albanian ruling
parties, Kosovo Serb representatives from the Serbian Civic Initiative resumed full
participation in the Kosovo government and Assembly a fter an absence of two
months, enabling the governing coalition to proceed with pressing matters,
including promoting its extensive legislative programme. After being nominated by
the Serbian Civic Initiative on 24 April, Dalibor Jevtić was appointed by Pr ime
Minister Mustafa as the new Minister for Communities and Return.
8.
On 9 May, the Serbian and Kosovo Chambers of Commerce met in
Graçanicë/Gračanica and signed an annex to an existing memorandum of
understanding intended to promote increased commercial opportunities, including
through an exchange of representatives. Following three further meetings of the two
Chambers in June, the respective representatives have been designated and are
expected to establish their offices soon in the coming period.
9.
Amid other legislative activity, on 25 May, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted a
resolution establishing its geographic demarcation with Montenegro. In the
resolution the Assembly recognized the delineation as corresponding to the
1974 Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia’s former administrative boundary, in
harmony with current Kosovo legislation.

2/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

10. On 27 May, the government of Kosovo approved a package of constitutional
amendments on the transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo
Armed Forces. The amendments matched those approved by the preceding
government, as well as by the Constitutional Court in 2014.
11. On 30 April, the European Commission adopted the stabilization and
association agreement proposal for Kosovo, which now require s approval by the
European Council before being forwarded to the European Parliament for
endorsement. The government continued discussions with the European Union on
visa liberalization and, early in June, submitted its latest report on progress towards
meeting the requisite criteria.
12. Significant steps were taken on regional cooperation in socioeconomic
development and security. On 21 April, six Prime Ministers of the Western Balkans
met in Brussels, in the presence of European Union Commissioners Johan nes Hahn
and Violeta Bulc, and agreed on steps to improve the regional transport network, a
key factor in regional economic growth. The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their
commitment to the maintenance of good-neighbourly relations, regional
cooperation, and progress towards European integration.
13. On 19 and 20 May, the first regional summit on countering violent extremism
was hosted in Tirana, bringing together interior ministers and security officials from
the Western Balkans, including the Kosovo Minister of the Interior, Skënder Hyseni.
14. On 26 May, the President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, participated in the
annual summit of the South-East European Cooperation Process in Tirana, where
she highlighted current security challenges, including radicaliza tion and extremism,
and called for further regional cooperation in addressing security -related matters.
15. On 27 May, the Prime Minister of Serbia, Aleksander Vučić, paid an historic
State visit to Albania, the first at this level, and held a range of talks on subjects
including joint infrastructure projects and the two countries ’ respective steps
towards European Union integration.
16. Following the major violent incidents involving persons from Kosovo in
Kumanovo, in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, on 9 and 10 May, the
Kosovo police on 15 May conducted a search operation at 38 locations in Kosovo,
questioning persons and gathering evidence. Prime Minister Mustafa and some other
Pristina leaders condemned those who had been involved in the a ctivities leading to
the incidents, and called for international support for the investigation. On 25 and
26 May, the Association of War Veterans of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
participated in well-publicized burial ceremonies, mainly in the “Martyrs
Cemetery”, for those Kosovo residents killed during the Kumanovo incident, some
of the participants wearing KLA uniforms and insignia. Some members of the
Kosovo Assembly, municipal officials and representatives of some political parties
also participated and delivered statements. On 7 July, Kosovo police arrested a
citizen of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on an international warrant
issued by the latter country for involvement in the May incidents. The suspect, who
had previously escaped from police custody in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, was apprehended in Letnicë/Letnica, Viti/Vitina municipality, near the
crossing point between Kosovo and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

15-12661

3/22

S/2015/579

III. Northern Kosovo
17. On 24 April, after protracted discussions with Pristina officials, all four
Municipal Assemblies adopted revised budgets, which foresaw salaries in the health
and education sectors in conformity with Kosovo law, but excluding salaries for
those health and education workers who are being paid by Serbia. Municipal bank
accounts were unblocked on 15 May. Some municipalities, however, continued to
face difficulties executing their budgets, including on account of a lack of
familiarity with the government of Kosovo’s public finance software, which in turn
lacks instructions in the Serbian language. By the end of the reporting period, the
mayors of all municipalities had signed the required memoranda of understanding
with relevant line ministries to access more than half of the €1 5 million allocated
within the Kosovo budget for capital investment projects. The prolonged delay in
finalizing the municipal budgets had some negative impact on negotiations for
capital investment funds. The mayors of the four northern municipalities also
participated in a series of discussions with relevant Kosovo ministries regarding the
European Union-sponsored development fund for northern Kosovo.
18. The mayors of South and North Mitrovica continued to engage in practical
cooperation on critical issues affecting their respective constituencies, including
construction activities in the ethnically mixed area of Brdjani/Kroi i Vitakut, and in
the aftermath of security incidents that occurred in Mitrovica from 9 to 13 April. On
30 April, the mayors agreed to refer construction activities to a high-level
committee and to introduce a moratorium on construction in the neighbourhood
until the committee had considered the matter. On 3 June, a working group of the
Interministerial Commission for Return was established by the government of
Kosovo in order to address the issue. Despite the moratorium, a Kosovo Albanian
attempted to resume construction on 22 June but, after intervention by both mayors,
activities were halted and remain suspended. On 14 July, the Working Group for the
Return of Displaced Persons in Brdjani/Kroi i Vitakut had its first meeting. The
Mayor of North Mitrovica’s proposal to make the Kosovo police part of the group
was unanimously adopted and a three-month timeline to resolve the issue was set.
19. On 10 June, the remains of Isa Boletini, an Albanian historic figure, were
reburied in Zvečan/Zveçan municipality. After several months of coordinated
preparations, in which the Mother Superior of the Serbian Orthodox Monastery of
Sokolica participated, and despite some apprehension in both communities, the
event proceeded without incident, thanks largely to the deterrent measures taken by
KFOR and other actors.
20. UNMIK continued to facilitate meetings between Serbian -run and Kosovo
forestry agencies to address illegal logging and to discuss trade in timber between
the northern municipalities and the rest of Kosovo, which is currently hampered by
a lack of integration of the forestry sector into Kosovo ’s institutional framework.
21. As part of its confidence-building projects, UNMIK implemented several
initiatives to foster dialogue among the communities in northern Kosovo. These
included a project, co-funded by the municipality of South Mitrovica and KFOR,
called “Keep Mitrovica rivers clean”, in which 45 people, including 6 women, from
different communities in North and South Mitrovica came together in May and June
to remove over 600 tons of waste from four rivers in the region. The project also
raised awareness on environmental issues in local schools and events celebrating
Earth Day and Kosovo Cleaning Day.

4/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

IV. Security
22. The security situation in Kosovo remained generally stable: a number of
largely peaceful anti-government protests were held, and there were several
incidents affecting minority communities.
23. On 19 April, Kosovo police proactively intervened to prevent an escalation of
scuffles in North Mitrovica between two small groups of Kosovo Albanian and
Kosovo Serb juveniles. On 28 April, as a result of a joint Kosovo police -Kosovo
Security Force search operation, authorized by KFOR, the body of a Kosovo
Albanian juvenile, who had disappeared in North Mitrovica on 10 Apri l, was
discovered by Kosovo Security Force divers in the Ibër/Ibar River near
Grabovac/Graboc village in Zvečan/Zveçan municipality. On 30 April, the mayors
of both North and South Mitrovica attended the funeral held in North Mitrovica. In
the evening of 11 June, in North Mitrovica, shots were fired at the premises of the
news portal KoSSev, which resulted in material damages.
24. South of the Ibër/Ibar River, several anti-government protests passed off
peacefully. On 18 April, opposition parties organized a rally attended by 1,500
people protesting, inter alia, against the establishment of the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities. On 28 May, approximately 3,000 people
temporarily blocked the main road in Skenderaj/Srbica in protest at the Drenica
verdicts (see para. 38 below). On 29 May and 17 June, some 250 to 300 protesters,
including members of the Association of War Veterans of KLA, rallied in Pristina
against the establishment of the specialist court. On 20 June, an attempted blockade
of the main Pristina-Skopje road near Kaçanik/Kačanik by about 150 members of
the Association of War Veterans was forcibly dispersed by the Kosovo police using
tear gas. Several protesters were injured, including the Head of the Council for the
Protection of the Rights of KLA Fighters.
25. With regard to incidents affecting non-majority communities, the Pejë/Peć
region remained the most affected. While in April and May a spike in incidents
targeting Kosovo Serb returnees was reported in Klinë/Klina municipa lity, totalling
13 incidents, in June the highest number of such incidents was recorded in Pejë/Peć
municipality, with 17 burglaries. In Klinë/Klina municipality, Kosovo police
increased patrols in affected areas and deployed additional police officers fro m
Pristina, including Kosovo Serb officers, to strengthen the capacity of the local
police force. However, no similar measures have yet been taken with regard to
Pejë/Peć. On 9 and 10 July, three incidents of concern affected the Kosovo Serb
community in Gorazhdevc/Goraždevac, Pejë/Peć municipality. Shots were fired at a
parked Belgrade-registered vehicle, owned by an internally displaced Kosovo Serb
from Gorazhdevc/Goraždevac; a monument dedicated to Kosovo Serb victims of the
1999 conflict and two Kosovo Serb youth killed on 11 August 2003 was damaged;
and the word hakmarrja (Albanian for “revenge”) was sprayed on the external wall
of a house owned by a Kosovo Serb. It remains unclear whether these incidents are
related and the perpetrators are still unkno wn. Representatives of the Kosovo
authorities promptly condemned these acts. On 14 July, in Gorazhdevc/Goraždevac
village, Pejë/Peć municipality, while approaching the scene of a burglary in
progress, a Kosovo police patrol came under fire from an automati c rifle by a
known fugitive. One police officer was wounded, and the search for the perpetrator
continues.

15-12661

5/22

S/2015/579

26. On 31 May, the Kosovo police discovered and defused an explosive device
some three kilometres from the ruins of the Holy Trinity Monastery in
Mushitishtë/Mušutište village, Suharekë/Suva Reka municipality. The incident
occurred immediately before a visit to the site by a group of some 100 Kosovo Serb
internally displaced persons to mark the feast of the Holy Trinity at the ruins of the
monastery. The Deputy Prime Minister, Branimir Stojanović, and the Minister for
Communities and Return also attended the liturgy.
27. The number of incidents affecting religious sites decreased slightly compared
with the previous reporting period. A total of 22 incidents affected religious sites, of
which nine affected Serbian Orthodox sites, four Islamic sites and four Roman
Catholic sites as well as five other cultural heritage sites.
28. On 11 July, three Kosovo Albanians were arrested near Badovc/Badovac
reservoir, which supplies water to Pristina, after Kosovo police found in their
vehicles masks, military uniforms and black flags bearing inscriptions in Arabic.
A Kosovo police counter-terrorism unit secured the lake perimeter and tests were
conducted to assess the safety of the water. The Kosovo Institute for Public Health
announced that no hazardous substances were detected. Later the same day, two
more Kosovo Albanian suspects were arrested in relation to the case. Two of the
five suspects had previously been arrested by Kosovo authorities on suspicion of
participation in activities in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. At the time,
however, they were released for lack of evidence.

V. Rule of law
29. UNMIK continued to monitor activities and exercise some responsibilities in
the area of the rule of law, and maintained technical cooperation with relevant
institutions in both Pristina and Belgrade. UNMIK continued to provide document certification services, both to Kosovo residents and at the request of c ountries which
do not recognize Kosovo, primarily for the certification of civil status and academic
and pension documents. A total of 857 such documents were processed from
16 April to 15 July 2015.
30. UNMIK continued to facilitate communications between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). During
the reporting period, UNMIK received 12 requests for international wanted notices
while six INTERPOL “red notices” have been issued. UNMIK processed 51 new
requests from Kosovo police and the Serbian Ministry of the Interior for verification
of documents and assistance in criminal investigations.
31. Progress has been made in implementing the European Union-facilitated
agreement on integration of the judiciary. By the deadline of 25 May,
112 candidates, the majority of whom are from former Serbian -sponsored judicial
structures, had applied for 48 judge and 25 prosecutor positions. Interviews of
candidates are under way. Vacancy announcements for support staff have not yet
been published, owing to disagreements between Belgrade and Pristina over the
management positions in the Basic Court and the Basic Prosecution Office of
Mitrovica as well as over the number of Kosovo Serb support staff to be integrated
in southern Kosovo. In addition, the Government of Serbia has yet to adopt
legislation regulating the pensions of the staff still employed in its institutions. This

6/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

has further delayed the resignation of Kosovo Serb judiciary staff and their
integration into the Kosovo system.
32. Some progress has also been observed with regard to the integration of civil
protection personnel in view of the deadline of 1 September set in the Belgrade Pristina agreement of 26 March. Under the agreement, Pristina is to integrate 483 of
the 751 employees registered in Belgrade’s records. The remainder will take early
retirement with full pensions. Serbia has yet to adopt the law regulating the status of
these civil protection staff. Nevertheless, 80 people have already been integrated
into the Kosovo Agency for Emergency Management. In addition, by 11 June, three
civil protection observation posts had been removed in the Leposaviq/Leposavić and
Zvečan/Zveçan municipalities, as provided for in the agreement. The sole remaining
post is located near the northern end of the main bridge in Mitrovica.
33. On 21 April, President Atifete Jahjaga appointed a new Chief State Prosecutor.
His stated priorities include combating organized crime, corruption and terrorism.
On 19 May, 41 new judges took the oath of office before the President. On 2 July,
the Assembly of Kosovo elected a new Ombudsperson for a non -extendable term of
five years.
34. On 7 May, the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo indicted 32 individuals
on terrorism charges, specifically allegations of joining, encouraging others to join
or recruiting persons to fight in the Syrian Arab Republic, or raising funds for the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. On 5 June, the trial against 11 of the
32 defendants started before the Basic Court of Pristina.
35. On 13 May, the Office of the State Prosecutor announced a decision by the
Kosovo Prosecutorial Council to establish a Department for War Crimes that will
function within the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo. There is currently only
one designated prosecutor in the Department, however.
36. On 14 May, the Kosovo Ministry of Justice, the European Union Office in
Kosovo/European Union Special Representative and EULEX co-signed a second
Compact on Rule of Law in Kosovo. The document reiterates the joint rule of law
objectives of the previous Compact, aimed at addressing issues of accountability,
corruption, inter-ethnic crimes, organized crime, gender balance, ethnic inclusion,
and development of the Kosovo witness protection system, as well as outstanding
property-related claims.
37. During the reporting period, the main trial in the case of Oliver Ivanović and
other defendants continued before a panel of EULEX international judges at the
Basic Court of Mitrovica. The testimonies of 34 prosecution witnesses have been
heard to date, and an additional 25 prosecution witnesses are scheduled to testify.
The detention on remand of the defendants, Oliver Ivanović and Dragoljub
Delibašić, was extended until 26 August and 4 September 2015, resp ectively. Oliver
Ivanović has been in detention on remand since 28 January 2014.
38. On 27 May, a panel of EULEX international judges at the Basic Court of
Mitrovica announced judgements in the Drenica I and II war crimes cases. In the
Drenica I case, Sami Lushtaku, current mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica, was found guilty
of murder and was sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment. Sylejman Selimi was found
guilty in both cases and was sentenced to an aggregate punishment of eight years ’
imprisonment. In total, 11 of the 15 defendants in the two Drenica cases were found
guilty.

15-12661

7/22

S/2015/579

39. On 12 June, the Appellate Panel of the Special Chamber of the Kosovo
Supreme Court, composed of three local judges and two international EULEX
judges, issued two split decisions in cases relating to ownership rights concerning
land within and outside the special protective zone of the Visoki Dečani Monastery.
The Appellate Panel upheld appeals filed by two socially owned enterprises, the
Privatization Agency of Kosovo and the municipality of Deçan/Dečane, thus setting
aside two previous judgements rendered by the Trial Panel of the Special Chamber
of the Supreme Court of Kosovo in December 2012, which were hailed at the time
as a sign of a maturing justice system in Kosovo. Those judgements had held that a
settlement reached among the parties was binding. However, the Appellate Panel
upheld the appeals against the jurisdiction of the Trial Panel to adjudicate the instant
case, despite the fact that the Trial Panel had rendered several dec isions in similar
cases in recent years. The cases were instead sent for retrial in the Deçan/Dečane
Branch of the Basic Court in Pejë/Peć. After almost 15 years of litigation, these
decisions further delay the resolution of the cases and have given rise t o serious
concerns about the capacity of the Kosovo judiciary to handle this and other socially
sensitive cases.
40. UNMIK held three coordination meetings with civil society on rule of law
issues in northern Kosovo during the reporting period, on 15 Apri l, 21 May and
25 June. A number of rule of law-related activities emerged from those meetings,
including assistance to the North Mitrovica Detention Centre to continue with
vocational training for inmates, and facilitation of cooperation between civil soc iety
and government institutions.
41. As at 25 June, a total of 1,654 persons are listed as missing from the Kosovo
conflict, and UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress on the issue. The
last session of the Belgrade and Pristina delegations to t he Working Group on
Missing Persons was held on 18 November 2014. The next session is expected to
convene once Pristina appoints a new Chair for its delegation.
42. On 26 June, the Advocacy Centre for Democratic Culture, a non-governmental
organization, organized a mock trial under Kosovo law at the Basic Court in North
Mitrovica, as one of the UNMIK-funded confidence-building projects. The event
involved 20 students majoring in Serbian law at the University of North Mitrovica,
and it is hoped it will serve as a critical bridge for eventual Kosovo Serb
participation in the Kosovo legal system.
43. On 10 July, the Kosovo Special Prosecutor filed charges of attempted
terrorism against a Serbian citizen who was detained on 25 December 2014 in
Pristina with explosive materials in his vehicle.
44. On 10 July, a new appeals panel of judges was appointed in the Kleçkë/Klečke
case (involving Fatmir Limaj, a leader of the opposition party Initiative for Kosovo
and member of the Assembly), consisting of a majority of EULEX international
judges. Two high-profile cases continued before the Kosovo courts: the Gračanica
10 case and the “drug kingpin” case (involving Naser Kelmendi). Progress was also
noted in cases involving public officials.

VI. Returns and communities
45. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
recorded 132 individual voluntary returns to Kosovo in April, May and June,

8/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

consistent with the downward trends outlined in my previous report. The number
included 78 Kosovo Serbs; 3 Kosovo Roma; 10 Kosovo Ashkali; 19 Kosovo
Egyptians; 6 Kosovo Bosniaks; 9 Kosovo Goranis; 3 Kosovo Albanians; 3 Kosovo
Turks; and one Kosovo Montenegrin. UNHCR estimates the total number of
internally displaced persons living in Kosovo to be 17,063 at the end of June 2015.
Of these, 543 reside in 32 collective centres in Kosovo.
46. UNMIK continued to monitor developments and issues affecting majority and
non-majority communities through field visits and regular exchanges with local
stakeholders. In addition to increasing its engagement with central authorities,
UNMIK conducted a number of visits to municipalities across Kosovo, and met
with representatives of local government, civil society and religious leaders. It
discussed the situation of non-majority communities in the respective municipalities
as well as the return and reintegration process, how language rights are being
implemented, and issues related to education, property and inheritance rights, in
particular the property rights of women.
47. Despite efforts to advance voluntary returns to Kosovo, the pace of returns
continued to decrease during the reporting period. On 15 May, the government
announced the establishment of the Interministerial Commission for Return, which
held its first meeting on 3 June. The Commission established a working group on
return with a view to strengthening the return process to locations in North and
South Mitrovica as well as to Mushitishtë/Mušutište village. Early in June, the
Minister for Communities and Return outlined the key strategic objectives of his
Ministry for the coming year, which included setting a minimum target of returnee
families for 2015.
48. Progress towards facilitating returns was also made at the local level, most
notably within the framework of the fourth phase of the European Union return and
reintegration housing project, which is co-financed by the European Union and the
Ministry for Communities and Return, and implemented by the International
Organization for Migration. Municipal task forces on return and municipal working
groups on return met regularly. By the end of June, construction of 15 houses was
completed in Istog/Istok and Shtërpcë/Štrpce municipalities and construction had
commenced for another 31 houses in the municipalities of Obiliq/Obilić, Istog/Istok,
Pejë/Peć, Klinë/Klina, Shtërpcë/Štrpce and Gjilan/Gnjilane.
49. With regard to the working group to develop procedures for the temporary
validation and recognition of diplomas issued by the University of Mitrovica No rth,
established by the government on 27 April, the group is expected to submit a draft
normative act to the government for review and approval within six months. The
process seeks to enable holders of such degrees, who are predominantly from
non-majority communities, to be employed in public institutions.
50. The sharp increase in irregular migration from Kosovo to Western Europe,
outlined in my previous report, continued to subside during this period, while,
according to the International Organization for Migration, the number of repatriated
migrants increased. At present, these irregular migrants are not eligible to receive
assistance in the framework of the reintegration programme.
51. UNMIK implemented 20 confidence-building projects during the fiscal year
2014/15. One project funded and monitored by UNMIK supported the cooperation
of law graduates of both Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb communities in the

15-12661

9/22

S/2015/579

judicial system in Kosovo. Other projects encouraged dialogue and reconciliation,
including through the refurbishment of a community centre in Leposavić/Leposaviq.
UNMIK also co-financed the organization of the fourth International Interfaith
Conference, which discussed ways to employ social media in countering extremism
and improving the dialogue among religious and non-religious communities. The
Mission also supported activities on forest regeneration, involving Kosovo residents
from different communities in the fight against illegal logging. Other projects
promoted reconciliation between communities through culture, reuniting different
generations of musicians to revive a common musical history, as well as by building
ties through a local “rock school” in Mitrovica and supporting the continuation of a
Summer Music Academy in Pristina.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
52. In April, the municipality of Prizren established the Office of the Historic
Centre of Prizren, mandated to coordinate activities regarding the promotion,
protection and development of the town’s historic centre as a cultural heritage site.
During the same month, the local Municipal Assembly allocated funding for the
Cultural Heritage Council, which monitors and advises on cultural heritage
preservation activities in the historic centre.
53. On 8 June, the Implementation Monitoring Council discussed developments
regarding the special protective zone around the Peć Patriarchate, including ways to
address illegal construction, and a request by the Kosovo Cadastral Agency to
obtain detailed maps of such zones in Kosovo. Pursuant to the Council’s decision,
the unfinished building of the Christ the Saviour cathedral in Pristina, in which
homeless persons had taken shelter, was cleaned on 4 and 5 June, and the keys were
handed over to representatives of the Serbian Orthodox Church and the municipality
of Pristina.

VIII. Human rights
54. The Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the right to an
adequate standard of living, and on the right to non -discrimination in this context,
Leilani Farha, visited Kosovo on 26 and 27 May. She met stakeholders in the
government, civil society and the international community. The Special Rapporteur
focused on the situation of vulnerable and marginalized groups in Kosovo. She
welcomed the inclusion of international human rights standards in Kosovo
legislation, but expressed concern about the gap between the existing legal
framework and its implementation. She observed that women in Kosovo face
inequality, particularly in respect of their property rights.
55. On 21 and 22 April, a conference on the implementation of the legal
framework on the protection of the rights of women and gender equality was held in
Pristina. In her opening remarks, affirming Kosovo ’s advanced legal framework on
these issues, the President of Kosovo concluded that enhanced efforts were required
to guarantee the realization of equal rights of women and girls in Kosovo society
and announced her intention to work towards the establishment of a fund for the
education of girls and women.

10/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

56. On 15 May, the National Council for the Survivors of Sexual Violence during
the War launched a collection of dresses and skirts, which contributed to the artistic
installation Thinking of You, dedicated to survivors of sexual violence related to the
conflict. The event, which was attended by the President of Kosovo, marked the
beginning of a Kosovo-wide awareness-raising campaign.
57. On 28 May, the Assembly of Kosovo, with assistance from OSCE, adopted a
human rights-related legal framework, the so-called “human rights law package”,
deriving from the European visa liberalization process. The package comprises new
laws on gender equality, anti-discrimination and the Ombudsperson institution, as
well as amendments to laws related to the composition and functioning of the
judiciary. On 22 June, the government of Kosovo launched another key human
rights-related document, the draft Kosovo strategy on property rights.
58. On 24 June, the United Nations Kosovo team launched a new joint programme
on domestic violence, to be implemented in northern Kosovo by the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and the Office of the United Nations High C ommissioner
for Human Rights. The joint programme will focus on strengthening the
responsiveness of key municipal services related to domestic violence.
59. The UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel, which reviews complaints of
human right violations allegedly committed by UNMIK from June 1999 to February
2008, delivered 16 opinions on 20 complaints. In 15 complaints, the Panel found
that UNMIK failed to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of article
2 of the European Convention on Human Rights. In 12 complaints, the Panel also
found that, by its failure, UNMIK contributed to the distress and mental suffering of
the complainants and their families, in violation of article 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights. Since my last report, no progress has been made with
regard to the Panel’s recommendations relating to the payment of adequate
compensation for moral damages suffered as a result of those violations.
Furthermore, EULEX informed UNMIK that, owing to current legal constraints, it
is unable to implement the Panel’s recommendation on continuation of criminal
investigations pertaining to cases before the Panel. By the end of June, the Panel
had closed 474 cases, while 53 cases are outstanding.

IX. Observations
60. I welcome the continuation of the technical and high-level negotiations
between Belgrade and Pristina in the framework of the European Union -facilitated
dialogue, in particular the meetings held in June addressing outstanding issues of
implementation, including the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities, as well as issues related to energy and
telecommunications. While the reporting period witnessed a comparatively slower
pace of implementation on some of the issues, I am hopeful that the po sitive
difference the dialogue process has already made on the ground will encourage both
parties to remain steadfast in their commitments, and to tackle other challenging
issues in the coming months.
61. The slow progress by Kosovo institutions during the reporting period towards
the establishment of a specialist court is a major source of concern. The Assembly ’s

15-12661

11/22

S/2015/579

failure to adopt the requisite constitutional amendment marked a serious setback to
Kosovo’s commitment to basic principles of justice and accountability. Such delays
are regrettable and undermine Kosovo’s image and, as importantly, represent lost
opportunities to set a good example of commitment to justice and accountability. As
an important contribution to reconciliation, I urge all actors to re double their efforts
and rise to the responsibility of serving the fundamental and long -term interests of
all residents of Kosovo.
62. I welcome the adoption by the European Commission of the proposal for a
stabilization and association agreement with Kosovo, as well as continuing progress
towards visa liberalization, as both are important signposts for the institutional
reforms that Pristina continues to implement along its European path. I commend
the Kosovo authorities, and the new government, for demonstrating an increasing
ability to surmount short-term political considerations for the sake of longer-term
objectives.
63. I am heartened by the examples of productive cooperation between the local
leaders, in particular between the mayors of North and Sout h Mitrovica. This
positive and significant trend must be maintained and strengthened. Such initiatives,
by concretely improving the daily lives of Kosovo citizens, help to reduce tensions
and benefit all communities in Kosovo. UNMIK will continue its outre ach and
facilitation efforts, including through confidence-building projects, to support
reconciliation at the community level.
64. The pace of work to ascertain the fate of those missing from the conflict
should not falter. I urge the Kosovo authorities to appoint a new Chair for the
Working Group on Missing Persons as soon as possible so that its work can
continue apace. I also urge continuing the search for a means to compensate
families who have lost their loved ones.
65. Kosovo and the region continue to face transnational challenges, in particular
from youth radicalization and violent extremism. I welcome the ongoing efforts
undertaken by the Kosovo authorities to address, in a systemic manner, the
socioeconomic drivers which may be fuelling the recrui tment activities of extremist
groups; and also for engaging in law-enforcement measures directly aimed at
addressing these challenges.
66. I note the strong condemnation by the Kosovo leadership of the involvement
of Kosovo residents in the clashes in Kumanovo on 9 and 10 May, and the
subsequent action by Kosovo police to support the ongoing investigation into those
events. It is important that such incidents are not allowed to jeopardize the efforts to
promote regional reconciliation and cooperation.
67. I express my gratitude to my Special Representative, Farid Zarif, for leading
UNMIK with dedication and vision, and to all Mission personne l for their
commitment and service. I am also thankful to members of the United Nations
system and partners on the ground, including KFOR, EULEX, OSCE and the
European Union, for their cooperation and continuing contributions to peace and
progress in Kosovo.

12/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the
Secretary-General on the activities of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(covering the period from 16 April to 15 July 2015)
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued to
undertake monitoring, mentoring and advising activities and to implement its
executive functions in line with its mandate in the rule of law area. A number of
verdicts were pronounced in organized crime, corruption and war crimes cases,
including the announcement of the verdicts against the so -called “Drenica group”.
The case relates to the torture and mistreatment of civilian Kosovo Albanian
detainees at the then Kosovo Liberation Army headquarters in Skënderaj/Srbica
municipality, as well as the murder of a Serbian police officer and a Kosovo
Albanian civilian. Defendants included high-profile politicians, such as the Kosovo
Ambassador to Albania and the Mayor of Skënderaj/Srbica.
After a hiatus of one year, the Joint Rule of Law Coordination Board
reconvened and signed the renewed Rule of Law Compact. The Mission provided
advice to Kosovo police on the operational planning for several public order events
during the reporting period, including several protests of Kosovo Liberation Army
war veterans associations, the Vidovdan/St Vitus Day commemoration and the
reburial ceremony of Isa Boletini on 10 June. Kosovo police were professional in
preparing and executing their operational plans. The Mission advised the Kosovo
Border Police to engage in better communication with the Kosovo Force (KFOR), in
particular when it comes to the preparation of joint patrols with KFOR along the
border/boundary. This is also to allow the Border Police a better understanding of
the restrictions with respect to movements along the administrative boundary line
deriving from the Military Technical Agreement between NATO and Serbia of 1999.
In northern Kosovo, the security situation remained relatively calm, without
significant incidents. EULEX facilitated joint tactical medical training sessions
involving Kosovo police quick-response team officers from Mitrovica North and
South, fostering regional cooperation. In this respect, the Mission also provided
monitoring, mentoring and advice to Kosovo police in their involvement in making
the local public security committees fully operational by supporting a joint
Mitrovica-wide working group on community policing.
Successful steps were taken in the implementation of European Unionfacilitated dialogue agreements with support from EULEX. In the framework of the
customs agreement, full implementation of the licensing regime for controlled
goods, including medicine, was introduced during the reporti ng period. Both parties
suggested and agreed to the opening of two additional interim crossing points by
2016. In the framework of justice integration, positions for prosecutorial and judges ’
positions were advertised and candidates interviewed. In the context of civil

15-12661

13/22

S/2015/579

protection integration, the first 80 applicants were integrated into the Agency for
Emergency Management.

2.

EULEX activities, April to July 2015

2.1

Executive
War crimes
On 27 May, following two separate year-long trials at Mitrovica Basic Court,
the verdicts were pronounced in the war crimes case against the “Drenica group”
including high-profile politicians, such as the Kosovo Ambassador to Albania and
the Mayor of Skënderaj/Srbica. A panel of EULEX-only judges sentenced one
defendant to 12 years’ imprisonment for murder, while another defendant was
sentenced to an aggregate punishment of eight years’ imprisonment for war crimes,
including repeated torture of a Kosovo Albanian civilian. Three defendants were
sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment for war crimes related to the torture and
humiliating and degrading treatment of Kosovo Albanian civilians. Meanwhile, six
defendants were all sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for war crimes related to
the maltreatment of detainees. The case, which was prosecuted by EULEX
prosecutors from the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office, related to the torture and
mistreatment of Kosovo Albanian civilians detained at the then Kosovo Lib eration
Army headquarters in Likoc/Likovac in the municipality of Skënderaj/Srbica in
1998, as well as to the killing of a Serbian police officer and a civilian. In total,
11 of the 15 defendants were found guilty by the Court. The prosecution
acknowledged the courage of victims and witnesses in the case, who had faced
significant challenges and intimidation.
Main developments in organized crime and corruption
On 28 April, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Prizren Basic
Court started a trial against nine defendants charged with various offences,
including issuing unlawful judicial decisions and abuse of official position.
Also on 28 April, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at
Ferizaj/Uroševac Basic Court ratified a guilty plea agreement between the Special
Prosecution Office and a former Kosovo police sergeant. The defendant was
sentenced to an aggregate punishment of five years’ imprisonment for, inter alia,
abuse of official position, accepting bribes and trading in influence. He wi ll also be
disqualified from being a police officer for 20 years and must perform 200 hours of
community service. The case involves former police officers and their associates in
Ferizaj/Uroševac. Three defendants have already pleaded guilty and the trial is
continuing with regard to two other defendants.
On 26 May, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina Basic
Court found a former Kosovo judge at the then Pejë/Peć District Court guilty of
accepting a bribe of €10,000 in order to guarantee termination of detention on
remand against a number of defendants. He was sentenced to imprisonment for two
years and three months.
On 3 June, a EULEX judge at Pristina Basic Court sentenced a defendant to
imprisonment for four years and six months, a fine of €5,000 and sequestration of
his vehicle. The trial is continuing against five other defendants charged with

14/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

organized crime, money-laundering and smuggling of migrants from Kosovo to
Hungary, Austria, Germany and Italy. The case is led by a EULEX prose cutor in the
Special Prosecution Office. On 12 June, a EULEX judge at Pristina Basic Court
confirmed the indictment in the Kosovo Energy Corporation case against seven
defendants suspected of various offences, including fraud and abuse of official
position or authority. The case is led by a EULEX prosecutor from the Special
Prosecution Office.
Other serious crimes cases
On 24 April, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pejë/Peć Basic
Court found two defendants guilty of tax evasion. They were s entenced to pay fines
of €5,000 and €3,000 respectively as well as to imprisonment of one year and eight
months and one year and six months, respectively. The imprisonment will not be
executed if the defendants do not commit another criminal offence for th ree years
and if they return to the Tax Authority of Kosovo the approximately €53,000 and
€34,000 acquired through the commission of the offence.
On 4 May, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge at Prizren Basic
Court started the trial against a defendant accused of extortion. The case relates to
offences involving seven other defendants who have already stood trial in front of a
EULEX-led panel.
Allegations found in the report of the Special Rapporteur for the Committee
on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe
The Special Investigative Task Force continued its criminal investigation into
the allegations contained in the report of January 2011 authored by the Special
Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of
Europe, Dick Marty. Individual criminal liability of those most responsible for the
allegations made in the report remains the focus of the work of the Special
Investigative Task Force. Work with injured parties, victim advocacy g roups and
individuals to gather information relevant to the investigation has continued apace.
Cooperation with law enforcement and judicial authorities in the region and
elsewhere remains satisfactory. Sustained cooperation from all parties remains
critical for investigative and operational activities to continue to make progress.
David Schwendiman took up his post as lead prosecutor on 21 May. He has
since held a series of introductory meetings with senior officials in European Union
institutions and European Union member States. All interlocutors reiterated their
support for the Special Investigative Task Force and assured Mr. Schwendiman that
the Task Force would continue to receive the necessary resources to complete its
investigation in an independent, impartial and professional manner. At his meetings
Mr. Schwendiman endorsed Clint Williamson’s investigative findings of July 2014,
underlined his commitment to take forward the work already done by the Task Force
and expressed his hope that the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor ’s
Office will be established without further delay.
Following the judgement by the Kosovo Constitutional Court on 15 April that
the draft constitutional amendments with regard to the establishment of the
Specialist Chambers, which would adjudicate over the outcome of the investigation
by the Special Investigative Task Force, do not breach human rights and freedoms
set out in the Constitution, the Assembly Committee on Legislation approved the

15-12661

15/22

S/2015/579

proposed constitutional amendments. However, on 26 June, after a six -hour long
debate, the Assembly of Kosovo failed to reach the required two-thirds majority
necessary to adopt the constitutional amendments. Kosovo authorities reiterated
their commitment to proceed with the establishment of the Specialist Chambers and
to revert to the Assembly.
Department of Forensic Medicine
On 16 April, EULEX experts at the Department of Forensic Medicine met the
families of 21 victims found in Raška, Serbia, in 2014. All identified remains have
been handed over, although there is still one unidentified set of remains. EULEX
forensic experts conducted site assessments in the municipalities of Istog/Istok,
Pejë/Peć, Prizren and South Mitrovica. In Prizren nothing was found, whereas the
remains found in South Mitrovica are not connected to the Kosovo conflict. An
excavation is planned following the site assessment for a possible grave in Pejë/Peć.
EULEX also assisted in the conduct of an excavation in Novi Pazar, Serbia, but no
remains were found.
Property rights
During the reporting period, the Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Pan el
received 114 new appeals and adjudicated 45 appeals, while 453 appeals are
pending a decision of the panel.
The Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for privatization matters rendered
362 decisions in trial panel cases and finalized 43 cases at the app ellate panel level.
2.2

Strengthening
On the digitalization of civil registry records, the Mission continued to advise
the Ministry of Internal Affairs that all citizens and all data from certified copies
should be entered into the electronic system to satisfy crucial needs, for instance of
law enforcement agencies. This should happen automatically and not be only event driven (for example, upon birth, marriage or death). This is particularly important in
cases where persons do not reside in the territory, but, for example, want to claim
property rights. This is related to the ongoing digitalization of cadastres, which
includes all data in hardcopy cadastre books.
Following EULEX advice to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the issuance of
visas at the crossing points has decreased to only six visas issued in the last six
months, which constitutes good progress for Kosovo authorities in comparison to
the situation reported in July 2014. As a relevant judicial database is still being
established, EULEX advised the Ministry to create a specified channel for the flow
of information between Kosovo authorities in the meantime, which comprises the
Ministry of Justice, Kosovo police and the Civil Registry Agency.
The Mission advised the Kosovo Border Police to i mprove the communication
with KFOR when it comes to the preparation of joint patrols along the
border/boundary and the restrictions on the Border Police stemming from the
Military Technical Agreement between NATO and Serbia of 1999, particularly with
a view to the upcoming season for illegal logging.
As for the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council, an analysis of disciplinary hearings
and disciplinary decisions against prosecutors during the period from November

16/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

2014 to March 2015 showed that, despite certain progress, the overall situation of
the disciplinary system remains weak and it is still in need of significant
improvements, including through amendments to the legislative framework. In May,
the Mission conducted a workshop for investigators of the Anti -Corruption Agency
to address weaknesses identified in the investigation techniques and the quality of
investigation reports. In addition, the Mission collaborated with the United Nations
Development Programme in organizing a workshop on disciplinary investigati ons
for investigators from the Office of the Disciplinary Counsel/Prosecutor, the Police
Inspectorate of Kosovo and the Anti-Corruption Agency in order to tackle some of
the weaknesses of the disciplinary system.
The Kosovo Correctional Service, in an effort to adequately deal with the
staffing shortage, acted upon the Mission’s advice and appointed a working group
on planning issues, including Service-wide staffing and budget needs, recruitment
procedures and the transfer of staff of the Pristina Detentio n Centre to the High
Security Prison. The Service agreed to pilot a new staffing roster system with the
support of EULEX at the High Security Prison, which suffers most from a lack of
staff. After the verdicts in the “Drenica group” trials, the convicted defendants were
again given preferential treatment by the Kosovo Correctional Service and the
Kosovo police, despite the Mission on numerous occasions advising consistently to
the contrary.
Apart from the Kosovo Correctional Service not properly categorizi ng the
“Drenica group” convicts, in accordance with its own regulation, by admitting them
to Dubrava Correctional Centre instead of the High Security Prison, the issue of
abuse of extended medical appointments at the University Clinical Centre of
Kosovo in Pristina remains a source of concern.
In May, EULEX discussed with the senior management of the Kosovo police
and international partners the current state of play of the Kosovo police Directorate
of Organized Crime Investigation. It was unanimously agree d that the Directorate
needed to establish a more proactive, intelligence -led approach in organized crime
investigations and to increase positive investigation results. EULEX provided
strategic advice to the Kosovo police on the operational planning for se veral public
order events during the month, including several protests of Kosovo Liberation
Army war veterans associations and the recurring Vidovdan/St Vitus Day
commemoration on 28 June. The Mission assessed that the preparations and
execution of operational plans reflected the professionalism of the Kosovo police as
well as proper planning on their part.
2.3

The north
As part of its monitoring, mentoring and advising activities and outreach in the
north, the Mission continued to meet regularly with p olitical representatives, civil
society, Kosovo police Regional Command North, the Kosovo Correctional Service
at the Mitrovica Detention Centre and others. On 24 May, the Head of Mission met
with Kosovo police and mayors and other officials in Mitrovica N orth,
Leposavić/Leposaviq, Zubin Potok and Zvečan/Zveçan to discuss security and other
challenges.
Overall, the situation remained relatively calm but fragile. On 10 June, the
remains of the Albanian historic national hero, Isa Boletini, were reburied in his
home village in the northern municipality of Zvečan/Zveçan. Following thorough

15-12661

17/22

S/2015/579

coordination with international and local counterparts, the events ended without
significant incidents and proceeded in an overall calm and peaceful atmosphere.
There were a few security-related incidents in the reporting period. On
19 April, an assault against a police officer in a vehicle patrol occurred in Mitrovica
North. On 27 May, Kosovo police arrested three armed Kosovo Albanian youngsters
in Mitrovica North who had crossed the bridge from the south and pulled down
Serbian flags. On 11 June, shots were fired against an independent local online
media office in Mitrovica North, causing material damage. There was an attempt on
22 June by a Kosovo Albanian potential returnee to conduct (re)construction
activities in the ethnically mixed neighbourhood of Brdjani/Kroi i Vitakut of
Mitrovica North in violation of an agreement to resolve the issue on the central
level; since then, works remain suspended.
On 19 June, a Kosovo Serb and his family left the house where they were
residing, following a court eviction order. Kosovo police assisted the execution of
the court order by cordoning off the area. A previous attempt to execute the eviction
order had failed when Kosovo police were not able to keep protesters away from the
site. Only 7 of 279 pending eviction requests were executed in Mitrovica North in
2014, according to the Kosovo Property Agency. Kosovo police assistance to the
Agency began in 2009 but it was suspended following an incident in January 2010.
In March 2015, Kosovo police resumed assistance to the Agency in e xecuting
eviction orders.
EULEX exercised its executive functions in a number of judicial cases. On
20 April, a panel of EULEX judges at Mitrovica Basic Court found two defendants
not guilty in the first of three judicial proceedings related to the shooti ng of a
Kosovo police officer, Enver Zymberi, in July 2011. The main trial in the case
against five defendants including a well-known Kosovo Serb politician accused of
war crimes continued throughout the reporting period with hearings of witnesses for
the prosecution. In June, a detention hearing was held against five Kosovo Albanian
defendants, all minors, charged with attempted aggravated murder (the stabbing of a
Kosovo Serb youngster on 9 April) and for pulling down flags and threatening the
public on 27 May, among other things. After one of the defendants had violated an
initial house detention imposed on 28 May, a EULEX pre-trial judge on 25 June
ordered a one-month detention on remand against him and lesser restrictive
measures against two others. Also in June, the pathologist produced the final
autopsy results for the Kosovo Albanian boy who went missing on 10 April and was
found dead in the Ibër/Ibar River on 28 April 2015. The case was assigned to a
EULEX prosecutor; the autopsy results indicated that there was no shooting
involved. On 1 July, the main trial started against seven defendants indicted for an
attack against EULEX personnel in the municipality of Zubin Potok in 2012.
The Mission continued to provide advice to the Kosovo police, includin g on
inter-ethnic crime and on principles of intelligence -led policing. EULEX facilitated
joint training for Kosovo police quick-response team officers Mitrovica-wide in
basic tactical combat casualty care. This served to foster Mitrovica -wide
cooperation; further training was discussed with Kosovo police regional
commanders in Mitrovica North and South. EULEX continued to support the
Kosovo police in their involvement in making the local public security committees
fully operational by encouraging them to link in with police counterparts from
Kosovo police Mitrovica South region and by supporting a joint working group on
community policing.

18/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

2.4

Dialogue implementation
In April, the Chair of the Integrated Border Management Agreement
Implementation Group visited two prospective new crossing points along the
border/boundary. One is situated in northern Kosovo, in Rajetici/Izvor, and the other
south of the Ibër/Ibar River, in Kapi/Kapija Vrapce. Both parties had made a request
for these additional crossing points, which would fall under the same procedures as
the already existing six interim crossing points. Following agreement on the exact
locations and the layouts of these crossing points, the Chair of the Implementation
Group and both parties signed the respective plans in June. It is expected that both
new crossing points will become operational in 2016 at the latest. This development
is yet another step forward in the implementation of the Integrated Border
Management agreement. Preparatory work on the six agreed permanent crossing
points is progressing.
The issue of mutual legal assistance between Belgrade and Pristina remains
pending since the handover of the handling of requests for mutual legal assistance
from EULEX to the European Union Special Representative in October 2014. Since
14 October, no requests have been answered or processed from the Belgrade side,
and nearly 600 cases are pending, including cases handled by EULEX.
With regard to the process of registering and issuing licences to companie s
that import controlled goods through the northern crossing points at Rudnica/Jainjë
and Bërnjak/Tabalije, since June the full regime applies with no significant
problems reported to date.
At the end of April, the first sessions of the selection panel fo r the integration
of civil protection staff were held as foreseen in the agreement in the framework of
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. In June, the three observation points on the
road from Mitrovica to Leposavić/Leposaviq were removed, pursuant t o the
agreement. On 1 July, the first 80 civil protection staff were integrated into the
Agency for Emergency Management. Preparations to continue the integration
process with other institutions are ongoing. The Ministry of Internal Affairs issued
another decision, allowing people with old Kosovo licence plates with the letters KS
instead of RKS to extend the temporary registration of their vehicle for one
additional year, starting from the expiry date of the registration. All requests for
transfer of registration plates from ex-Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian to
Kosovo plates have to undergo a verification procedure. The requests are submitted
through INTERPOL to Belgrade for verification. Currently, there are over
2,000 cases pending in Belgrade.
The signing on 23 June of a memorandum of understanding between Pristina
and Belgrade on the mutual recognition of vehicle insurance policies is another step
in the implementation of the freedom of movement agreement of July 2011, which
will have a tangible impact on the freedom of movement. The memorandum will
allow holders of vehicles with Kosovo licence plates to drive their vehicle in Serbia
without prior purchasing of an additional border/boundary car insurance, and vice
versa.
As for the agreement on justice integration, in May, 112 candidates applied for
the positions of 48 judges and 25 prosecutors advertised publicly. In June and July,
panels facilitated by EULEX interviewed eligible candidates and selection results
need now to be processed by, respectively, the Kosovo Judicial Council and the

15-12661

19/22

S/2015/579

Kosovo Prosecutorial Council before the formal appointments can be finalized as
envisaged. Progress has been made by the Kosovo authorities to secure premises for
the court building in Mitrovica South. A site visit to the future branches in Zubin
Potok and Leposavić/Leposaviq was conducted.

3.

Other key issues
The Joint Rule of Law Coordination Board, co-chaired by the Minister of
Justice, the European Union Special Representative/Head of the European Unio n
Office in Kosovo and the EULEX Head of Mission finally reconvened after a one year hiatus on 14 May. The main outcome was the signature of the renewed Rule of
Law Compact. The Kosovo authorities committed to ensuring that the institutions
are adequately resourced to implement the compact actions and make them a
priority. The Board also discussed, among other things, measures to strengthen the
independence of the judiciary and the state of play of the Palace of Justice, in
particular the need for improvements in the maintenance and security of the
building. All parties welcomed the national action plan on sexual violence as a war
crime and committed themselves to fully support it.

20/22

15-12661

S/2015/579

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 26 June 2015)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

1

Total

8

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 26 June 2015)
Country

15-12661

Number

Czech Republic

2

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

21/22

S/2015/579

22/22

15-12661
