Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

Recalling further the provisions of paragraph 5 of
resolution 2978 (XXVII), in which it requested the
administering Powers concemed to transmit, or continue
to transmit, to the Secretary-General the infarmation
prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as
the fuJlest possible infarmation on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that infarmation!
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this item, 5
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the infarmation from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Strongly deplores that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the Special Committee, sorne Member States having responsibilities far the administration of Non-Self-Goveming
Territories have ceased or have failed to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter, have transmitted insufficient infarmation or have transmitted information too ,late;
3. Strongly condemns the Government of Portugal
for its continued refusal to recognize the colonial status
of the Territories under its domination and to transmit
infarmation under Article 73 e of the Charter on those
Territories in complete disregard of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Speciail Committee;
4. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit infarmation under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect
to that Territory;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Charter, as well as the fullest possible infarmation
on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concemed;
6. Reiterates its request that the Administering
Powers concerned transmit such information as early
as possible and, at the latest, within a maximum period
of six months following the expiration of ,the administrative year in the Non-Self-Goveming Territories concemed;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
'lbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev.1), chap. XXIX.
11 A/9239 and Add.1.

93

3111 (XXVIII). Question of Namibia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council far Namibia 6 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 7
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the South West Africa People's Organization, 8 who has
participated in an observer capacity in the work of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and also, in accordance with the decision taken by the General Assembly at its 2139th plenary meeting on 3 October 1973,0
in the Fourth Committee's consideration of the ítem,
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners, 10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the ful! implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent resolutions of both the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to the question
of Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, 11 delivered in response to the request addressed to it by the
Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29 July 1970,
Taking into consideration the programme of action
adopted by the lnternational Conference of Experts
for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid
in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973, 12 the resolutions on Namibia adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its twenty-first ordinary session, hcld at Addis
Ababa from 17 to 24 May 1973, and by the Fourth
Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of NonAligned Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973, 13 as well as the Lusaka Declaration adopted
by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 14 June
1973, 14
Reaffirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independe1;1ce within a united
Namibia,
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/9024).
7 lbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/Rev.1), chaps. 1-VI
and VIII.
8 lbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2046th
meeting.
o See "Other decisions", p. 111.
10 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Fourth Committee, 2047th, 2053rd and 2060th meetings.
11 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory
Opinion, l.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
12 A/9061, annex, sect. IV.
1s A/9330 and Corr.l, p. 42.
14 O{ficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/9024), para. 157.

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

94

Bearing in mind the efforts of the Secretary-General1 5
with a view to the implementation of Security CouncH
resolution 323 ( 1972) of 6 December 1972, and considering that the efforts of the Unitcd Nations hav_e
been utilized by the South African régime to consohdate its illegal occupation of the Territory,
Strongly deploring South Africa's continued refusal
to comply with the resol~tions _and decisions _of the
United Nations its contmued 11legal occupat10n of
Namibia, its b~tal repression of the Namibiai:i, people
and its persistent violation of their h~man nipits, as
well as its efforts to destroy the nat1onal umty and
territorial integrity of Namibia, and recognizing that
this situation cannot continue without danger to international peace and security,
Deploring the policies of those States which, despite
the relevant decisions of the United Nations and the
adviso1 y opinion of the lnternational C:ourt of_ Justice
of 21 June 1971 continue to have d1plomat1c, consular economic a~d other relations with South Africa,
acting on behalf of or concerning Na~ibia, which h~ve
the effect of supporting or encouragmg South Afnca
in its defiance of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the opposition of the Namibian people to South Africa's illegal presen~e. in the
Territory and to its racist and oppress1ve pohc1es and,
in particular, the progress o! their struggle for natio:1-aI
liberation under the leadersh1p of the South West Afnca
People's Organization,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Counci,1 for Namibia in the discharge of the
responsibilities entrusted to it by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Having invited the United Nations Council for Namibia to participate on behalf of Namibia in the Third
United N ations Conference on the Law of the Sea,

I
1. Reaffirms the inalienable and imprescriptible right
of the people of Namibia to self-determination and in-

dependence in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621 (XXV) and subsequent
resolutions, and the legitimacy of their struggle by ali
means against the illegaJ occupation of their country
by South Africa;
2. Recognizes that the national Iiberation movement
of Namibia, the South West Africa People's Organization, is the authentic representative of the Namibian
people, and supports the efforts of the movement to
strengthen national unity;
3. Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent
refusal ,to withdraw from the international Territory of
Namibia and for its efforts to consolidate its illegal
occupation by intensified repression and by the imposition of its policies of apartheid and the fragmentation
of the Territory into "Bantustans", in total disregard
of the wishes of the people of Namibia, tlie decisions
and resolutions of the United Nations and the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June
1971;
4. Demands the immediate withdrawal by South
Africa of ali its mili1:ary and police forces and its administration from Namibia so as to enable the Namibian
people to achieve freedom and independence;
1~ See Offecial Records of the Security Council, Twenty-eighth
Year, Supp/ement for April, May and /une 1973, document

S/10921.

5. Takes note of the efforts of thc Secretary-Gcneral
to implemcnt Security Council resolution 323 (1972);
6. Deplores the obduratc refusal of thc South African régime to comply with the resolutions ?f th~ United
Nations, particularly its rcfusal to ncgot1ate m good
faith for the transfer of power in Namibia;
7. Considers that the contact'i betwccn the Secretary-General and the Governmcnt of South Africa under
the terms of Security Council resolution 323 (1_972)
should be terminated as bcing detrimental to the mterests of the Namibian pcople;
8. Invites the Security Council to consider taking
effective measures, in accordance with thc relevant
Chapters of the Charter of the United Nations, to put
an end to South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia;
9. A pproves the report of the United Nations Council for N&mibia, 0 including the recommendations contained thcrein and the programme of work envisaged
for 1974, and decides to make adequate financia} provision for their implementation;
10. Commends the United Nations Council for
Namibia for its efforts to fulfil .the mandate entrusted to
it by thc General Assembly and requests it to continue
to discharge its functions and responsibilities;
11. Calls once again upan ali Statcs to comply with
the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council concerning Namibia
and the advisory opinion of the lnternationa,1 Court of
Justice of 21 J une 197 I, and to refrain from all direct
or indirect relations, economic or otherwise, with South
Africa when it purports .to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia;
12. Urges al] States to take ali possible economic
and other measures with a view to compelling South
Africa to withdraw immediately from Namibia in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 2145
(XXI) and 2248 (S-V);
13. Calls upon all States, .the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system, as weJl as the non-governmental organizations,
to co-operate fully with the United Nations Council for
Namibfa in the discharge of its mandate;
14. Requests aH States, :the specialized agencies and
otlier organizations within the United Nations system,
as well as the non-governmental organizations concerned, to render to the Namibian people, in co-operation with the Organization of African Unity, a1l moral
and material assistance necessary to continue their
struggle for freedom and independence, and to work
out, in active co-operation with the United Nations
Council for Namibia and the Organization of African
Unity, concrete programmes of assistance to Namibia;
15. Calls upan all States which have consular representation, whether ordinary or honorary, in Namibia
to termínate such rep:-esentation, and calls upon ali
States which have consuls in South Africa accredited
to Namibia to withdraw such accreditation;
16. Requests all States which have agreements with
South Africa relating to Namibia to enter into consultations with the United Nations Council for Namibia and
the Secretary-General with a view to concluding new
agreements, as appropriate, on matters covered by the
previous ones;
17. Requests all subsidiary organs of 1:he United
Nations, intergovernrnental bodies -and conferences to
ensure that the rights and interests of Namibia are protected and to that end, atnong other tliings, to invite the

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commitlee

United Nations Coundl for Namibia to participate in
an appropriate capacity whenever such rigbts and interests are involved;
18. Decides, having regard to paragraph 2 above, to
defray the expenses of a representative of the So1;1th
West Africa People's Organization when ac~ompanym?:
such rnissions a~ the United N:1tions Council for Namibia may determine and whenever c_alled for cons~ltation by the Council, and to auth<?nze th~ Co~ncil to
utilize the financia! resources aval'lable, mcludmg the
United Nations Fund for Namibia, to enable it to give
assistance to the N amibian people when, in the. opinion
of the Council, such assistance would be reqmred;
l 9. Requests the Sccrctary-General:
(a) To continue to provide the necess_ary assista!l~e
and facilities to the United Nations Counc1! for Nam1b1a
and to the Unitcd Nations Commissioner for Namibia
for the discharge of their respective duties and functions;
(b) To report to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session on the implementation of the present
resolution;

11
l. Requests ali specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system and the
mernber States thereof to take such necessary steps as
will enable the United Nations Council for Namibia,
as the legal authority for Namibia, to particípa~e fully
on behalf of Namibia in the work of those agencies and
organizations;
2. Requests ali specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations ~ystem, in ~o.nsultation with the United Nations CounCJ,l for Namibia, to
render within their respective spheres of competence,
ali po~siblc assistance to the people of Namibia and
their liberation movement;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in clase co-operation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to review the full and speedy implementation of the
present resolution and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;

III
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations Council far Namibia, to take
concrete measures through all the media at his disposal
to intensify the dissemination of information on the
question of Namibia and, inter alia:
(a) To issue a further series of United Nations commemoratíve postage stamps on Namibia in arder to
emphasize the direct respo~s(bility of the Un\ted
Nations with regard to Narn1b1a through the Umted
Nations Council for Namibia and the legitimate struggle being wagcd by the people of Namibia for selfdetermination and independence;
(b) To continue to issue the Namibia Bulletin;
(e) To contínue to explore additional measures for
wider di5Semination of information concerning the question of Namibia and the activities of the Council;
2. Invites al] States, specialized agencies and United
Nations uodies conccrns.:d, as ·,.vell as intergovernmental
and non-govemmentaJ organizations h,n;ing an interest
in the field of decolonizatíon, to co-üperate closely with
the Unitcd Nations Council for Namibi¡, and the Secretary-General in the dis~emination of infonnation on
Namibia and, among other things, to consider taking

95

steps to encourage the organization of seminars on the
question;
3. Decides to observe 26 August each year as Namibia Day and requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to prepare a programme for such a commemoration.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

3112 (XXVIII). United Nations Fund for Namibia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 Oc~ober
1966, by which the U nited N ations deci~e~ to terrnmate
the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and assume
direct responsibility for the Territory until its independence and resolutíon 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, by
which it established the United Natíons Council for
Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to continue to discharge
that responsibility in regard to the Territory,
Mindful tbat, by assuming direct responsibility . for
Namibia, •the United Nations incurred a solemn obhgation to assist the people of the Territory morally and
materially,
Recalling further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970, 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December 1~71
and 3030 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 concemmg
the United Nations Fund for Namibia, established on
the basis of the report of the Secretary-Genernl to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session, 16
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia at present prevents the ~nited
Nations from furnishing needed, large-scale ass1stance
within the Territory,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the operation of the United Nations Fund for Namibia during 1973, 17
Having examined al.so the sections of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia relating to the
Fund, 1 ~
1. Expresse.s its appreciation of the report of the
Secrctary-General on the operation of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia during 1973;
2. Decides to allocate to the Fund the sum of
$100,000 from the regular budget of the United Nations
for 1974;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to continue to appeal to
Governments for voluntary contributions t0 the Fund;
4. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organízations and institutions for voluntary
contributions to the Fund;
5. Urges the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the United Nations Council for Namibia, to begin the
implementation of the long-term measures and studi_es
outlincd in bis report to the General Asscmbly at 1ts
twentv-sixth session;
6. · Appoints the Unitcd Nations Council for Namibia
as trustce of the Fund and authorizes thc Council to
prepare guiddines for its oricnLation rn consultation
with the Secretary-Gcnernl;
10 A/8473.
11 A/9225 and Corr.1.

1s See O/ficit;./ Record.,, of the General Assembly, Twentyeighth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/9024).
