A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/135
30 January 1996
Fiftieth session
Agenda item 103
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/626)]
50/135.

Measures to combat contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/147 of 23 December 1994 and taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/12 of 24 February 1995, 1/
Bearing in mind the outcome of the World Conference on Human Rights,
held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, and, in particular, the attention
given in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 2/ to the elimination
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance,
Aware that racism, being one of the exclusionist phenomena plaguing many
societies, requires resolute action and cooperation for its eradication,
Having examined the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including its conclusions and
recommendations, 3/
Deeply concerned that, despite continued efforts, racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as well as acts of racial
violence, persist and even grow in magnitude, incessantly adopting new forms,
including tendencies to establish policies based on racial, religious, ethnic,
cultural and national superiority or exclusivity,
Conscious of the fundamental difference between, on the one hand, racism
and racial discrimination as governmental policy or resulting from official
doctrines of racial superiority or exclusivity and, on the other hand, other

1/
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995,
Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II,
sect. A.
2/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

3/

See A/50/476.

96-76297

/...

A/RES/50/135
Page 2

manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance taking place in segments of many societies and perpetrated by
individuals or groups, some of which are directed against migrant workers and
members of their families,
Underlining the importance of creating conditions which foster greater
harmony and tolerance within societies,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance; 3/
2.
Expresses its full support for the work of the Special Rapporteur,
and requests him to continue his exchange of views with relevant mechanisms,
related United Nations organs and specialized agencies in order to further
their effectiveness and mutual cooperation;
3.
Expresses its profound concern at and unequivocal condemnation of
all forms of racism and all racist violence, including related acts of random
and indiscriminate violence;
4.
Expresses its deep concern at and condemnation of manifestations
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against
migrant workers and members of their families and other vulnerable groups in
many societies;
5.
Encourages all States, in accordance with the conclusions and
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur in his most recent report, to
include in their educational curricula and social programmes at all levels, as
appropriate, knowledge of and tolerance and respect for foreign cultures,
peoples and countries;
6.
Supports the efforts of Governments in taking measures aimed at
the eradication of all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
7.
Recognizes that Governments should implement and enforce
legislation to prevent acts of racism and racial discrimination;
8.
Calls upon all Governments and intergovernmental organizations,
with the assistance of non-governmental organizations, as appropriate, to
continue to cooperate with and to supply relevant information to the Special
Rapporteur;
9.
Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur, with a view to enabling him to fulfil his mandate;
10.
Requests, once again, the Secretary-General promptly to provide
the Special Rapporteur with all the necessary human and financial assistance
in carrying out his mandate and enabling him to submit, in a timely manner, a
preliminary report to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session on this
question.
97th plenary meeting
21 December 1995
