S/PV.8346

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8346th meeting

Monday, 10 September 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Corruption and conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28029 (E)
*1828029*

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Corruption and conflict
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. John Prendergast, founding Director of the Enough
Project and co-founder of The Sentry, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United States
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
briefing, which reflects a recognition of the importance
of tackling corruption as part of our efforts to maintain
international peace and security.
Corruption is present in all countries, rich and poor,
North and South, developed and developing. Numbers
show the startling scope of the challenge. The World
Economic Forum estimates that the cost of corruption
is at least $2.6 trillion, or 5 per cent, of global gross
domestic product. According to the World Bank,
businesses and individuals pay more than $1 trillion in
bribes each year.
Corruption robs schools, hospitals and others
of vitally needed funds. It rots institutions, as public
officials enrich themselves or turn a blind eye to
criminality. It deprives people of their rights, drives
away foreign investment and despoils the environment.
Corruption breeds disillusion with Government
and governance and is often at the root of political
dysfunction and societal disunity. The poor and
vulnerable suffer disproportionately, and impunity
compounds the problem.
Corruption can be a trigger for conflict. As conflict
rages, corruption prospers. Even if conflict ebbs,
corruption can impede recovery. Corruption drives
and thrives on the breakdown of political and social
institutions. Those institutions are never more in crisis
than in times of conflict. Corruption is linked to many
2/22

10/09/2018

forms of instability and violence, such as the illicit
trafficking in arms, drugs and people.
The connections among corruption, terrorism and
violent extremism have been repeatedly recognized by
the Security Council and the General Assembly. Assets
stolen through corruption can be used to finance further
crimes, including violent extremist and terrorist acts.
Large-scale corruption surveys conducted by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime found that
bribery of public officials was particularly high in areas
affected by conflict. In conflict situations, stakeholders
such as anti-corruption commissions, civil society
and the media may be weakened or hindered in their
essential work.
The consequences of corruption in times of conflict
can be especially devastating, as they can affect the
most basic needs and exacerbate hunger and poverty.
Member States must be on the front lines in the
fight against corruption. It is especially important
to build up the capacity of national anti-corruption
commissions and prosecutorial efforts. Governments
can also enhance anti-corruption efforts by ensuring
independent judiciaries, a vibrant civil society, freedom
of the media and effective whistle-blower protections.
The international community can complement those
efforts by working more effectively against money
laundering, tax evasion and the illicit financial flows
that deprive countries of much-needed resources and
fuel further corruption.
As members of the Council know, I have called
for heightened efforts to prevent conflict and to
address risks early, before they escalate. In that spirit,
combating corruption and addressing governance
challenges, which lie at the root of many conflicts,
must be a component of preventive approaches. This
is an opportunity to build a solid foundation of trust
and accountability and increase a society’s resilience
to crisis.
In peace operations, our engagement should be
designed and implemented with a clearer anti-corruption
lens to reinforce a culture of accountability and respect
for the rule of law. At its January Summit this year,
the African Union launched the observance of 2018 as
African Anti-Corruption Year. I am pleased to note that
anti-money laundering efforts in Nigeria and Tunisia
have seen funds returned.
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

As I said to the General Assembly in May in
marking the fifteenth anniversary of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, the role of the
United Nations is crucial. There are several ways the
Organization can support Member States, from sharing
good practices to supporting efforts to strengthen
national anti-corruption institutions. The International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala is a case
in point.
Before the adoption of the Convention, there was
no global instrument to criminalize corruption or to
recover stolen proceeds. Now the Convention has 186
States parties and the crime of corruption is on the books
of nearly every country in the world. The Convention’s
robust peer review mechanisms have served as a global
framework for international cooperation to strengthen
prevention, disrupt money-laundering schemes, return
stolen proceeds from foreign banks and other necessary
actions. I encourage all Member States to bring greater
resolve to its implementation.
Let us also take profit of advances of technology,
which give us an opportunity to massively expand
public participation in governance and to increase
accountability. At the same time, we know that
conventions and legal measures must be complemented
by strong leadership that elevates corruption as a
concern and makes it a priority for action.
People across the world continue to express outrage
at the corruption of their leaders and at how deeply
corruption is embedded in societies. They are rightly
calling for political establishments to operate with
transparency and accountability or to make way for
those who will. I call on leaders everywhere to listen, to
nurture a culture of integrity and to empower citizens
to do their part at the grass-roots level. We must all
do more to fight corruption, strengthen governance and
build trustworthy institutions that can ensure probity
and progress for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Prendergast.
Mr. Prendergast: Throughout history, war
may have been hell, but for small groups of conflict
profiteers it has also been very lucrative. Today’s
deadliest conflicts in Africa — such as those in
South Sudan, Somalia, northern Nigeria, the Sudan,
the Central African Republic and, perhaps most

S/PV. 8346

importantly, the Democratic Republic of Congo — are
sustained by extraordinary opportunities for illicit selfenrichment that emerge in war economies, where there
is a visible nexus between grand corruption and mass
atrocities. State armies and rebels use extreme violence
to control natural resources, labour and smuggling
networks, including those trafficking in wildlife.
Violence becomes self-financing from pillaging,
natural-resource looting and stealing State assets, with
banking and business connections that extend from
right here in New York to London, Dubai and many
other global financial centres.
In these hijacked African States, the dynamics of
which are certainly similar to those in other war-torn
countries around the world, such as Afghanistan, Iraq
and Syria, military and civilian leaders use networks
of commercial collaborators and financiers from inside
and outside their countries to enrich themselves, to
benefit the commercial and political networks, and
usually to maintain an iron grip on power. Arms
dealers, ivory traffickers, gold and diamond smugglers,
minerals dealers, oil companies, construction firms
and others collude with Government officials and
rebel warlords — as well as, at times, with terrorist
networks — to maximize profit for a narrow few.
Technically savvy and skilled at exploiting legitimate
systems of finance, trade and transport — utilizing
money-laundering, regulatory and sanctions evasion,
disguised beneficial ownership, the diversion of
State resources and assets, security sector fraud, and
offshoring assets — these networks have remained
largely untouched by law enforcement, regulation or
international sanctions imposed by this organ or others.
At their core, these conflicts are battles over the
control of hijacked States and the natural resources that
enrich the countries involved. Control of the State is the
surest way to access these resources. Diverting State
budgets into the military and internal security — the
primary means of violently suppressing dissent — is
how to secure them.
Until the Security Council and other interested
parties with potential influence can create leverage
to change these dynamics, the bottom line is that war
will remain more beneficial than peace for those at the
centre of conflict and corruption. The same people
benefiting from war economies are often the powerbrokers in peace talks and have limited incentive — in
fact, sometimes no incentive — to reach and implement

18-280293/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

a negotiated settlement, especially if adhering to such
an agreement means losing out economically.
Therefore, peace efforts require an emphasis on
conflict transformation, where war economies must be
dismantled and hijacked State institutions, which have
often been predatory dating back to the colonial period,
must be completely reformed to fulfil their intended
purpose. This is even more difficult in countries where
natural resources have provided huge opportunities for
plunder and corruption to people all over the world.
Remarkably, and regrettably, there is currently no
coordinated strategy to disrupt the illicit siphoning of
money by leaders and their foreign business partners,
or to break the link between corruption and conflict.
Every year, billions of aid dollars pour into Africa to
clean up these horrific messes. United Nations agencies,
taxpayers and donor Governments around the world
fund peacekeeping forces, State-building programmes,
humanitarian assistance, elections and peace processes,
but none of this support has been able to keep corrupt
leaders and their network of beneficiaries from stealing
billions of dollars because the diplomats leading these
efforts simply have no leverage to change the systems
that perpetuate conflict. This is not about regime
change. It is about system change.
For years, the tool of choice for building leverage
against actors undermining peace or human rights has
been to impose targeted sanctions. But the sanctions
often imposed by this organ and many Member States
in these situations, especially in Africa, have been
inadequate. Too few individuals are sanctioned too
infrequently. The sanctions are often too weak, because
the mandate does not exist to target those responsible
for the corruption that leads to conflict. In other words,
we rarely sanction those at the centre of the networks
responsible for greed-fueled extreme violence and
their commercial collaborators. Over time, and in the
absence of meaningful enforcement, warring parties
have come to regard these kinds of erratically applied,
one-off sanctions as a vague annoyance for their public
relations rather than as a serious threat to their power.
What is missing is the use of policy tools of
financial pressures that actually alter the costbenefit analysis of those committing atrocities and
prolonging war. As is obvious, these leaders and their
commercial collaborators do not keep their money
under the mattress; rather, they launder it through the
international financial system and move it offshore into
4/22

10/09/2018

real estate, shell or front companies, and bank accounts.
That makes them vulnerable. As a result, the leverage
must be laser-focused on going after this specific
illicit activity, valued in the billions of dollars. If that
activity is disrupted and the vulnerabilities of these
kleptocratic networks are exposed and attacked, only
then will United Nations envoys and other diplomats
be in a position to actually make progress towards
brokering and supporting the implementation of peace
agreements that lead to lasting peace and that benefit
long-suffering populations.
The policy tools available to the Security Council
and other interested parties are threefold: first, a
network-focused approach to sanctions that focuses
on grand corruption; secondly, anti-money-laundering
measures that focus on the illicit movement of money
through the international financial system; and
thirdly, as the Secretary-General said, prosecutions
that, in this case, focus on financial crimes associated
with atrocities.
Let us go to the first one. Sanctions must be levied
against entire networks, not just individuals. That
is the approach that the Security Council and others
took to propel Iran and North Korea to the negotiating
table. Sanctions that target networks in this way are
powerful tools for changing behaviour and pressuring
individuals to compromise. These network sanctions
work because they affect not only the primary target of
the sanctions themselves, but also the individuals and
companies that play an important role in supporting the
targets’ activities. By sanctioning the individuals and
entities all at once or in close succession, and ensuring
robust enforcement, which is key, the primary target’s
network does not have enough time to recover from
the financial impact of being cut off from the global
financial system.
To implement this, the Council should add
“corruption tied to conflict” as a sanctions criterion to
its existing sanctions programmes and ensure that panels
of experts are mandated to report on corruption related
to conflict. Panels of experts must be provided with
the support they need to do this work, which includes
ensuring accountability for those responsible for the
tragic deaths of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán.
Secondly, the Council should enhance its
engagement with anti-money-laundering bodies,
such as the Financial Action Task Force and similar
regional bodies, and ensure that sanctions regimes
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8346

include references to the importance of combatting the
laundering of corruption proceeds. These organizations
need the help of the Security Council to bolster
their work.

I also thank John Prendergast for telling us about
the important work his team does to uncover the ways
that corruption fuels conflict and for giving us clear
recommendations on what we can do to stop it.

An important component of any effort to strengthen
the Security Council’s ability to counter corrupt
activities that fuel conflict more effective is to move
beyond working with Governments alone. The Council
could enhance its leverage considerably by expanding
its outreach and engagement with banks and other
financial institutions to counter corruption-fueled
conflict. Certain elements of the private sector could
them become allies in support of these objectives.

I thank everyone for being here for this, the first
Security Council meeting on the relationship between
corruption and conflict. This is an issue that has for
too long gone unaddressed. For all the time we spend
here discussing conflict, we hardly ever talk about how
corruption fuels the instability, violence and criminal
activity that put countries on our agenda. We pour
billions and billions of dollars into trying to fix these
problems. We deploy Blue Helmets. We set up massive
assistance missions. We send experts to all corners
of the globe. But we fail to recognize the issue that is
staring us in the face — corruption.

Thirdly and finally, courts must have the mandate
to prosecute financial crimes, particularly those rooted
in corruption, when connected to conflict and atrocities.
The International Criminal Court and other courts of
special jurisdiction, such as the Special Criminal Court
for the Central African Republic or the Hybrid Court in
South Sudan, must have the authority to prosecute these
financial crimes.
Ultimately, these tools of financial pressure are
not an end in themselves, but should be deployed, as
the Secretary-General said today, in the context of a
comprehensive strategy that intensifies diplomacy,
supports Government institutions of accountability and
transparency, and gives space to civil society efforts to
promote human rights and reconciliation. As it stands
now — and this is the kicker — war crimes pay. In
order for peace to have any chance, those benefiting
from the human misery wrought by conflicts around
the world need to pay a price, whether financial, legal
or political, and the corrupt systems that underlie them
need to be ended.

At its core, corruption is the transfer of wealth
from the powerless to the powerful. Bribes, insider
deals, the skimming of public funds and the diversion
of humanitarian aid — these are all forms of the
involuntary tribute the poorest pay to the powerful
and corrupt regimes. When the weight of this burden
becomes too much for the people to endure, they
inevitably react. Corruption also allows transnational
crime and drug trafficking to flourish, threatening the
health and safety of all of us. The resulting instability
and outflows of desperate people demonstrate that
corruption is not just an internal matter; it is a regional
and global concern for all of us.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

On 17 December 2010, a humble Tunisian fruit
seller sat down in front of the local governor’s office,
dowsed himself in paint thinner and set himself on
fire. Mohamed Bouazizi’s desperate act set off the
Arab Spring and made him the face of protest against
authoritarian Governments. What is often lost in his
story is that Mohamed was driven to publicly and
painfully kill himself by corruption. Like other poor
street vendors in Tunisia, Mohamed was routinely
harassed by officials seeking bribes. Hours before his
suicide, he had experienced yet another humiliating
shakedown by a local police officer. Perhaps hoping
that others would understand his plight, Mohamed
committed one final act of protest against the system
that was robbing him not only of his livelihood but of
his dignity.

I thank Secretary-General Guterres for being here
today and shining a light on the link between corruption
and international peace and security.

Mohamed’s action sparked a wave of anti-corruption
uprising across the Arab world. Governments that
had appeared stable for decades fell within weeks. In

I thank you, Madam President, for inviting me to
speak today and for bringing attention to this critical
issue. I also thank all Security Council members for
considering a more robust action plan for countering
the corruption-fueled conflict that is destroying the
lives of millions of people around the world today.
The President: I thank Mr. Prendergast for
his statement.

18-280295/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

Yemen, Syria and Libya, protest quickly spiraled into
conflicts as corrupt leaders and their cronies tried to
hang on to power. All of this unrest eventually found
its way to the Security Council’s agenda. In fact, nine
out of the ten countries that Transparency International
considers to be the most corrupt in the world are on the
Security Council agenda — nine out of ten. But instead
of reflecting on why this is the case, the United Nations
is too often willing to ignore corruption. We fear that
addressing it will put off Governments and shut off
cooperation, or we regard corruption as just the cost of
doing business in some countries.
But this head-in-the-sand approach is backwards.
In the most troubled countries in the world, corruption
is not simply part of the system; corruption is the
system. Governments in places like Venezuela and Iran
do not exist to serve their people and happen to do a
little corruption on the side; they exist to serve their
own interests and corruption is the means by which
they do so.
The fact is that corrupt regimes cannot be ignored,
wished away or dealt with quietly or with whispers. If the
Security Council is going to deliver on its commitment
to peace and security, corruption must be addressed.
Examples of corruption leading to conflict are all around
us. The estimates of how much the corrupt Government
of Viktor Yanukovych stole from the Ukrainian people
run as high as $100 billion over the course of less than
four years. His lavish lifestyle was legendary and
greatly resented by the Ukrainian people. And when
Yanukovych was eventually ousted for his crimes, the
ripple effects were global. Russia occupied Crimea and
began the most serious confrontation between Moscow
and the West since the Cold War.
Corruption also fuels terrorist movements. Citizens
who watch Government insiders get rich by stealing
resources or demanding brides are ripe for recruitment
by terrorists. Boko Haram gained power and support in
Nigeria largely in opposition to Government corruption
and oppression. The first targets of its violent
attacks were the police stations that housed Nigeria’s
notoriously corrupt and abusive police force. And as
Boko Haram carried out barbaric attacks that killed
thousands, Nigeria’s leaders stole countless amounts
of money to defeat terrorism. Since then, Nigeria has
taken real steps towards reform, and we commend the
Government for recognizing the need for change.
6/22

10/09/2018

Corruption sustains and prolongs conflict. The
ethnic divisions in South Sudan are real, but the driving
source of the conflict is a fight over who will control
South Sudan’s oil revenues, as we heard earlier today.
Until there is a way to transparently distribute natural
resources in a way that is seen as fair by the South
Sudanese people, the civil war will go on. Elsewhere
in Africa, groups exploit natural resources, even
trafficking in wildlife to pay for war.
Corruption is also an international problem
because looted funds are laundered through the global
financial system. More than any other country, the
United States has taken action to stop this. Through
the Kleptocracy Initiative, the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act, and the Global Magnitsky Human Rights
Accountability Act, we have shut down corrupt actors
involved in drug trafficking, arms trafficking, and
money-laundering.
In countries like the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Nicaragua and Venezuela, where corruption has
fuelled conflict or prevented its resolution, the United
States Treasury has levelled significant sanctions. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Treasury used the
Global Magnitsky authority to sanction businessman
Dan Gertler, one associated individual and 33 entities
for corruption related to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
In Venezuela, the United States Treasury has
imposed targeted sanctions on Government officials
to stop them from moving their stolen assets in the
international financial system. And we have gone
the extra mile to ensure that our sanctions are aimed
directly at the Maduro regime and not at the Venezuelan
people. Later today, the United States will host an Arria
Formula meeting that will focus specifically on the toll
that corruption in Venezuela has taken on its people and
how it threatens international security. We welcome all
Member States to join us at the meeting.
Last year during the United States presidency, we
demonstrated that human rights is an issue of peace and
security. This year, we make the same argument for the
Council’s time and attention on the issue of corruption.
By the time a person like Mohamed Bouazizi is moved
to lash out against his oppressors, it is too late to
prevent corruption from becoming a full-fledged threat
to international peace and security.
To those of my colleagues who are serious about
fulfilling their duties as members of the Security
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council, I urge that we take a longer view. If we fail
to take seriously the issue of corruption now, we will
doom ourselves to deal with the violence it creates in
the future.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to Council members who wish
to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to thank
you, Madam President, for putting this very important
issue on the Council’s agenda today. I want to thank the
Secretary-General for his insightful words.
I also want to thank Mr. Prendergast. I was very
interested in what he had to say about the three primary
issues that need to be addressed, about how sanctions
need to be extended to networks and about system
change. As the Council considers some of the issues
before it, I hope we will be able to follow some of his
prescriptions and debate how we can more productively
tackle corruption.
Corruption is pervasive. We agree with those who
spoken so far that it causes and exacerbates conflict.
But even more importantly, it is a major obstacle
to economic growth and poverty alleviation. It is a
subterranean current that perniciously undercuts efforts
at peace, reconciliation and community rebuilding, and
in many cases it causes those efforts to collapse.
From my own experience in Kabul, I know what it
does to the willingness of individuals to go along with
Governments trying to do the right thing when they see
lower-level officials trying to shake them down for the
most basic human services. Losses from corruption total
some $1 trillion dollars a year. Corruption holds back
economic development, it undermines the provision of
public services and it stokes grievances and, ultimately,
conflict. Kofi Annan, in 2003, called it an “insidious
plague” (A/58/PV.50, p. 12).
The links between conflict and corruption are well
established. We heard some examples of that today. In
Syria, we have seen how a corrupt Government can
generate grievances that lead to discontent and then
to violence and then to conflict. In the Balkans, much
ethnic tension has been fuelled by leaders not living up
to their responsibilities. Studies of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in Iraq, Nigeria
and Afghanistan show how, once a conflict begins, it
creates even more opportunities for bribery and other

S/PV. 8346

corrupt practices. That, in turn, undermines the rule
of law, which fuels further conflict. Terrorist groups,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham or
Al-Qaida, take advantage of corruption both to fund
their operations and to attract recruits and promote
their ideology.
No country is immune from corruption, and I
include my own country. The fight against corruption
therefore needs to begin in our capitals. I would like
to highlight three steps that the United Kingdom has
taken recently to strengthen our own defences. In 2017,
we passed the Criminal Finances Act, which establishes
new anti-corruption tools, such as unexplained wealth
orders. This year, we announced that we would establish
a public register listing the beneficial ownership
of overseas companies, including in our overseas
territories. That will help ensure that the United
Kingdom is not used as a refuge by corrupt leaders,
businessmen and officials. We have also established
the National Economic Crime Centre, hosted by our
National Crime Agency to task, and coordinate our
overall law enforcement response.
But in today’s interconnected world, as we have
heard, it is vital that there be a properly coordinated
international response. We are a very strong supporter
of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
and I would like to take this opportunity to urge all
the countries that have not ratified the Convention to
do so because it provides an excellent international
framework to guide collective efforts. Fifteen years after
its adoption by the General Assembly (resolution 58/4),
we need to ensure that we maintain our momentum and
focus on implementation and that the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly all ensure that their efforts in that regard are
mutually reinforcing.
In 2016, we hosted an anti-corruption summit in
London in the hope of stepping up global action. One
of the most important outcomes of the summit, we
believe, was the establishment of the International
Anti-Corruption Coordination Centre. It brings together
specialist law-enforcement officers from six countries
to trace the assets and individuals involved in cases of
grand corruption.
Asset recovery is a critical part of efforts to
tackle corruption and a fundamental principle of the
Convention against Corruption. In 2017, we co-hosted
the first Global Forum on Asset Recovery with the

18-280297/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

United States, the World Bank and UNODC. The Forum
helped to move forward arrangements for returning
stolen assets of more than $300 million to Nigeria. The
Convention, in chapter VI, highlights the importance
of technical assistance and information exchange. The
United Kingdom is proud to be working in partnership
with several countries to share best practices and develop
capacities. In Nigeria, we provide technical assistance
and equipment to key agencies fighting international
and domestic financial and economic crime, and we
work to raise public awareness of corruption.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom will continue
to support a concerted international response to end
impunity for those engaged in corruption, to recover
stolen assets and to empower citizens to stand up to
and report corruption. That, in turn, will help prevent
and resolve conflict. The United Nations has a crucial
role to play in that response. We hope that all Member
States will work together in order to get the better of
corrupt leaders, businessmen and officials and ensure
that there is no safe haven.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank the United States for having taken
the initiative of convening this unprecedented meeting
of the Security Council on the fight against corruption
in conflict situations. We also warmly thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Mr. Prendergast for their
illuminating briefings.
Corruption is both a consequence of instability
and conflict and an important factor in exacerbating
them. The Council is therefore the appropriate forum
to address this issue, but we must do so in a pragmatic,
operational and non-ideological manner.
In addition to significantly weakening institutions
that safeguard the rule of law, corruption leads to drastic
economic disparity and promotes organized crime
and the financing of terrorism. It thereby undermines
the security and the political, economic and social
development of affected States. In that regard, it can
be an obstacle to international peace and security,
particularly in countries in conflict or post-conflict
situations, which often suffer a lack of institutions or
weak institutions. Those countries, already vulnerable,
are often the first victims of the ravages of corruption,
which affects the stability of the State, the security of
its citizens and the future of the country.
Beyond the threat it poses to peace, corruption is
a major obstacle to development. Free of all ideology,
8/22

10/09/2018

France’s pragmatic approach helps us to us see
corruption as a threat to peace and development. It
is an insidious evil that rots them both. Conversely,
good governance — that is, a legal and institutional
environment that promotes transparency and
accountability — is a necessary condition for
peacebuilding and development.
In that context, it is absolutely essential that the
international community remain fully engaged in
the fight against corruption at all levels — national,
regional and international. Fifteen years after its
adoption, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption remains the only universal instrument and
a pillar of the international fight against corruption.
France reiterates its call for the strict implementation
of the Convention by all States, in particular through its
review mechanism, which helps to ensure the effective
monitoring of the application of the Convention.
In that framework, each State has a responsibility
and duty to act to put an end to corruption. Since we are
here to share best practices, let me briefly share France’s
experience. We have considerably strengthened our
anti-corruption powers by mobilizing public authorities,
economic actors and civil society, who are closer to the
field and promote innovative initiatives. To prevent
and effectively fight corruption, non-State actors, who
have essential expertise and links on the ground, play
a major role. It is therefore important to implement
joint strategies that bring together States, civil society
and the private sector. That is the key to success.Those
avenues are part and parcel of the assessment to which
France was subjected this year as part of the second
review cycle of the Convention against Corruption.
In order to effectively fight corruption, economic
transparency is also essential. That is why in 2016
France adopted a law on transparency, the fight against
corruption and the modernization of the economy. That
law also created the French anti-corruption agency that
is responsible for drawing up recommendations on the
prevention of and assistance in detecting corruption
for public and economic actors, as well as a national
plan for the prevention of corruption. We encourage
all States to establish robust national mechanisms to
prevent and combat corruption.
Beyond the national level, regional and international
organizations also have a central role to play in
contributing to anti-corruption efforts and in
supporting States that express a need for them. In
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Europe, for example, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development and the Council of
Europe have developed particularly relevant regional
legal instruments. The Group of 20 also has an
anti-corruption working group, which France is
co-chairing with Argentina until the end of this year.
Finally, I would like to highlight the key role of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) as
the guarantor of the Convention against Corruption. The
UNODC undertakes many anti-corruption activities,
including the facilitation of the review mechanism and
technical assistance activities — for example, training
workshops for judges and prosecutors or assistance in
the drafting of legislative documents — in order to help
States implement their international obligations in that
area. We encourage all Member States to support the
important work of the UNODC in that regard.
Let me conclude by stressing the importance
of international cooperation in the fight against
corruption, in particular in order to learn from the best
practices already in place. France thus fully supports the
Open Government Partnership, which we co-chaired
in 2016. That initiative, which seeks to increase the
openness of public data and civic participation in public
decision-making and is now comprised of more than
70 countries from all continents, is a formidable tool
for preventing corruption risks. We hope that as many
States as possible will join those efforts, and on behalf
of France, I would like to once again make an appeal to
that end.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the United
States presidency for the opportunity to discuss how
corruption fuels conflicts. As for us, we stand for a
system-wide coordination to improve the interlinkages
between development and security, in particular in the
regional context. It is from that angle that we see added
value in scrutinizing that phenomenon as a consequence
of conflict, with development drivers.

S/PV. 8346

make every effort to support our common commitment
to preventing and controlling corruption so as to
ensure peace. Transparency, the rule of law, good
governance and accountability are the ways to root
out corruption. That is true for pre-conflict, conflict
and post-conflict societies. Our experience shows that
more engagement of countries in the international
system of relations and transactions, rather than less,
helps to avoid corruptive practices. Isolation plays the
opposite role, fuelling negative tendencies in national
and international development.
Secondly, today’s world clearly testifies to the
fact that there are interlinkages between development
and security. We are confronted today by protracted
conflicts with complex political instability and tensions
that defy our interventions. To address them, we
need to assess the alarming intensity and proportions
assumed by problems such as terrorism, armed
groups, transnational crime, the exploitation of natural
resources and historical legacies and trafficking in
drugs, weapons and human beings, and to identify how
corruption permeates all of them.
On the other hand, corruption is also triggered by
insecurities caused by development-related root causes:
deep poverty arising from climate change; food, water
and energy insecurities; and large inflows of money
for capacity-building and development aid. As such,
in order to attain sustainable peace, including through
engagement on conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
we need to promote a threefold strategy by, inter
alia, creating the potential for the close, complex,
multifaceted and case-specific relationship between
security and development, utilizing an innovative
and revamped regional approach, and strengthening
coordination within the United Nations to increase
its effectiveness and ensure greater transparency
and accountability.

My delegation would like to make the following
observations on some key points.

Thirdly, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development identifies an explicit link between
corruption and peaceful, just and inclusive societies.
One of the most important commitments in the Agenda
is to leave no one behind in the delivery of services,
decision-making and the dispensation of justice.
Achieving that ambitious goal will not be possible
without tackling corruption in all its forms.

First, my country has its own experience in fighting
various threats to peace and security at the national,
regional and global levels. In that vein, we intend to

To conclude, my country firmly believes that the
efforts of individual country have to be complemented
by future actions conducted in unity. It is critically

We express appreciation to Secretary-General
Guterres and the founding Director of the Enough
Project and co-founder of The Sentry, Mr. Prendergast,
for their comprehensive and insightful briefings.

18-280299/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

important to build an environment of sustainable peace
and resilient development for all. However, when we
speak about the ways that the Security Council’s sanction
regimes and resolutions could lower the probability of
conflict affected by corruption, we have to also bear in
mind that the effect is yet to be thoroughly studied.
Lastly, we believe that the United Nations and its
main organs have a crucial role to play in addressing
that phenomenon, which triggers conflicts and impedes
the post-conflict recovering process.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation thanks the United States presidency for
holding this briefing on corruption and conflict. It also
welcomes the presence of Secretary-General António
Guterres, whose relevant analysis shed light on the
acuity of corruption and its correlation with conflicts
around the world. My delegation also thanks Mr. John
Prendergast, founding Director of the Enough Project,
for his briefing.
There is no doubt that corruption is one of the
main causes of conflict, and it seems to be one of the
most complex challenges facing our States. Corruption
is morally and legally reprehensible and can create a
fertile breeding ground for social unrest and give rise
to new forms of violence, which can lead to conflicts
that undermine the mechanisms for managing and
distributing national wealth. When it reaches endemic
proportions, corruption can undermine the foundations
of a modern State that aspires to peace, development
and shared prosperity through its impact on the values
of transparency, integrity, morality and justice.
Corruption is a gangrene that is rotting
State institutions by undermining their ability to
carry out their sovereign functions and thereby
represents a source of instability and conflict. In
that regard, my delegation would like to focus its
statement on administrative, judicial and security
institutions, three areas that are emblematic of
the challenges that corruption poses to States.
Indeed,
in
many
countries,
corruption
in
administrative institutions has a negative impact
on their effectiveness and fairness, in particular
in how they serve their clients, which leads to
frustrations that are factors in social conflicts.
As a result, such institutions often lose all credibility
in collective perceptions and thus struggle to establish
themselves as places of civic equality.
10/22

10/09/2018

Judicial institutions are equally susceptible, as they
are supposed to guarantee the equality of citizens before
the law, contribute to the control of democratic and
economic governance, and ensure the implementation
of accountability.
With regard to the corruption of security
institutions, which are tools for protecting people and
defending national territory, it represents a break in the
pact of trust with civilians and another source of social
tensions. Those institutions struggle to effectively
control borders and to resolutely combat trafficking of
all kinds, in particular drug trafficking and trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.
In the light of corruption’s enormous potential
for harm and its ability to undermine the foundations
of States, in particular those in post-crisis situations,
African leaders declared 2018 the African
Anti-Corruption Year, with the theme: “Winning
the Fight against Corruption: A Sustainable Path to
Africa’s Transformation”. In doing so, they intend
to demonstrate their collective commitment and
determination to combating that scourge.
In that connection, the African Union Peace and
Security Council, at its 764th meeting held on 12 April,
stressed the need for greater integration of the African
governance architecture within the framework of
structural conflict prevention, while anchoring the
African anti-corruption strategy within a global
perspective. Indeed, as described earlier, corruption
appears to be a major obstacle to good governance,
may lead to large economic disparities, fuels organized
crime and represents an obstacle to democracy. It
therefore creates the conditions for destabilizing States,
while endangering peace and security at the local,
regional and international levels.
That is why, in the final statement of the thirty-first
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State of
the African Union, held on 1 and 2 July in Nouakchott,
emphasis was placed on strengthening South-South
cooperation through the voluntary exchange of
information, mutual legal assistance and the sharing
of best practices among anti-corruption agencies;
combating illicit financial flows through such measures
as the provision of financial information on a countryby-country basis; and investment in demographic
dividends through education and awareness campaigns
for young people in the fight against corruption. Those
measures require genuine ownership to be taken at the
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

local level in the fight against corruption, with a view
to sharing experiences for greater effectiveness on the
African continent.
We must also recall that the consequences of
corruption are more pronounced in post-conflict
countries, which are already affected by the absence
or weakness of State institutions and the scarcity of
financial resources. In that context, corruption can
have destabilizing effects on the process of building
and sustaining peace and even increases the likelihood
of the resumption of hostilities. In order to break the
vicious cycle that leads to increasingly inextricable
situations in post-conflict countries, some practical
measures could be considered to limit the corrosive
effects of corruption on their stability and development.
Those could include, among others, explicitly including
the anti-corruption dimension in peace agreements;
ensuring that anti-corruption interventions start in the
immediate aftermath of conflict and take into account
the context and relevant capacities existing in countries;
strengthening collaboration with civil society and
supporting its efforts to combat corruption.
As part of its peacebuilding strategy, and
aware of the fact that corruption can be a potential
factor in the resurgence of conflicts, Côte d’Ivoire
has been working to strengthen its legislative and
institutional framework to combat that scourge.
On 16 April 2014, it set up the High Authority for
Good Governance, which is responsible, among other
tasks, for drawing up and implementing the national
anti-corruption strategy, monitoring the implementation
of prevention policies and the fight against corruption,
and international cooperation in that field.
My country has also strengthened the capacity of
its National Financial Information Processing Unit,
which is responsible for combating illegal financial
transactions and money-laundering. It has also updated
and strengthened the texts governing the Central
Public Procurement Department in order to make
public procurement even more open and transparent.
The pursuit of institutional reforms has also been
marked by the expansion of the auditing powers of the
Court of Auditors, in order to track and repress the
embezzlement of public funds by high-ranking officials
and to closely review the management of those funds.
That institutional overhaul should make it possible
to stem the loss of public funds and to pursue the
establishment of a council of State and a court of appeal.

S/PV. 8346

My country is deeply convinced that combating
corruption is a matter of national, regional and
international peace and security. We therefore support
not only the preventive approach advocated by the
Secretary-General, but also the need to promote
international cooperation, including the sharing
of experiences and good practices, in the fight
against corruption.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
We listened to the statements made by Mr. Prendergast.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is an important purpose of the Charter of
the United Nations and the primary responsibility
of the Security Council, as entrusted by the Charter.
Nowadays, complex factors are at play throughout
world, the emergence of regional hotspot issues is
increasing, and traditional and non-traditional security
challenges are intertwined. Against that background,
the international community should act in concert to
prevent and resolve conflicts in order to build longlasting peace and universal security.
First, it is important to adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and settle disputes by peaceful means. Sovereign
equality, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States are
the basic principles that guide international affairs.
Countries must develop equal partnerships through
consultation and mutual understanding. All parties to
conflict must insist on consultations on an equal basis
and resolve their differences through peaceful means,
such as dialogue and negotiations. The mechanisms
and means of addressing matters of international peace
and security must be further refined in order to better
resolve conflicts, defuse tensions and eliminate wars
and conflicts.
Secondly, both the symptoms and the root causes of
conflicts must be tackled. The international community
should focus on addressing the root causes of conflict,
such as poverty and underdevelopment, in an effort to
comprehensively promote the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, strengthen
global development partnerships, honour assistance
commitments and help developing countries improve
the livelihood of their people, exploring development
paths that suit their national conditions and helping
them to enhance their own capabilities for development.

18-2802911/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

We should promote development through peace and
consolidate peace through development so that people
in conflict areas can enjoy the peace dividends as soon
as possible.
Thirdly, it is important to build a new international
peace and security partnership featuring cooperation
and win-win outcomes. All parties should establish a
new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security, and respond to challenges in the
area of international peace and security in a mutually
beneficial manner. The Security Council should play a
central role in the collective security mechanism and
work side by side and in a coordinated manner with the
relevant United Nations agencies to establish synergies.
Regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, enjoy advantages in terms of shared
geography, history and culture, and should therefore
play important roles in maintaining peace and security
in the region.
China is a builder and defender of world
peace and actively participates in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and mediation activities
related to international and regional hotspot issues,
while advocating the settlement of disputes through
dialogue and negotiations. We firmly uphold the basic
norms of international relations based on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and promote international relations that are mutually
respectful, fair, just and characterized by cooperation
and win-win outcomes. The Beijing Summit of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation was successfully
held on 3 and 4 September. Leaders of China and Africa
announced new measures to strengthen comprehensive
cooperation between China and Africa around the theme
“Towards an even stronger China-Africa community
with a shared future” through win-win cooperation.
Eight major initiatives have been identified for the next
three years and beyond.
In the area of peace and security, China has
decided to establish a China-Africa peace and security
cooperation fund to support peace and security and
stability in Central Africa, while continuing to provide
free military aid and assistance to the African Union.
We support national and regional efforts, including in
the regions of the Sahel, the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf
of Guinea, to maintain regional security and support
counter-terrorism efforts.
12/22

10/09/2018

The Forum on China-Africa Cooperation has been
established to provide a platform for China and Africa to
strengthen exchanges in the area of peace and security.
We are making efforts to promote the implementation
of 50 security assistance projects, including the Belt
and Road Initiative, social security, United Nations
peacekeeping, combating piracy and counter-terrorism.
Within the United Nations framework, we will continue
to actively participate in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa and to mobilize the international
community to strengthen support for the African
Standby Force and build rapid-reaction forces to
respond to crises. China will continue to work with
the international community, adhere to multilateralism
and support the United Nations in playing a central role
in making greater contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption. Corruption is the common enemy of
humankind. Substantially reducing corruption and
bribery in all their forms and strengthening the recovery
and return of stolen assets are included as targets
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The international community needs to strengthen
cooperation, resolutely fight corruption and prevent
gaps and loopholes that could be used to the benefit
of corrupt actors. China is a party to the Convention
against Corruption and actively participates in the
relevant discussions in the General Assembly and other
relevant mechanisms to support the United Nations role
as the main cooperative channel to combat corruption.
China stands ready to work with Governments and
the relevant international agencies to continuously
contribute to deepening international cooperation to
counter corruption.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Prendergast for
their briefings.
The United Nations Convention against Corruption
stresses that corruption undermines the institutions
and values of democracy, ethical values and justice.
Given those undermining effects, it is remarkable that
the Security Council has never discussed corruption
before. I therefore commend you, Madam President, for
putting this issue on the agenda today.
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

In my intervention, I would like to focus on
three aspects: the rule of law, accountability and
sustainable development.
The rule of law forms the basis of stable societies,
democracy and the trust that citizens place in their
Government. If the rule of law is the medicine for
stability, then corruption is the virus that breeds
conflict. The report of the United Nations Development
Programme, entitled Journey to Extremism in Africa,
tells us how corrupt and ill-performing Governments
push people into the hands of violent extremists, and
Mr. Prendergast’s organization has highlighted how
actors engaged in illegal economic activities driven by
corruption have an interest in perpetuating conflict. At
the same time, reliable, corrupt-free Governments have
proven to be a source of resilience. Let us therefore
step up our efforts to strengthen the rule of law, build
capacity and create strong State institutions that truly
serve citizens.
This brings me to my second point — accountability.
Accountable State institutions are strong State
institutions. Accountability requires the separation of
powers, checks and balances and judicial follow-up. I
would like to thank Mr. Prendergast for his concrete
suggestions in that regard, which are worth looking into.
It requiresnot only the separation of powers, checks
and balances and judicial follow-up; it also requires
transparency. For that reason, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports Transparency International. The
annual Corruption Perceptions Index of Transparency
International shows that corruption and conflict
correlate. It also shows that corruption diminishes
when there are structures in place for citizens to hold
their Government to account.
The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI) is worth mentioning as well. The EITI standard
requires Governments to publish information on their
natural resources management, including on where
related tax money ends up. The EITI gives an informed
voice to the people, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been a proud supporter of the Initiative since its
inception because it is clear to us that internal oversight
mechanisms, as well as external oversight mechanisms
run by civil society, businesses and independent
auditors, are key to holding State institutions to account.
Lastly, with regard to my third point, sustainable
development, the sustaining peace agenda and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are our

S/PV. 8346

most comprehensive responses to conflict prevention.
Corruption, however, undermines their implementation.
It deprives those who are most marginalized of access to
vital services. Corruption diminishes tax revenues and
fuels grievances and discontent. Corruption raises the
cost of sustainable development. Tackling corruption is
vital to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
in particular Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong
institutions. Tackling corruption is vital to sustainable
development, and thus to global security.
In conclusion, today the Security Council has taken
a first and important step to address corruption and its
link to conflict. For the Council to take further steps,
we call on the Secretary-General to highlight the issue
more explicitly in his future reports and briefings. In
his foreword to the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime publication of the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption, the late former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan wrote that corruption “is found in all
countries — big and small, rich and poor”. Let the
disruptive consequences of corruption that all our
countries face unite us in our efforts to tackle that evil
phenomenon once and for all.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his briefing earlier this morning
and to Mr. John Prendergast for his account of how
corruption affects societies and drives conflict and for
his concrete recommendations to the Security Council.
The Security Council’s mandate to maintain
international peace and security, prevent conflicts and
address their root causes makes the topic of corruption
highly relevant to its work. We therefore welcome
today’s discussion, especially as it places significant
emphasis on prevention and sustaining peace.
Corruption can be defined as the abuse of power
and trust for private gain. It affects all countries, does
not recognize boundaries and can spread through all
levels of public agencies. Corruption cuts across entire
populations but hits the most disempowered members
of society the hardest. Women are often more at risk
of suffering the consequences of corruption. That is
because they tend to have weaker access to services and
are also at higher risk for sexual extortion and physical
abuse. We recognize how corruption contributes to
the destabilization of fragile States and is ultimately
one of the drivers of conflict. The recent United
Nations and World Bank study Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict

18-2802913/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

also mentions corruption as an underlying source for
conflict and violence. In contrast, when people trust
their service providers, institutions, Governments and
elected officials, the path to stable societies is firmer.
Knowing that everyone is treated equally gives the
most disempowered in particular a sense of belonging
and security, while offering better opportunities
to end the cycles of violence that are the result of
political exclusion.
Our multilateral efforts have produced strong
political commitments to supporting anti-corruption
initiatives. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, especially Goal 16, on stronger
institutions, and Goal 10, on reducing inequality within
and among countries, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
and the United Nations Convention against Corruption
are important foundations for those commitments. The
peacebuilding and sustaining peace agendas of the
United Nations are also directly relevant to the fight
against corruption. Resolution 2282 (2016), on sustaining
peace, stresses the importance of strengthening the rule
of law and promoting accountability, good governance
and gender equality. It also highlights the need to
respect and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Addressing corruption is part and parcel of
honouring those commitments.
Anti-corruption efforts are a high priority for my
country at home, at the multilateral level and through
our development cooperation. We support increased
democratic participation, which requires strong and
independent judicial systems, political institutions and
free media. That in turn reinforces transparency and
accountability, thereby making the abuse of power more
difficult. We also support partner countries in their
fight against corruption by strengthening institutions
such as tax and audit authorities. For example, we
organized the Stockholm Tax Conference, held in May,
to promote capacity-building in the area of taxation.
Efficient, transparent and effective tax administration
supports poverty reduction and equality and is closely
linked to the fight against corruption.
Every day in the Council we see the devastating
effects that conflicts have on countries by undermining
institutions and the rule of law, thereby creating more
avenues for corruption. It is crucial to keep that aspect
in mind when we plan for United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. Work against
corruption must be clearly included in mandates and
in the support we provide to capacity-building and the
14/22

10/09/2018

reform of rule-of-law institutions. Mr. Prendergast has
put forward additional ideas, including on how we could
improve sanctions policies, which we believe are well
worth considering and are very much in line with the
work we have started in order to ensure that sanctions
instruments become more efficient.
It is also important to ensure that the support that
the United Nations provides to Member States in their
anti-corruptions efforts is coherent. Missions, United
Nations country teams and United Nations entities,
such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
must all work together. We must also continue to
support models for international cooperation among
practitioners, prosecutors and law enforcement. Not
only does anti-corruption work address the crippling
effects of corruption on societies, economies and lives,
it is first and foremost about prevention. If we can build
effective, accountable and inclusive public institutions
and provide access to justice for all, we decrease the
risk of a society sliding or relapsing into conflict. It
is for that reason that corruption is and should remain
part of the Council’s agenda in the broader context of
prevention and sustaining peace.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the information he provided
and his assessment of the threat of corruption in
situations of conflict. We also thank Mr. Prendergast
for his briefing.
Yes, conflicts do provide scope for profit and
many people do indeed profit from them. We should
not forget, however, that many conflicts are provoked
by struggles, both concealed and open, over natural
resources. And this is about external and well as
internal players. Nowhere is that more evident than in
Africa, where the thought of its undeveloped natural
resources gives many no rest. We could term that the
reverse side of corruption.
As the Secretary-General rightly said today,
corruption is a feature of both rich and poor countries.
It also exists in the United States, which lectured us
about corruption today. It exists there in its traditional
forms, but it is frequently disguised through unique
institutions such as legalized lobbying. So if people
want to discuss the subject in the Security Council, it
would be more logical for them to start at home, and
specifically with lobbying, which envelops the highest
levels of power in the United States and is dictated by
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the interests of numerous private military companies,
whose commercial interests are inextricably entwined
with those of the powerful defence lobby in the Capitol.
For the Council’s information, the cause of the
conflict in Ukraine was not Yanukovych’s corruption
but a coup d’état that exchanged one corrupt regime for
another, which, unlike that of Yanukovych, has actually
waged war on its own people. There are members of the
Council who are well aware of the scale of the corruption
in Ukraine because those people are their protégés.
And it is that corruption, including in the military, that
is fuelling the conflict in south-eastern Ukraine.
The Russian delegation has consistently advocated
strengthening the central coordinating role of the
United Nations in uniting the international community’s
efforts to prevent corruption and combat such scourges.
In our view, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption is a robust international legal framework for
developing international cooperation in this area. Russia
was one of the first countries to sign the Convention,
in December 2003, and to ratify it, in March 2006.
In 2015, the sixth session of the Conference of States
Parties to the Convention was held in Saint Petersburg.
We pay particular attention to the Mechanism for the
Review of Implementation of the Convention, which we
consider unique, open, transparent and unpoliticized,
and which functions as an intergovernmental process
based on respect for the principles of the equality
and sovereignty of States and of non-intervention in
domestic affairs.
We support strengthening the role of the United
Nations and of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) in providing expert assistance
to States in their efforts to effectively implement the
provisions of this critical Convention, and in UNODC’s
efforts to ensure its universalization. Russia is a major
donor to UNODC’s anti-corruption projects, including
a number of joint initiatives such as the annual
preparatory courses for contacts and Government
experts participating in the review of the Convention’s
implementation. In 2017, Russia provided financial
support for the operations of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption Legal Library and the
Tools and Resources for Anti-Corruption Knowledge
web portal. In June in Vienna, on the eve of the World
Cup, together with UNODC and with support from
the BRICS countries, Brazil, Russia, India, China
and South Africa, we held an international conference
on preventing corruption in sports. As we know,

S/PV. 8346

intergovernmental open-ended working groups have
been established in the framework of the Convention
to review measures on preventing corruption, ensuring
the restitution of assets and bringing together experts
on international cooperation. All these formats are
open, intergovernmental and technical in nature.
There are still gaps and inconsistencies in States’
legal norms with regard to the restitution of criminally
derived assets. In that connection, the Russian
Federation has consistently supported the development
of a corresponding multilateral international legal
mechanism under the auspices of the United Nations,
which would help to eliminate vague areas and would
help to strengthen the coordination of the relevant
bodies in supplying mutual legal assistance on
criminal matters and extraditions, and in countering
money-laundering.
As is blindingly clear, unpoliticized mechanisms
for anti-corruption have been functioning effectively
and are being developed at the United Nations. In
that connection, we do not support initiatives aimed
at enshrining the topic as some kind of so-called new
challenge to international peace and security and thus
making use of the forum and mechanisms of the Security
Council in that context. That can only undermine
the existing formats and would damage the practical
cooperation of the relevant State agencies based on
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
We believe that the distribution of labour that exists in
the United Nations enables us to productively tackle
the challenges in the area of anti-corruption activity,
and that changing it, especially to the detriment of the
authority of the United Nations, is counterproductive.
There are no objective reasons for it. For our part,
we will continue to assist the specialized bodies and
mechanisms of international cooperation in this
area and in adapting them to reflect the evolution of
existing threats.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
the Secretary-General and Mr. Prendergast for their
important briefings.
Peru attaches high priority to the issue that brings
us together. Our country has not been spared the
scourge of the corruption that affects our hemisphere.
The problem manifests itself in different forms in every
region of the world, and in the numerous conflicts that
make up the Security Council’s agenda. Corruption

18-2802915/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

10/09/2018

erodes citizens’ belief and trust in their authorities and
institutions. It undermines ethical values, the rule of
law, justice and democratic governance. It is one of the
greatest obstacles to effectively addressing the needs
and development of our peoples.

held in Lima in April, Peru promoted the adoption of
the Lima Commitment, which includes 57 measures
and concrete actions in support of the fight against
corruption and regional cooperation in that area. We
are currently working on its implementation.

The transnational scope and multiple forms of
corruption and organized crime should compel us to
commit to strengthening international cooperation and
multilateralism in order to respond consistently to the
challenges that are shared by all our countries. That
includes the work of the Council, given that according
to the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
this scourge represents a threat to the stability and
security of societies. It is clear that corruption is a root
cause of many conflicts and humanitarian crises, and
it is often associated with organized crime, which in
turn manifests itself as a financial backer and enabler
of violence and terrorism through activities such as
money-laundering and the illicit arms trade. In that
regard, we would like to recall the Council’s presidential
statement of 8 May (S/PRST/2018/9), which commits us
to deepening investigations in order to better understand
the nature and scope of the links between terrorists
and transnational organized crime. Peru attaches high
priority to the fight against corruption and organized
crime, in line with the Convention against Corruption
and with Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which, among other things, commits us
to promoting peaceful and inclusive societies and to
strengthening the rule of law.

In line with the need to prevent corruption from
degenerating into conflicts and humanitarian crises, we
consider it essential that the international community
have at its disposal mechanisms for early warning and
exchanging good practices. We therefore consider it
important to consider extending Council sanctions
regimes to corruption and money-laundering networks
that benefit from conflicts, as Mr. Prendergast
has proposed.

We emphasize that sustaining peace, defined
as a general objective and a permanent process in
identical resolutions recently reaffirmed by the General
Assembly and the Council (resolutions 70/262 and 2282
(2016)), duly commits us to consolidating inclusive,
transparent and accountable national institutions.
An effective fight against corruption requires a
culture of integrity and of constitutional provisions that
guarantee checks and balances on the exercise of power.
That includes full access to justice to ensure that there
is no impunity and greater participation by women and
young people in political and institutional life. The
citizenry must be able to know about the accusations in
cases of corruption in a timely manner and participate,
in an informed manner, in political life.
We are also believe that the scope of corruption
demands a coordinated response from Governments.
That is why, at the eighth Summit of the Americas,
16/22

Finally, with a view to strengthening national
institutions called on to sustain peace, we consider it
important to ensure that the fight against corruption
and respect for fundamental freedoms are reflected
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and other
missions mandated by the Council in countries affected
by conflict, as appropriate.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Prendergast for
their briefings. We have listened carefully to both and
we agree that corruption erodes the economy, weakens
Government institutions and enables other, related
crimes, such as money-laundering and international
transfers of illegally derived funds, often used to
finance mechanisms in support of terrorist activities.
Similarly, corruption undermines the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals, in particular
Goal 16, regarding the building of robust institutions, a
challenge from which no State is exempt.
However, the fact that corruption affects all States
to varying degrees does not indicate that it constitutes
a threat to international peace and security per se. In
many cases, corruption derives from weak institutions
due to a lack of economic resources or regions with
armed conflict. It can also emerge where there is a
lack of State presence as a product of the key causes
of conflicts. We therefore believe that corruption is
fundamentally an issue that falls under the functions
and powers of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the relevant subsidiary bodies
of the Organization. Those powers are set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations, and the Security Council
is duty-bound to respect that and to confine itself to
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

matters that constitute threats to international peace
and security.
The Security Council must identify threats to
international peace and security in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter, as stipulated in
Article 24, paragraph 2. The Council must also comply
with the Charter and with international law both in
its decisions and in its actions. The interference of
the Security Council in the functions and powers of
other organs of the United Nations is a distortion of the
purposes and principles of the Charter, undermines the
authority of those organs and violates the rights of all
Member States.
Including corruption as a threat to international
peace and security in the Council’s agenda does not give
any added value and leads only to greater politicization
of the issue and heightened disagreement among States.
In that regard, Bolivia emphasizes that the Security
Council’s decision to hold this informative briefing
should not be considered a precedent and should not
lead to undermining the authority or mandate of the
competent bodies in which the entire membership
participates or to the exploitation of this meeting for
ideological reasons. Likewise, it should neither lead
to the undermining of the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States by using the Security
Council under the pretext of fighting corruption for
international peace and security, nor should it be used
for ideological reasons, as we said before. By the same
token, it should not be used as an excuse to undercut
legitimate and democratic Governments or to encourage
policies of regime change.
The Council should set an example of defending
and promoting the rule of law, respecting the sovereign
equality of States, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and non-interference in the domestic jurisdiction of any
State. Selective application and politicization of rules
that aggravate conflicts and weaken the credibility and
authority of the Security Council, and thus the United
Nations system, should be avoided.
The United Nations, and the international
community in general, should cooperate with Member
States in the creation and strengthening of their
institutions and the rule of law, assuming responsibility
themselves for fighting corruption, and I repeat, doing
that in strict respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States.

S/PV. 8346

In Bolivia, President Evo Morales Ayma,
together with other authorities of the country, decided
voluntarily and for the first time in the history of
Bolivia, to renounce banking secrecy for the sake of
transparency — an example that should be replicated
throughout the world.
Moreover, at the international level, this year marks
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, which enjoys
broad international consensus and has served as an
international framework for cooperation to strengthen
prevention and mitigate the risks of corruption. At the
regional level, the member States of the Organization
of American States adopted the Lima Commitment to
tackle systemic corruption. Bolivia adhered to those
documents, as well as to the Inter-American Convention
against Corruption. There are also initiatives against
corruption in the framework of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations.
However, rules and regulations are not everything.
A strong political commitment to fight such a
phenomenon and take concrete actions to eliminate
that evil is needed. In that regard, it is necessary to
work on the elimination of tax havens, as well as to
design, adopt and implement measures to supervise and
control transnational corporations, which undermine
the sovereignty of States and in many cases encourage
corruption and the violation of human rights. As
Mr. Prendergast mentioned, the financial system is used
through those tax havens and banking secrecy, and in
conjunction with transnational corporations, to launder
money from criminal activities, including corruption
and the plundering of natural resources, which is used,
inter alia, to finance conflicts. That is why we must
fight corruption worldwide — first and foremost within
the global financial system.
In conclusion, we emphasize our conviction that
the promotion of the rule of law at the international
level is fundamental to make a reality a fairer world
and Organization that can deal with the phenomenon of
corruption effectively and in respect for the sovereignty
of all States.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for holding this important meeting and for the concept
note. We also appreciate the briefing by the SecretaryGeneral and that of Mr. John Prendergast, whom we

18-2802917/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

thank for his thoughts and proposals about targeted
sanctions. We believe that there is a need to further look
into them. The Security Council managed previously
to move from general sanctions to targeted and smart
sanctions. However, we believe that it is high time to
evaluate that experience more thoroughly.
I will cover three main aspects in my statement: first,
the causes and repercussions of corruption; secondly,
the role of the United Nations in fighting corruption
and in international cooperation; and, thirdly, the steps
taken by the State of Kuwait to fight corruption.
First, with respect to the causes and repercussions
of corruption, we know that our world today is suffering
from the spread of corruption to varying degrees. The
Secretary-General mentioned some facts and figures
that stress that point, especially in areas that suffer
from political or security turmoil. Corruption does not
exist in a vacuum. There are underlying economic and
social causes, such as poverty, oppression, inequality,
violations of human rights and a decline in levels of
social justice, as well as the absence of the rule of law.
All those create fertile ground for the proliferation
of corruption.
The increase in the levels of corruption in societies
negatively impacts the national security of countries,
similar to terrorism, violent extremism and organized
crime. Many examples and conflicts have proven that
there is a close link between the spread of corruption
and the intensity of conflicts. Corruption increases as
conflicts become more intense, which is why conflicts
become prolonged. The risk of corruption is not limited
to one country alone, but rather it threatens regional
and international security. The spread of corruption
deepens human misery, injustice and the misuse and
waste of public and private resources. Corruption can
destroy the economies of countries by diminishing
economic growth, slowing development and increasing
unemployment and poverty.
Secondly, with regard to the role of the United
Nations in fighting corruption, as well as in international
cooperation, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, adopted by the General Assembly in 2003, is
considered a solid legal framework that includes a set of
norms, measures and rules that should be implemented
by all parties to the Convention in order to promote
its legal and regulatory systems to fight corruption. If
implemented, it will reduce the incidence of corruption,
especially since the Convention further states that the
18/22

10/09/2018

United Nations would provide assistance to Member
States for capacity-building and the implementation
of programmes that promote transparency, integrity,
accountability and the rule of law. We therefore urge
Governments, the private sector and civil society to
take a collective stand against that phenomenon so that
we can attain a just and more prosperous future for all.
In that regard, we underscore the need to strengthen
cooperation and coordination with regional and
international entities in order to promote measures to
fight corruption. We must establish regional networks
to fight corruption, strengthen cooperation, share
expertise and work towards the implementation of
United Nations conventions in several areas, such as in
the areas of extradition and exchange of information.
As the Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing,
corruption exists in all countries — large and small,
rich and poor, North and South.
Thirdly, in 2016, the State of Kuwait established an
anti-corruption authority to fulfil our obligations under
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
I will mention briefly some of the objectives that
the authority aims to achieve, namely, promote the
principles of transparency and integrity in economic
and administrative transactions; implement the United
Nations Convention against Corruption and other
international conventions and treaties on fighting
corruption; work on fighting corruption, reduce its
threats and repercussions and prosecute its perpetrators;
seize and restore assets and proceeds from corruption,
in accordance with the law; protect State institutions
from bribery, trading in influence and the misuse of
power; protect whistle-blowers about corruption;
promote the principle of cooperation and participation
with countries and regional and international
organizations; and encourage and operationalize the
role of civil society institutions and organizations to
fight corruption and increase society’s awareness of
its risks.
In conclusion, we stress that the issue of fighting
and eliminating corruption is a common responsibility
that starts with the individual in particular and the
State in general. Corruption is a tool that allows its
perpetrators to achieve their purpose quickly, illicitly
and illegally. We can put an end to such a phenomenon
by educating societies and providing a decent life and
equality to all, and by Governments implementing
international conventions and treaties pertaining to this
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

issue, while above all strengthening and applying the
rule of law without discrimination.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As I take the floor on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea at this important debate, I would
first like to congratulate the United States Mission and
Ambassador Nikki Haley for including the important
issue of corruption on the agenda of the Security Council
for the first time. Today’s debate is taking place one day
after Africa Day, on 9 September, which was celebrated
under the theme “Winning the Fight against Corruption:
A Sustainable Path to Africa’s Transformation”. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and Mr. Prendergast
for their insightful briefings, which greatly enrich
today’s debate.
If we understand corruption as the act of corrupting
someone or allowing oneself to be corrupted, misusing
one’s official position to obtain or grant an illegitimate
advantage, then we can say that corruption is a form of
moral turpitude and that its sphere of influence pervades
all layers, especially the civil service but also the private
business sector. Obviously, the term “corrupt” implies
a diversion of services or the results thereof, which are
generally economic, to other illegitimate recipients,
which constitutes misappropriation. Therefore, in one
way or another, it is covered by Article 26 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Influence peddling, bribery, extortion and fraud
are some of the corrupt practices that are reflected
in actions such as giving money to public officials in
exchange for a service or the omission of their official
responsibility. Unfortunately, we are facing a scourge
that does not differentiate among States; it is found in
developed and developing countries alike. While there
may be more cases in some countries than in others, it
is a shared problem and concern for all nations of the
world — so much so that international cooperation and
the exchange of experiences and strategies in that area
are of global interest.
Although it is not their only source of financing, the
mafias, terrorists, criminal networks and mercenaries,
in satisfying their different ambitions, also resort to
extorting and corrupting certain officials in order to
obtain public goods and services, which leads to war,
public disorder, waste and so forth, with the ultimate
objective, in most cases, of seizing the countries’
political or economic power, in particular their natural

S/PV. 8346

resources. My country, Equatorial Guinea, has fallen
victim several times to those types of attempts, the
most recent of which took place in December.
As far as the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
concerned, not only does the law on civil servants of
the central administration of the State prohibit and
penalize, including with separation from service,
officials who engage in those types of practices, but
also, on 5 February 2004, a decree was enacted that
put into effect the law on ethics and dignity in the
exercise of public punctions. In our view, if civil
servants maintain high moral and ethical values, it will
be harder for them to lower themselves to committing
crimes, such as corruption, which are totally contrary
to their code of ethics.
Aware of the relevance of that issue and the great
damage it causes for society throughout the world, His
Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, and the Government
have on several occasions publicly condemned that
practice and taken appropriate actions and urged the
country’s legislature to develop every possible legal
instruments aimed at combating corruption.
I must also point out that our national development
plan, known as Horizon 2020, includes as one of its
main objectives the achievement of good governance,
which obviously includes supporting measures such as
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, including
poverty reduction. It is hoped that, in attaining the
Goals, it will be harder to justify misleading or derailing
certain public servants. However, many researchers
have agreed that improving working conditions is
among the aspects that need to be reviewed to reduce
the impact of the problem. Therefore, we encourage the
international community to ensure that each country
takes all possible measures to ensure good governance
and thereby improve the standard of living of its people
in order to reduce the tendency towards corruption.
In the area of peacebuilding, the Government of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has contributed to
the best of its ability by always providing human and
financial resources in the subregion of Central Africa
and on the African continent in general. In order for
the international community to succeed in this area,
States must get involved by improving their domestic
legislation to allow them to tackle this universal
scourge and enhance cooperation. In that regard, I
take this opportunity to commend the United Nations

18-2802919/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

Office on Drugs and Crime on its work and the great
effort it has undertaken so far in several States to
eradicate corruption with a view to reducing the serious
conflicts that simmer and persist in those countries.
Consequently, for the purpose of preventing conflicts
fuelled by corruption in all their manifestations, it
is the duty of States to cooperate with the competent
international organizations and to take preventive
measures to reduce this practice, which is becoming
systemic in many societies.
Unfortunately, transnational corporations, backed
by some powerful countries and with many financial
resources, in order to achieve their objectives of
maximum profits, sometimes corrupt officials,
especially from the poorest countries, with a view to
obtaining large profits by working outside the legally
established rules. Therefore, there is also a moral duty
to be borne by corporate actors and their backers to
comply with the law of the countries where they operate
and submit to the rule of law and avoid impunity,
another source of social unrest, and therefore a possible
cause of conflict.
In accordance with the position of the African
Union, we urge States in conflict to strengthen their
public institutions, transparency and accountability for
the perpetrators of corrupt acts that strengthen armed
groups and facilitate the trafficking in arms, drugs and
persons for personal gain and who destabilize society as
a whole. These actions are essential in order to achieve
the noble goal of silencing the weapons and putting an
end to all wars on our continent as soon as possible.
We believe that the mandates of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and political missions must include
measures and strategies that allow them greater access
to international financial information pertaining to the
parties to a conflict in order to reduce corruption, which
influences the length of a conflict and, for each specific
case, a specific formula for the control and monitoring
of funds on the ground, necessary expenditures and
payments that have actually been made, thereby
ensuring an exhaustive and impartial accounting.
Let me conclude my statement by quoting Argentine
journalist Hugo Alconada Mon, who stated in his book
The Root of All Evil: “Corruption is like tango; it takes
two to dance.”
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to congratulate
the presidency of the Security Council for taking the
initiative of convening today’s briefing. Allow me
20/22

10/09/2018

also to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. John
Prendergast for their very informative briefings.
One might say that corruption is an internal
problem of a country, but it is not. The fact is that
corruption undermines governmental institutions and
weakens judiciary systems and countries’ economies. It
also undermines armies’ ability to stand up to terrorist
groups, especially in countries in which soldiers are
not well paid or fully equipped. In an environment of
low morale, corruption can thrive. It provides terrorists
with access to financing and weapons and undermines
the rule of law, good governance and human rights.
Widespread and systematic corruption is one of the root
causes of many conflicts that may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
Corruption is also one of the major structural
obstacles to successful post-conflict reconstruction in
its negative impact on the three foundational pillars of
the United Nations system, namely, peace and security,
human rights, and sustainable development. It all leads
to one conclusion: corruption is not confined to national
borders. The Security Council cannot turn a blind eye
to corruption and terrorism that have joined forces in
conflict-affected countries. However, we have to bear
in mind that it is both a factor and a consequence of
the present security challenges we face. I would like to
share with the Council a few ideas that, in our opinion,
could contribute to addressing the problem.
First, we should veer towards a policy of financial
pressure aimed at reforms. Donors should send a clear
message that they are willing to stop funding or reject
projects if the Government in question fails to include
safeguards to prevent corruption. The scope of Security
Council sanctions should be expanded when deemed
necessary. By targeting multiple actors at the same
time, there is a chance of having greater impact.
Secondly, with regard to good governance and
transparency, Poland considers the fight against
corruption as a cornerstone of modern democratic
societies. Member States and international institutions
should support long-term democratic and transparency
processes and governance reform. Capacity-building
programmes in all sectors need to be re-evaluated so
that they no longer bolster existing corrupt institutions.
We all know that, without political will, no reform
can bring about the desired effects. Globally, we
call for the universal adoption of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and close cooperation
18-28029

10/09/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

among institutions dealing with corruption, such
as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, the Council of Europe and the European
Union. We also see civil society as an essential partner
in this area.
For many years, Poland has advocated at the Human
Rights Council for the adoption of a draft resolution
on the role of good governance in the promotion and
protection of human rights focused, inter alia, on the
fight against corruption. Poland has also been successful
in developing cooperation with interested countries
that have implemented at the local and regional levels
measures contributing to reducing corruption in the
governmental sector. We also provide training in which
we share anti-money-laundering practices and counterterrorist financing measures.
Lastly, we call for enacting anti-money laundering
measures when needed. Bodies like the Financial Action
Task Force have developed international standards to
combat money laundering, and countries should use that
toolbox of measures and implement them at the national
level. If such measures were implemented effectively
by countries, their implementation could create an
environment in which corruption, terrorist financing
and money laundering would fail to go unnoticed.
In conclusion, Poland is fully committed to
reducing corruption. It is disruptive to people’s lives and
countries, and not a single one is immune to corruption.
As reducing levels of corruption is one of the Goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, it makes
it an even more challenging and ambitious objective,
and we should all strive towards achieving it.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his briefing on the
topic of our discussion today. We also are grateful to
Mr. Prendergast for his remarks.
We all recognize the negative effects of corruption
on the political, economic and sociocultural stability of
societies. It undermines accountability and transparency
in the management of public affairs, and it is inimical to
socioeconomic development. As stated in the preamble
of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
it can also pose a threat to the stability and security
of societies, while undermining the institutions and
values of democracy, ethical values and justice and
jeopardizing sustainable development and the rule of
law. While recognizing that fact, we do not believe
that this is an issue within the purview of the Security

S/PV. 8346

Council. Based on the principle of complementarity, the
Council should be able to allow other relevant organs to
handle such cross-cutting issues.
Of course, there is nothing that precludes the
Council from considering corruption in the context
of conflict-specific situations, and we understand that
that has been the case so far. Within the framework
of the various relevant sanctions regimes, the Council
has been taking measures to address the embezzlement
of public resources. In that regard, a number of cases
can be cited in which the Council took decisions to
ban trade in charcoal, oil and minerals. In terms of the
fight against terrorism, the Council also has adopted
important resolutions for countering the financing of
terrorism. The Council should continue to use such
tools where appropriate in mitigating the negative
impact of corruption in instigating and fuelling
conflicts and violence. Nevertheless, even in the context
of conflict-specific situations, corruption cannot be
looked at in isolation, as it cannot be the only factor,
but a manifestation of many other serious political and
socioeconomic challenges contributing to instability
and conflict. That is why sanctions cannot be the only
tools for addressing the threats posed by corruption.
There has to be a comprehensive and long-term
strategy aimed at tackling the root causes of conflict,
among which corruption could be one of them. That
cannot be done without ensuring good governance,
strengthening State institutions and promoting
accountability and transparency, as well as ensuring
the rule of law. Neither is the fight against corruption
something that should be left to Government alone; it
requires the active participation and engagement of all
segments of society, including women, young people,
the media and the private sector. It is because of that
broader scope and dimension that we believe that
corruption should be dealt with by other relevant United
Nations organs. The United Nations Convention against
Corruption is the only legally binding anti-corruption
instrument that provides a comprehensive response,
and the vast majority of us are State parties to the
Convention. In that regard, we recognize the work
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
providing technical assistance to Member States in
various corruption-related thematic areas, such as
prevention, education, asset recovery and integrity in
the criminal justice system, among others.
We in Africa have been facing serious challenges as
a result of corruption that are hampering efforts aimed

18-2802921/22

S/PV.8346

Maintenance of international peace and security

at promoting democratic governance, socioeconomic
transformation, peace and security and the enjoyment of
human rights. The High-pevel Panel on Illicit Financial
Flows from Africa, chaired by President Thabo Mbeki,
highlighted the magnitude of the problem in its report
submitted to the African Union Commission and the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
in February 2015. The report found that, on average,
African countries lose $50 billion every year — with
a potential of rising to $148 billion — through illicit
financial flows. Also according to the report, corrupt
practices play a key role in facilitating those outflows.
That is why the African Union declared 2018 as the
African Anti-Corruption year to curb corruption, which
is considered as a major societal flaw causing setbacks
in the socioeconomic and political development of

22/22

10/09/2018

the continent. The feeling by our leaders is that, if
corruption is not dealt with as a matter of priority,
Africa cannot make meaningful progress towards
achieving its Agenda 2063 and the 2030 global plan for
sustainable development, and neither can it succeed in
its efforts towards silencing the guns.
At the level of the African Union, we also have in
place the Convention on Preventing and Combating
Corruption, along with other legal instruments aimed
at fostering a culture of democracy and ensuring good
governance and the rule of law. We believe that greater
cooperation and collaboration among the relevant
bodies of the United Nations and the African Union and
its regional mechanisms in the fight against corruption
is something that needs to be encouraged.
The meeting rose at noon.

18-28029
