S/PV.7394

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7394th meeting

Thursday, 26 February 2015, 3.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Min .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Jakubonė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/124)

15-05218 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1505218*

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) (S/2015/124)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator;
and Mr. António Guterres, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/124, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014).
I now give the floor to Ms. Kyung-wha Kang.
Ms. Kang: On behalf of Under-Secretary-General
and Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, I
would like to deliver the following statement.
As Syria enters its fifth year of conflict, violence
and brutality continue unabated and with total
impunity. The indiscriminate use of explosive weapons
in populated areas by all parties claimed more lives this
month and displaced thousands. Government aerial
bombardments, including the use of barrel bombs, and
attacks by armed opposition groups have intensified
in many areas, including Aleppo, Dar’a and rural
Damascus. The parties to the conflict continue to kill
civilians and target civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including vital public services such as water and
electricity, in blatant disregard of resolution 2139
(2014) and international humanitarian law, condemning

2/25

26/02/2015

people to further unnecessary suffering. Over 2 million
people in Aleppo and Dar’a governorates have been
affected by the wilful denial of water and electricity
by parties to the conflict this month. Of the 212,000
people who are besieged in conditions that deteriorate
every day, only 304 were reached with food in January.
Those 304 were in Yarmouk, where 18,000 people are
in desperate need.
In the other besieged locations, the parties
continued to restrict access severely. The requests to
deliver assistance to people in east Ghouta, which were
mentioned in our previous statement to the Council
(see S/PV.7369), were denied by the Government — nor
could we deliver to the towns of Nubul or Zahraa,
which have been besieged by opposition forces since
May 2014.
In Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant has closed down the offices of several
organizations, including the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
a key implementing partner. Some 600,000 people
have not received food assistance in those governorates
since December 2014. The sick or wounded often have
nowhere safe to get treatment. According to Physicians
for Human Rights, there were four attacks on medical
facilities in January, and five medical staff were killed.
On 23 February, a car bomb reportedly killed at least
four civilians in the parking area of a hospital in
Qardaha, Latakia governorate.
There are continued challenges to the provision of
medical supplies, in particular surgical items. However,
in one development, the World Health Organization
(WHO) succeeded in sending life-saving medicine and
medical supplies this week from Damascus to hospitals
and public health centres in the eastern part of Aleppo
city and rural Aleppo, for approximately 60,500
medical treatments.
At the same time, WHO surgical items, UNICEF
midwifery and diarrhoea kits, and United Nations
Population Fund reproductive health kits were
removed by Government security personnel from an
inter-agency convoy travelling to Al-Wa’er, in Homs
governorate. This follows a previous refusal to allow
medical supplies into Al-Wa’er in November.
Every month we report on the same violations; the
numbers change but the pattern remains the same. The
parties to the conflict continue to act with impunity,
killing and abducting civilians, denying access and
removing vital supplies from convoys. This pattern

15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

must be broken. Specifically, the siege that currently
affects 212,000 people must be lifted. We must ensure
that everyone in all parts of Syria has access to medical
supplies, including surgical supplies. The use of
blockades of humanitarian aid and of basic services,
including water and electricity, must stop, as must the
indiscriminate attacks on civilians, including through
barrel bombs, which have come to characterize this
conflict.
The Council must do everything in its power to hold
the parties accountable and achieve the aforementioned
changes. Resolution 2139 (2014) is extensive in its scope,
and the Council’s concerns and recommendations, as
set out in the resolution, must be respected.
Humanitarian organizations operating from within
Syria and from neighbouring countries continue to
reach millions of people in need month after month.
Last month, some 3.4 million people were reached with
food assistance while hundreds of thousands were also
reached with medicines, household items and other
supplies. Cross-border shipments by the United Nations
and partners have increased since the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014). Some 950,000 people have been
reached with food, 880,000 with critical household
items, 340,000 with water and sanitation, and nearly
470,000 with medical supplies. This complements
and is in addition to the existing non-governmental
organization programmes that again reached over a
million people last month. But it is not enough. More
effort must be made to de-escalate the violence, protect
people and enable humanitarian organizations to give
greater support.
We are encouraged by the efforts made by the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura,
to secure a freeze in fighting in some parts of Aleppo.
In hopes that the freeze will materialize, humanitarian
agencies have developed plans to scale up aid deliveries
throughout the eastern part of Aleppo City. Our plans
include the provision of emergency food and other
supplies and the rehabilitation of basic services,
including electricity and waste management, removal of
debris, getting children back into school, and repairing
and renovating damaged homes. Humanitarian agencies
are already delivering assistance in Aleppo but much
more needs to be done. The United Nations will make
use of any additional opportunities, including through
the freeze, to expand humanitarian access.
However, we are extremely concerned that two
staff members of the Office for the Coordination

S/PV.7394

of Humanitarian Affairs, doing essential work with
opposition parties on the ground to secure access for
the delivery of urgently needed humanitarian supplies,
have been asked to leave the country without any reason
given. This will hinder our work tremendously. We call
upon the Government of Syria to reverse its decision so
that we are able to continue our life-saving work for all
Syrians in need.
In addition to the many operational constraints
we face, including insecurity and interference by the
parties to the conflict, our response cannot keep up
with the needs of Syria’s people because we do not
have enough funding. By the end of last year, the Syria
Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan for 2014 was
just 48 per cent funded. We cannot afford the dire
consequences of failing to meet those needs. We can
do more, if we have more money to do so. Lack of
funding has already forced the World Food Programme
to reduce food rations by 30 per cent. In the longer
term, if we do not receive what we need, we will only
be able to provide food to the extremely vulnerable. For
every $1 million the WHO cannot raise in Syria, some
227,000 people lose vital health services, and unless
urgent funding is received before May 2015, a million
children who are out of school will not be able to have
access to alternative education options. Malnutrition
programmes for up to a million children will have to be
halted or reduced.
The humanitarian community has come together to
bring all operations in Syria — cross-line and crossborder — under one single response plan for 2015. This
will enable better identification of needs to allow for
a more effective response. But in order for it to work,
we need the resources. Kuwait has generously agreed
to host a third pledging conference for Syrians in need
on 31 March. We need high-level representation at that
conference and meaningful pledges that will make a
difference on the ground. We look to the members of the
Security Council to show leadership to end the barbaric
and brutal warfare in Syria. We are running out of
words to describe the terrible human and humanitarian
consequences.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Ms. Kang
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres: Briefing the Security Council in
2013 (see S/PV.7000), I said that the war in Syria had
not only unleashed the worst humanitarian crisis of our

15-052183/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

26/02/2015

times but it was also posing a terrible threat to regional
and global peace and security. This is the reality we
face today.

of the conflict and do not get the help they need to
cope with the refugee influx, Syrians are finding it
increasingly difficult to reach safety.

Iraq saw the most frightening and complete spillover
of an internal conflict into a neighbouring country in
recent history. Lebanon has been on near-permanent
security alert, and there have been increasing threats
even to Jordan in the past months. As many as 20,000
foreign fighters from over 50 countries have reportedly
travelled to Syria and Iraq since 2011, with their number
nearly doubling during the course of last year.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) monthly registration figures in
Lebanon have dropped nearly 80 per cent compared
with early 2014, and the number of people entering
Jordan has also dropped substantially. Meanwhile, it is
important to underline that refugees continue to cross
the border into Turkey in significant numbers. The
Turkish budget has already spent around $6 billion in
direct assistance to Syrian refugees, and, in a landmark
decision last year, the Turkish Government’s temporary
protection decree gave Syrians access to the country’s
labour market as well as to free education and health
care.

Meanwhile, the Syrian refugee crisis has overwhelmed
existing response capacities, with 3.8 million registered
refugees in the neighbouring countries. Lebanon and
Jordan have seen their populations grow in the space
of a few years to a point they were prepared to reach
only in several decades. One third of the Lebanese
population today is Palestinian or Syrian. Jordan is
facing a similar challenge. Turkey has now become
the biggest refugee-hosting country in the world. In
addition, more than 2 million Iraqis were internally
displaced in 2014 and some 220,000 sought refuge in
other countries.
The continued growth in displacement is staggering.
But at the same time the nature of the refugee crisis
is now changing. As the level of despair rises and the
available protection space shrinks, we are approaching
a dangerous turning point. After years in exile,
refugees’ resources were depleted long ago, and their
living conditions are drastically deteriorating. I have
met middle-class families with children who are barely
surviving on the streets and are praying to make it
through the winter. Well over half of Syrian refugees in
Lebanon are living in insecure dwellings — up from a
third last year — and a survey of 40,000 Syrian families
in Jordan found that two-thirds were living below the
absolute poverty line. One father of four compared life
as a refugee to being stuck in quicksand — every time
he moves, he sinks further. With humanitarian appeals
systematically underfunded, there is simply not enough
assistance.
At the same time, host communities are severely
overstretched. The refugee influx has had a heavy
impact on the economies and societies, mostly of
Lebanon, Jordan and northern Iraq, overwhelming
social services, infrastructure and Government
resources. International support is far from keeping
pace with the magnitude of the needs. As host countries
face growing security risks due to the regional spread
4/25

But in the global context I described, it is no
surprise that growing desperation is forcing more
and more Syrian refugees to move further afield. The
dramatic situation in the Mediterranean illustrates this,
with Syrians accounting for one third of the nearly
220,000 boat arrivals last year.
With the refugee situation growing more protracted
and more desperate, almost 2 million Syrian refugees
under 18 risk becoming a lost generation. Many of the
over 100,000 refugee children born in exile could face
the risk of statelessness. If this issue is not properly
addressed, this crisis in the making could have huge
consequences for the future not only of Syria but of the
whole region.
As humanitarian resources dwindle, abandoning
refugees to hopelessness only exposes them to even
greater suffering, exploitation and dangerous abuse.
Abandoning their hosts to manage the situation on their
own could result in serious regional destabilization and
more security concerns elsewhere in the world.
It should be obvious that in order to prevent this and
to preserve the protection space in the region, refugees
and host countries need massive international support.
The regional refugee and resilience plan aims to bring
together the humanitarian and longer-term efforts of
host Governments and over 200 United Nations and
non-governmental organization (NGO) partners. Its
programmes are designed to be funded not only from
humanitarian but increasingly from development
cooperation budgets.
I hope that the upcoming Kuwait III conference
will play a determining role in stabilizing the situation
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

in the refugee-hosting countries. Beyond the immediate
humanitarian priorities, it is crucial that development
actors fund the plan’s resilience pillar and the host
Governments’ plans. Countries such as Lebanon and
Jordan need much more financial assistance, not only
to local refugee-hosting communities, but also through
Government budget support for the necessary structural
investments in health-care systems, education, water
and electricity supply, and other public infrastructure,
which is cracking under the tremendous pressure.
As discussed at length during the Berlin Conference,
the Syrian situation illustrates the inadequacies of
today’s development cooperation policies at a time of
multiplying conflicts. To address this, bilateral and
multilateral donors, as well as international financial
institutions, should review existing criteria and
priorities. It is absurd, for example, that Lebanon and
Jordan have no access to World Bank grants because
they are considered middle-income countries.
As High Commissioner for Refugees, it breaks my
heart to see Syrian families fleeing from a horrible war,
forced to risk their lives again, on unsafe boats, to find
protection in Europe. Since the start of 2015, more than
370 people have died trying to cross the Mediterranean;
that is one person drowning for every 20 who make it.
But Italy’s Mare Nostrum operation has ended, and
the European Union’s Triton initiative is limited in
both mandate and resources. Europe must step up its
capacity to save lives with a robust search-and-rescue
operation in the Central Mediterranean, or thousands
more, including many, many Syrians, will perish.
To reduce the number of people getting on boats
in the first place, more legal avenues are needed for
Syrians to seek protection in third countries. Several
States provide resettlement and humanitarian admission
programmes, but the needs far exceed available spaces.
We believe that one tenth of Syrian refugees would
require resettlement as an adequate solution to their
protection situation.
Flexible visa policies, expanded family reunification,
academic scholarships and private-sponsor schemes must
complement these measures. Following the example of
countries such as Germany and Sweden, other States
in Europe and the Gulf region should consider offering
legal access, with more opportunities, so as to alleviate
some of the pressure on Syria’s neighbours and give
more refugees an alternative way of reaching safety.

S/PV.7394

Without such alternatives, the number of people
taking to the seas will continue to grow. Not only are
they facing serious human rights violations at the hands
of smugglers and traffickers; we now also see armed
groups threatening to enter the smuggling business for
their own purposes of sowing fear.
This should remind us that protecting refugees
also means tackling racism and xenophobia. In today’s
climate of rising panic, it worries me deeply that
refugees are becoming mixed up with security concerns,
confronting hostility in places where they thought they
were safe. In several public debates, they have been
made scapegoats for any number of problems, from
terrorism to economic hardship and perceived threats
to their host communities’ way of life. But we need to
remember that the primary threat is not from refugees,
but to them.
Syrians are now the biggest refugee population
under UNHCR’s mandate. As their number keeps
growing and they become more vulnerable, the serious
repercussions this has across the region only highlight
the obvious: the urgent need for the international
community to bring together all key actors and put an
end to the conflict. There are no winners in this war;
everyone is losing. But the highest price is being paid
by the refugees and the other innocent victims inside
the country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Guterres for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank you for having facilitated the
taking up of this item at an open meeting in order to shed
light on the various dimensions of the humanitarian
crisis in Syria, the largest humanitarian crisis in the
world today. It is important that the international
community be aware of the deliberations in the Security
Council in order to know how to respond to this crisis
and its implications for neighbouring countries and
security in the region.
I should like also to thank the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs not only
for the assistance they have given Jordan to help it deal
with this humanitarian crisis, but also for all the efforts
they have made.

15-052185/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

The crisis in Syria has been raging for more than
four years now. The Jordanian people feels the pain of
the Syrian people and continues to work, along with the
Government, to find a political solution to the crisis.
I will not repeat what is stated in the reports of the
United Nations and of non-governmental organizations
on the situation in Syria. Words cannot describe the
magnitude of the tragedy and the suffering of women
and children.
I wish to stress today the need for the international
community to break its silence regarding the heinous
acts and atrocities committed in Syria, including
attacks against civilians and public infrastructure such
as hospitals and water and electricity supplies, with
full impunity. We must also emphasize once again how
important it is that the parties to the conflict, including
the Syrian regime, end the use of barrel bombs, which
is a flagrant violation of humanitarian law. All the
parties must commit to complying with humanitarian
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions by
ending this practice.
I also believe that the international community
should increase its efforts to enable humanitarian aid
to reach the more than 12 million Syrians in Syria who
need it, particularly in the areas under siege. For its part,
Jordan is committed to implementing all the relevant
Security Council resolutions designed to mitigate the
humanitarian situation in cooperation with France and
Spain. We are also working to achieve adoption of other
resolutions aimed at saving lives. Jordan will continue
to facilitate the passage of humanitarian convoys
through the Ramtha corridor, and we call on the United
Nations and its partners to take as much advantage as
possible of the resources made available to them by
Jordan in making use of this humanitarian corridor.
The humanitarian crisis has continued to worsen,
increasingly exacerbated as it is by extremism and
terrorism, and is taking a heavy toll on the countries
of the region, which are having to take in an unending
number of refugees. We have opened our doors
to Syrians since the beginning of the crisis, when
Jordanians took Syrians into their own homes, before
we had built refugee camps, one of which is now the
size of Jordan’s fourth-largest city. We are currently
hosting a million refugees and providing them with
as much as is in our power. I would like to emphasize
various concepts that Jordan has been highlighting
since the Berlin Conference on the Syrian Refugee
Situation, particularly that of fatigue. Not just donor

6/25

26/02/2015

fatigue — because we have still not been able to supply
all the aid that the refugees need — no, I am talking
about the fatigue of Syria’s neighbours. Jordan has been
exhausted by the assistance it has given to the Syrian
refugees.
Now more than ever, we urge the international
community to shoulder its responsibility to help Jordan
and the other countries sheltering Syria’s refugees to
take them in and provide them with what they need.
We are grateful to Kuwait for volunteering to organize
a donor conference, and we call on all the relevant
parties to participate. We also call for implementation
of the final declaration of the Berlin Conference, which
emphasized economic, social and humanitarian needs
and security issues in the countries bordering Syria.
We stress that it is vital that countries help to find a
solution to resettling the refugees.
There can be no humanitarian solution to the crisis
in Syria. The only solution is political, one that can
enable the country to begin a political transition that
can re-establish security and stability, restore social
cohesion among Syria’s peoples and reinstate a safe
environment so that Syrian citizens can return home.
In the absence of a political solution, extremism will
spread around the region and destroy it. We stress that
it is vital that peaceful solutions be found, and we urge
the various countries involved to continue to seek them,
in accordance with the Geneva final communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and Egypt’s efforts. We also call
on the various entities of the United Nations to continue
to work to settle the crisis in Syria. We also support
the plan of Special Envoy de Mistura aimed at ending
the violence and enabling humanitarian aid to reach the
region.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I would particularly
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang and
High Commissioner Guterres for their very helpful
briefings to the Council.
Last Sunday, 22 February, marked the first
anniversary of resolution 2139 (2014), whereby the
Council took action to reduce the suffering of the
Syrian people. And yet, as our briefers just confirmed
so graphically, one year later, much of resolution 2139
(2014) is being ignored by the parties to the conflict,
particularly the Syrian Government. Indiscriminate
attacks, including with barrel bombs, have continued
with devastating impact on civilians on the ground.
Around 212,000 people remain besieged, administrative
hurdles impede humanitarian access and Government
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

security personnel remove surgical and medical
supplies from humanitarian convoys, as Assistant
Secretary-General Kang told us. Serious violations
and abuses of international humanitarian and humanrights law continue, with direct impact on humanitarian
assistance and access. All that is unacceptable, and the
Security Council must do more to ensure that its own
resolution is implemented. We cannot stand by as if we
were spectators to this unfolding tragedy.
The first step must be to retain the attention of
the international community, through the Council, on
the full range of humanitarian issues that arise under
resolution 2139 (2014); to break the silence, as Jordan
urged us. With the Syrian crisis now in its fifth year, it
has become business as usual, to quote the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2015/124). While complacency and
fatigue are risks, they are simply unacceptable when
facing a humanitarian crisis on this scale.
Monthly briefings on the humanitarian situation
in Syria help to keep the crisis on the Security
Council’s radar. But New Zealand believes we need to
reinvigorate those proceedings by making them more
thematic in scope. As a specific step, we propose that
going forward, the monthly briefers should focus on
certain specific humanitarian challenges. As a starting
point, they could be the five challenges identified by
the Secretary-General in his report — ensuring access
for medical and surgical supplies; lifting the siege on
212,000 people; ending the practice of using denial of
key services as a weapon of war; rebuilding Syria’s
education system and addressing the indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, including through the use of
barrel bombs. We also support having briefings from
other relevant speakers, in addition to the Office of
Humanitarian Affairs, such as this month’s report from
High Commissioner Guterres. We would welcome
continuing that initiative in future months by inviting
other speakers.
As both Assistant Secretary-General Kang and
High Commissioner Guterres emphasized, funding for
the humanitarian response inside Syria has not kept
pace with the scale of the needs. New Zealand therefore
welcomes next month’s international humanitarian
pledging conference for Syria in Kuwait, to be hosted
by the Amir of Kuwait. We commend the generosity
and commitment of neighbouring countries, notably
Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and Egypt, in assisting the
more than 3.8 million people who have had to flee Syria.

S/PV.7394

Government services and local community services are
under immense strain in all of those countries.
Last month, New Zealand’s Foreign Minister
visited Jordan, where he saw first-hand the impact on
host communities and the plight of those who have
had to flee, particularly children. Following his visit,
New Zealand announced a NZ$1 million contribution
to deliver basic education and skills training to more
than 1,800 vulnerable young people in Jordan. Overall,
New Zealand is extremely concerned both about the
more than 2.1 million children inside Syria itself who
are currently either out of school or attending classes
irregularly, and about the long-term impact of the
collapse of the school system. From previously having
a school attendance rate of almost 100 per cent, Syria
now has the second lowest in the world. About 670,000
children are being deprived of education following the
closing of schools by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, or Daesh. We know that disaffected, ill-educated
youth are more likely to join radical groups and to take
up arms, with obvious destabilizing consequences for
the whole region. There are also worrying reports from
recent evacuees from Ghouta of minors being forcibly
recruited by non-State armed groups.
In neighbouring countries, almost 2 million Syrian
children are living as refugees, placing a heavy burden
on local education systems. Almost half of all Syrian
children living as refugees remained out of school
through the 2013-2014 school year. Having lost their
schools, having lost their homes, these children are
now also losing their chance to build a future. The High
Commissioner described them as the “lost generation”.
Let me come back to Security Council resolution
2139 (2013). One year after its adoption, the Council
must now take a leadership role and address the very
serious gaps in the implementation of that resolution.
New Zealand commits to working with other Council
members, stakeholder countries and those on the
ground to determine what we can do to ensure that the
Council’s own resolution — our express wishes — are
fully implemented with no “ifs”, “buts”, “maybes”,
prevarication or bureaucratic blockages. We commit
to finding ways to maintain pressure on the parties
concerned to abide by international law. In parallel, we
will continue to support the Council’s renewed focus
on the political track, without which there can be no
resolution of this humanitarian crisis.
New Zealand welcomes initiatives to give
momentum to a political solution based on the Geneva

15-052187/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), including the recent
meetings in Cairo and Moscow, and we commend those
who initiated those processes. Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura’s freeze proposal is also important. Modest
in scope, it still offers the best short-term chance to
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. We now
look for action, not words, from the Syrian Government
and the other parties to the conflict, in working with the
Special Envoy to implement that proposal. The Council
should stand ready to show the leadership urged on us
by Assistant Secretary-General Kang, and to act if that
action is not forthcoming.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank both Ms. Kang and Mr. Guterres for
their briefings. The work they are undertaking, together
with the humanitarian personnel of the United Nations
and other organizations, with a view to alleviating the
suffering of the Syrian population is remarkable and
worthy of our respect, admiration and appreciation.
Since 2011, 72 humanitarian personnel working
in Syria have died, including 17 United Nations staff
members. We believe that we owe them, their loved
ones and all the victims of this conflict more than
words. We are determined to ensure that their sacrifice
will not have been in vain and that it serves to bring
peace to Syria.
All Council members know that the solution to
the Syrian conflict is a political rather than military
one. We all know that humanitarian assistance and
protection for victims are a moral, legal imperative.
However, they are not enough to put an end to the
suffering of the civilian population. They will not be
enough until the parties involved cease to commit war
crimes, abuses and massive violations of human rights
and humanitarian law. In that regard, we will never tire
of saying that the primary responsibility to protect its
own population lies with the Syrian regime, and that
all parties are required to comply with the exigencies
of international humanitarian law. I believe that we all
recognize that the humanitarian dimension, which is
absolutely necessary, should not serve as a pretext to
shirk or justify our collective failure to find a political
resolution to this crisis.
Having said all of this, and despite our limitations,
there are reasons for hope. Overcoming our differences
from last year, we have been able to reach agreement
on an essential issue, and have adopted resolution 2139
(2014). One of the objectives of that resolution was
that humanitarian aid should arrive as quickly and
8/25

26/02/2015

efficiently as possible to those most in need. To that
end, the Security Council adopted resolutions 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014) . The border crossings were
opened and, though limited, they have nevertheless
proven to be effective in helping difficult-to-access
areas and populations.
The aforementioned resolutions contain humanitarian
standards to which all parties to the Syrian conflict
must comply, and which the international community
is compelled to enforce. We know that this is not
happening. The successive reports of the SecretaryGeneral have duly and fairly recalled the repeated
failures to comply with these resolutions. If this type
of debate and such reports have a purpose, it is to
remind us of the obligations we have assumed. I am not
concerned by the fatigue that this could cause. It is a
fatigue that I am willing to take on, and that cannot be
compared to the suffering of the victims whom we are
unable to help.
What concerns me is that today, a year after the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), barrel bombs and
mortars continue to be used against civilian populations.
What concerns me is that there are still more than
200,000 individuals under siege and used as hostages in
Ghouta, Yarmouk, Nubul and Zahraa, and that access to
essential services, such as water, continues to be used
as a weapon of war. What concerns me is the continued
failure to respect the responsibility to protect schools
and hospitals, and that surgical and sanitary material
are unfairly removed from humanitarian convoys
before reaching their destination. I am concerned that
thousands of minors are being recruited to fight, and
that the rights of hundreds of thousands of women and
girls continue to be systematically violated.
What worries me the most is that the Security
Council is acting as a passive spectator of this situation.
In his report, the Secretary-General has said that “the
conflict has become business as usual” (S/2015/124,
p. 10). It is terrifying to hear such a thing. We have the
responsibility to respond, and Spain will do all it can
to that end.
I should like to propose a pragmatic approach aimed
at ensuring that the Council’s action has a real impact
on the ground, so that it can contribute, howsoever
minimally, to mitigating the desperation of 12 million
people. This approach has three phases that should be
rolled out simultaneously.
First, we must identify the instruments at the
Council’s disposal to ensure that the parties to the
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

conflict comply with the exigencies of resolution 2139
(2014). Secondly, it is essential that we determine our
priorities. The Secretary-General lays out five areas
in which progress is urgently required. Spain believes
that those are indeed the areas on which the Council
should focus its efforts. Thirdly and lastly, we must
clearly state that the action of the Council and its good
offices should not only be extended to the parties to
the conflict, but to all actors, including Member States,
that can bring influence to bear on the parties.
I will conclude, but not without first calling
attention to the following point. Some time ago,
the Syrian conflict became a regional problem due,
among other reasons, to the enormous number of
Syrian refugees who spilled over the borders with
neighbouring countries. The United Nations system
must adapt its priorities. We are clearly facing a
humanitarian crisis that has a direct impact on the
development of the region as a whole. For that reason,
the agencies of the system should set aside business as
usual and rapidly adapt themselves to the new needs
of the communities and refugee-hosting countries.
Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon, Iraq and Egypt in particular
are making enormous efforts, for which we must thank
them. We must support them not merely in words, but
with deeds. The upcoming Kuwait conference, to be
held on 31 March, will offer an excellent opportunity
to do just that. Ensuring its success would be a way
to show that we mean what we say. We owe it to the
victims of the Syrian conflict and to the societies that
are hosting them at great sacrifice.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting on the situation in Syria. I would also like
to thank Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. António
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their detailed briefings.
The Syrian conflict will soon enter its fifth year,
as the security situation continues to deteriorate and
the humanitarian toll becomes worse by the day, with
more than 200,000 civilians dead and a high number
of refugees and internally displaced persons, without
real prospects for a political settlement. Bombs, mortar
attacks, explosive devices, along with a lack of food
and water, are becoming the daily plight of civilians in
Syria. It is unacceptable that the parties to the conflict
continue to violate human rights and to target peaceful
civilians and infrastructure. All parties must respect

S/PV.7394

the rules of international humanitarian law and the
relevant provisions of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014). The Government of Syria has
the obligation under international law to ensure the
free movement of assistance and access to vulnerable
populations, as well as the protection of humanitarian
workers and their facilities.
With the increasing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, the international community
must do more, be united and bring pressure to bear on all
the Syrian parties to lift the obstacles to humanitarian
assistance and allow unhindered access to all areas in
need. We would like to pay well-deserved tribute to all
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners,
who are carrying out their work under very difficult
and often dangerous circumstances. We encourage the
international community to increase its assistance and
to do more to support United Nations humanitarian
agencies in order to allow them to help populations, in
particular during the winter, which is especially harsh
in the area.
We continue to think that there are no military
solutions to the Syrian conflict and that it is vital to
actively search for an appropriate political solution that
would put an end to the suffering of the people. Against
that backdrop, Chad supports the tireless efforts of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, who is doing his utmost to negotiate with the
parties in Aleppo to provide better humanitarian access
and to clear the way for an exit out of the crisis. Chad
also supports the efforts made recently by Russia and
Egypt, which made it possible to bring together Syrian
stakeholders to seek political solutions to the crisis.
In conclusion, we underscore that the humanitarian
tragedy in Syria should tug at our collective conscience.
All regional and international efforts should be
geared towards finding solutions. We believe that a
comprehensive and definitive solution to the Syrian
conflict should also address terrorism in the region,
which is a serious threat to international peace and
security.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. António Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
their briefings. We would also like to reiterate our
appreciation for the outstanding work done by the teams
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High

15-052189/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

Commissioner for Refugees and other United Nations
agencies on the ground, as well as all their partners,
who are carrying out their duties at risk to their lives.
It is unacceptable that humanitarian workers in Syria
are being targeted, attacked, abducted and killed:
72 workers have died since March 2011, and I would
like to pay tribute to them.
As of 15 March, the conflict in Syria will have been
going on for four years. Yet, in report after report, it is
unfortunately clear that the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating at an alarming rate and that there is no
end in sight to the crisis. Despite the Council’s strong
message to the Syrian regime and the armed groups,
through the renewal of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Syria and its reminder to the parties to
the conflict of their obligation to respect international
humanitarian law, the situation remains dire, as was
forcefully alluded to by Ms. Kang and Mr. Guterres.
The statistics are unassailable: 220,000 dead,
12.2 million people in need of assistance, 7.6 million
internally displaced persons, 3.8 million refugees,
4.8 million in areas that are hard to reach and 212,000
people besieged without the means to survive. Aerial
bombardment, including the indiscriminate use of
barrels bombs by Government forces, continue to claim
civilian lives. The recent report by Human Rights
Watch states that, since February 2014, the Government
has bombed at least 450 sites in the region of Dara’a
​​
and
1,000 sites in Aleppo using barrels bombs. The parties
to the conflict also continue to deliberately target
civilian facilities and property, including infrastructure
and vital services and hospitals, which is contrary to
all the rules of humanitarian law, respect for human
dignity and the most basic principles of humankind.
The deliberate interference in humanitarian operations,
the limits imposed on access to assistance throughout
the country and the administrative obstruction by the
regime only exacerbate the suffering of a battered
people. This must stop. The obstacles to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to besieged areas, blocking
cross-border access and the proliferation of bureaucratic
obstacles are practices contrary to Security Council
resolutions. Moreover, pursuant to resolution 2139
(2014), an end must be put to impunity to violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights.
Those responsible for such violations in Syria must be
brought to justice.
The conclusions of the latest report (S/2015/124)
on the implementation of resolutions 2139 (2014),

10/25

26/02/2015

2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) are clear. They call
for immediate action by the parties to the conflict,
including the lifting of the various sieges, which affect
212,000 people, removing obstacles to the delivery of
medical and surgical equipment, ending the use of basic
services, such as water and electricity, as a weapon of
war and halting indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
especially the use of barrels bombs. As we know, there
are many obstacles. We must all collectively bring
pressure to bear on the Syrian regime to immediately
remove the obstacles to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people.
The current situation in Aleppo and Ghouta only
shows that the regime remains deaf to the calls of the
international community. The bombings carried out by
Government forces in early February in Ghouta, east of
Damascus, left more than 200 dead and 1,000 wounded.
France condemned those bombings in the strongest
way, while recalling that they violated the most basic
principles of international humanitarian law and could
constitute war crimes.
Whatever the measures taken to limit the cost of
the conflict in human lives and reduce the people’s
suffering, the humanitarian tragedy in Syria can end
only with the emergence of a political solution. The
conditions must therefore be created for a political
solution. First of all, the regime must immediately
cease aerial bombardment, the use of barrel bombs and
indiscriminate shelling targeting civilians, which are
prohibited by the resolutions of the Security Council.
Secondly, our objective remains, more than ever, to
promote a genuine political transition, based on the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex), and not a
simple makeover for the regime. Through its brutal
repression and rejection of any transition over the past
four years, Bashar Al-Assad has fanned the flamed
of extremism and chaos. As long as Bashar Al-Assad
remains in power, ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front will
continue to grow in strengthen. Renewed commitment
on the part of the United Nations to a resumption of the
political process is essential in this regard. The Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de
Mistura, must, of course, play an important role in this
regard.
A focused dialogue on the terms of a political
transition, based on the Geneva communiqué must be
resumed, bringing together the major parties concerned
among the international community. We must also
support the reconciliation initiatives of the various

15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

components of the Syrian Opposition around the Syrian
National Coalition. Without a moderate Opposition that
is strong and credible, no political transition will be
able to succeed. To achieve any lasting improvement
in the humanitarian situation in Syria will require a
political solution that will itself require the decisive
commitment of the Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang and High
Commissioner Guterres for their powerful presentations.
One year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2139 (2014), aimed at addressing the
humanitarian and human rights catastrophe in Syria.
As today’s briefings made clear, the humanitarian
crises have only deepened. There are multiple crises. It
is estimated that 12.2 million people need humanitarian
assistance in Syria. At this time last year, 9.3 million
people were said to need humanitarian assistance.
That is nearly 3 million more people who need aid to
survive, in just a year. Let us think about that. That
is why it is absolutely crucial that all donors make
generous commitments at the humanitarian pledging
conference in Kuwait in March; commitments that are
commensurate with the magnitude of Syria’s crisis.
That is what the United States plans to do.
While the international community absolutely
must meet the immediate and dire needs of the Syrian
people, we must also face the fact that humanitarian
assistance is a band-aid: it must be accompanied by
more intense political pressure to stop the violence and
widespread abuses that are fuelling the crisis.
Although more people in Syria need humanitarian
aid than ever before, the Al-Assad regime also seems
more intent on denying aid and causing civilian harm
than ever before. Resolution 2139 (2014) called on the
Syrian parties to immediately cease the indiscriminate
use of weapons in populated areas, including through
aerial bombardment using barrel bombs. Yet in the
year since the resolution was adopted, according to the
Syrian Network for Human Rights, the Assad regime
has dropped at least 1,950 barrel bombs, which have
killed at least 6,480 people, 95 per cent of whom were
civilians. According to the Human Rights Watch
report released earlier this week, satellite imagery
identified at least 450 distinct major damage sites in
10 opposition-held towns and villages in the Dara’a
governorate, and more than 1,000 major damage sites
in the Aleppo governorate, between February 2014
and January of this year. The Human Rights Watch

S/PV.7394

report shows that many impact sites have damage
signatures consistent with the detonation of large, airdropped munitions, including improvised barrel and
conventional bombs dropped by helicopters. Yet in
spite of this clear evidence, Assad cheerfully denied
that his forces used barrel bombs and called any such
claims, “a childish story” — a particularly grotesque
choice of words, given that well over 10,000 children
have been killed in the conflict so far.
The recently released report of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic (A/HRC/28/69) documents many attacks on
civilians. One of them occurred on Aleppo’s al-Shaar
neighbourhood on 6 November. The first barrel bomb
reportedly killed civilians in its area of impact and
buried more in rubble. When others rushed to the area
to dig out the people buried and assist the wounded,
the Government dropped a second barrel bomb. At
least 15 people were killed in all, most of them women
and children. Some of the wounded later died in field
hospitals, according to the report, due to the lack of
necessary medical supplies.
The lack of medical supplies is no accident; it is
the result of the Al-Assad regime’s routine confiscation
of medical and surgical supplies transported by
United Nations convoys. The United Nations and its
implementing partners have tried to be maximally
transparent with the Syrian regime by allowing the
Government to inspect cross-line shipments, going
beyond the provisions in resolutions 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014). Yet, even when these regime approvals
for cross-line operations are granted, the regime seizes
medical supplies, such as surgical items, midwifery
kits and rehydration kits, which could save the lives of
mothers, small children and babies. The Council was
clear in its demand that all parties allow delivery of
medical assistance and cease depriving civilians of
food and medicine indispensable for their survival in
resolution 2139 (2014).
The Physicians for Human Rights report that
Assistant Secretary-General Kang mentioned documents
228 attacks on 179 separate medical facilities. Of these,
Physicians for Human Rights found, 90 per cent were
carried out by regime forces. To date, according to
Physicians for Human Rights, 145 medical personnel
have been executed or tortured to death in Syria; 139
of those individual killings were carried out by Syrian
Government forces or by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL).

15-0521811/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

In Yarmouk, 18,000 civilians — most of them
Palestinians refugees — are virtually cut off from
assistance and surrounded by fighting. In 2014,
the United Nations was only able to provide the
equivalent of 400 calories per day for each inhabitant
of Yarmouk — the equivalent of two cups of rice — due
to the extremely limited access provided by the Syrian
regime. If members have not seen the photos of the
kids inside Yarmouk, they should force themselves to
stare at their sunken, hollow faces and glossed eyes.
This is what Al-Assad’s regime has done to children,
and he is under insufficient pressure from his backers
to do something as simple as let food through. And
Yarmouk is not an outlier: of the 212,000 Syrians living
in besieged areas, 185,000 of them, or 87 per cent, live
in areas being besieged by Syrian Government forces.
Now, terrorist groups like ISIL have committed
horrific abuses against Syrians, and we must be
absolutely adamant and united in our condemnation of
those horrors, which are on the rise. We condemn in the
strongest possible terms ISIL’s attacks of 23 February
on Assyrian Christian villages in the northeast Syrian
province of Al Hasakah, where they kidnapped
hundreds of civilians, including women, children and
older persons, and we join others in demanding the
immediate and unconditional release of these civilians,
together with all of ISIL’s hostages.
In December, four mass graves were discovered
in Deir ez-Zor, containing the bodies of some of the
hundreds of people abducted by ISIL months before.
ISIL has also established what they call “cub camps”,
where they indoctrinate kids, teaching them how to use
weapons and to carry out suicide attacks.
At the same time we condemn ISIL and unite to
confront them, we must remember that the rise of
these violent extremist groups in Syria would not have
happened without the atrocities perpetrated by the
Al-Assad regime. And the regime’s ongoing atrocities
continue to be the extremists’ best recruiting tool. So
any plan that would ally the international community
with Al-Assad to confront these violent extremist
groups would be completely counterproductive, as it
would further fuel ISIL’s rise.
There is only one way out of this horrific crisis,
and that is through a comprehensive political solution.
To that end, the United States again joins others in
commending the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, to
halt — even for a limited time — the use of all aerial
12/25

26/02/2015

bombs and heavy artillery in Aleppo, whose civilians
have suffered immensely amid fierce fighting. While it
would be a welcome step if the Al-Assad regime were
to fulfil the commitments it made to Mr. De Mistura
to stop unilaterally its aerial bombardment in Aleppo
and allow the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance to civilians for six weeks, the regime has an
abysmal track record on honouring its commitments.
Indeed, these very commitments are supposed to have
been implemented under resolutions adopted by this
very Council. So what matters and what we must look
to are the regime’s actions.
In addition to marking a year since the adoption
of resolution 2139 (2014), we also mark other terrible
benchmarks today. On 15 March, we will enter the
fifth year of the Syrian conflict. It has also been three
years since plainclothes security officers raided the
office of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom
of Expression, a Damascus-based group dedicated to
promoting freedom of expression, detaining 14 staff
members. Many of those detained were tortured,
according to staff members who were later released.
Among those detained was the group’s director, Mazen
Darwish, who was charged with so-called crimes such
as publishing human rights reports and documenting
the names of people tortured, disappeared or killed
during the conflict.
Mazen is still behind bars today, despite a General
Assembly resolution adopted in May 2014 (resolution
67/262) that included a demand for his immediate
release. Writing from jail last year, Mazen said,
“There is not a single prison in Syria today
without one of my friends inside it, nor is there a
cemetery in Syria today that doesn’t contain the
remains of one of them.”
There is a risk, in our regular meetings on Syria,
to get used to the fact that the numbers of individuals
detained and killed and disappeared and displaced
and denied food — among so many other measures of
human suffering — continue to rise. Indeed, there is a
perverse dynamic whereby, as those numbers continue
to rise, our sensitivity falls. Our nerve endings harden,
and a sense of inevitability takes hold.
We must not let that happen. We must remember
that each of those rising numbers and each one of those
millions stands for another person. We must return to
the commitments the Council has made, such as those
in past resolutions to “take further measures” “in the

15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

case of non-compliance” (resolution 2165 (2014)) and
to hold accountable those responsible for violations and
abuses.
The Council’s impact will increase only if member
States’ positions change, and that will happen only if
we recognize that there are children just like our own,
starving in Yarmouk, and mothers just like our own who
die in childbirth in Aleppo, because medical supplies
have been stolen off United Nations trucks, or mothers
who feel helpless in the face of their children’s pleas for
food. If that does not motivate us, literally nothing will.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the briefings by the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. António Guterres.
We did not want to say this, but in reading the report
of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation
in Syria (S/2015/124), we were struck by a sense of
death, desolation and desperation. It is evidenced in the
fact that, four years after the conflict’s start, we have
stopped counting those who die daily. Over 12 million
people need humanitarian assistance. More than half of
the Syrian population are displaced and 16 per cent of
the population is outside of the country.
Chile strongly condemns the violence committed
against the civilian population, regardless of where it
originates, in particular the escalation of violence in
Aleppo, Hama, Homs, Damascus and rural Damascus,
among other areas. We deplore the use of any kind of
weapon that does not distinguish between combatants
and the civilian population, in particular the use of
barrel bombs and the ongoing indiscriminate bombing
and attacks with explosives, which have increased
the number of dead, wounded and displaced by the
conflict. The attacks and the capturing of individuals
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and their
executions does nothing but exacerbate instability
and insecurity for the Syrian population. All of those
responsible should be held accountable before the law.
We believe it highly important that enhanced
measures be taken to ensure that the parties cease to put
up obstacles to aid delivery in areas that are out of their
control and put an end their ongoing attacks on basic
services and infrastructure. We stress the importance
of an end being put to attacks on schools and other
educational facilities. The displacement of children,
in addition to denying them the right to education,

S/PV.7394

increases the risk of them being marginalized in
society, with the resulting well-known consequences.
For that reason, we support the Secretary-General’s
observation in his report that there must be an urgent
effort to rebuild the Syrian education system.
Chile urges the parties to unequivocally implement
humanitarian resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014) in order to prevent the delivery of
humanitarian aid from being used as a weapon of war.
We stress the pressing need to free the besieged areas, in
which there are over 200,000 people, and ensure access
for the population to medicine and medical supplies.
We take this opportunity to recognize the agencies,
programmes and funds of the United Nations and their
implementation partners for the tireless efforts that
they undertake to deal with the tragic humanitarian
crisis in Syria and the region in a climate that is very
complex and marked by insecurity. Chile condemns the
fact that less than a year after the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2165 (2014), which ensures the protection
and security of humanitarian workers, there are endless
ongoing attacks against them.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that the
humanitarian crisis can only be overcome if we can
reach an inclusive political solution to the crisis, and
therefore we should continue to encourage the search
for such a solution. We value the initiatives taken at the
meetings held in Cairo and Moscow, mentioned by the
Secretary-General in his report, which constitute a first
step. We hope that they can be complemented by the
holding of other dialogue exercises on the basis of the
Geneva communiqué. We reiterate our support to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, in carrying out that task.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): We wish to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for their briefings.
Malaysia remains deeply concerned about the dire,
ongoing and deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Syria. The parties to the conflict keep upping the ante
in a desperate attempt to defeat the other, seemingly
oblivious to the gruesome toll of death, mayhem and
destruction that they are inflicting on the Syrian people
in the very country that they claim to be fighting for.
We commend the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their partners for their commitment and
dedication to delivering humanitarian assistance to

15-0521813/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

the Syrian people despite facing numerous challenges.
While we commend the cooperation by the parties to
the conflict in facilitating and allowing humanitarian
access to reach those in need, we are concerned that
administrative and bureaucratic hurdles, such as delays
in responding to requests for humanitarian access and
restrictions on the prohibitions of surgical and other
medical supplies, remain in place. Those obstacles are
definitely not helpful to the international community’s
efforts to alleviate the already worsening humanitarian
situation and ease the suffering of the Syrian people
on the ground. We call on the Syrian Government
to further facilitate the movement of humanitarian
supplies, especially to hard-to-reach areas. All parties
to the conflict must commit to implementing resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014). They must not be allowed
to thwart the objectives of those resolutions.
We commend the State of Kuwait for hosting the
third international humanitarian pledging conference,
which will be held on 31 March 2015. Malaysia looks
forward to its participation at the third conference to
demonstrate our solidarity with the Syrian people. We
are hopeful that the conference will help meet some of
the funding gaps of the 2015 Syria response plan.
We thank the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic for the recent
release of its ninth report (A/HRC/28/69). We are deeply
appalled at the continued violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law and atrocities
perpetrated by all sides to the conflict in Syria. In this
regard, we appreciate the victim-oriented approach
that has been adopted in the investigating reports on
allegations of human rights abuses and violations in
Syria. However, we regret that the Commission until
today has not been able to enter the country to enable it
to fulfil its mandate more effectively.
The inhumane atrocities and reign of terror of the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the areas
under its control has worsened the already grave human
rights and humanitarian situation in Syria. Malaysia
strongly condemns the recent abduction and killing of
more than a hundred Assyrians by ISIL on 23 February
2015 in north-eastern Syria. Such atrocities once again
demonstrate the brutality, intolerance and extremist
ideology of ISIL against people of all faiths, ethnicities
and nationalities. Malaysia strongly holds the view that
the perpetrators of all grave violations and atrocities who
have until now enjoyed impunity cannot go unpunished;
they must be brought to justice to be held accountable.

14/25

26/02/2015

Malaysia supports the efforts made by Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, to seek a comprehensive political solution for
the Syrian crisis based on the Geneva communiqué.
We applaud Mr. De Mistura’s continued efforts with
the relevant parties regarding the proposed freeze
arrangements. We are extremely hopeful that the parties
to the conflict will ensure the operationalization of
the Aleppo “freeze” proposal. The conflicting parties
should view it as a confidence-building measure to
facilitate humanitarian operations and as an opportunity
to restart dialogue and a political process.
Malaysia reiterates its view that there can be no
military solution to the Syrian conflict. Malaysia firmly
believes that the future of Syria should be determined
by the Syrian people themselves through a Syrian-led
political process. The international community should
continue to support, promote, encourage and facilitate
an inclusive political transition process and maintain
efforts to foster national reconciliation in Syria. In this
regard, Malaysia welcomes and supports all diplomatic
initiatives, such as the Moscow and Cairo initiatives, to
try to restart political dialogue between the conflicting
parties. We further call on parties with influence to
continue their efforts to encourage the conflicting
parties to seek a political and peaceful resolution.
Nevertheless, we firmly believe that there must be
a willingness on the part of the parties to the conflict
themselves to find a political solution to it. The
international community can only do so much. The
international community’s efforts will be meaningless
and in vain without the conscious efforts and sincerity
of the parties to end the conflict and seek a peaceful
and political solution.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank the
President for this meeting on the Syrian Arab Republic
on the implementation of resolution 2139 (2014) on
humanitarian assistance. We also wish to thank the
High Commissioner of the United Nations for Refugees,
Mr. António Guterres, and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang.
In addressing the dramatic humanitarian situation
in Syria, we have to speak with clarity before the
international community. We cannot address this
problem without failing to refer to the causes that led
to the armed conflict and the devastating effect that
the conflict has on the country, in particular on the
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

civilian population, which has been victim of violence.
In violation of international law, foreign powers have
backed — financially and otherwise — armed groups
and terrorists in order to promote through violence the
toppling of the legitimate regime in Syria, ignoring
the country’s right to self-determination. Such illegal
actions have also endangered the unity, territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Syria.
Venezuela rejects war, human rights violations and
atrocities that arise as a result of religious, political and
ethnic intolerance. We are indignant about and lament
the fact that other countries are intervening, which has
led to political and military instability in the region
and brought so much suffering to the people, triggering
barbarities that threaten human beings. The financing
of the war has led to an escalation in the crisis aimed at
toppling the Government of President Bashar Al-Assad.
Weapons and military capacity have been given to
terrorist groups that today are expanding their barbaric
acts and have destroyed the country.
The existence of terrorist groups is not just a problem
in Syria. The expansion of their actions currently affects
neighbouring countries and threatens to broaden the
their presence and control over other territories. That
is why the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes
to reiterate that the only way to stop the humanitarian
crisis hinges on a political solution to the conflict that
is negotiated and inclusive. Accordingly, there should
be an immediate ceasefire that helps to bring about a
firm and lasting peace that ensures reconciliation in
this sister Arab country.
We reiterate our commitment to the respect for
the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria in step with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
back the initiatives that are aimed at seeking peace
in Syria. We therefore welcome the diplomatic efforts
that have been deployed in Moscow and Cairo aimed at
assisting the parties and finding a political solution to
the conflict. We encourage ongoing diplomatic efforts
through the holding of upcoming events. Further, our
country wishes to express its most firm support for
the actions undertaken by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, who in his
latest report showed optimism regarding peace and at
the same time expressed that within the equation of this
armed conflict the Al-Assad Government is part of the
solution.

S/PV.7394

In that regard, our country supports the
implementation of the mechanism on a freeze — the
ceasefire in Aleppo — so as to contribute to alleviating
the tragic humanitarian situation being experienced
by the civilian population victimized by the armed
conflict. We must build confidence among the parties
and give peace a chance.
We have noted with concern the latest information
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. The SecretaryGeneral’s twelfth report (S/2015/124) paints a critical
picture of the situation in Aleppo, Raqqa, Homs,
Damascus and Al-Hasakeh, among other places. We
are concerned about the humanitarian impact produced
by the crisis in Syria, which is spilling over into
neighbouring States.
Given the challenges that have arisen from
this protracted conflict, we appreciate and wish to
commend the work of the humanitarian agencies. We
reject the idea of those agencies being the victims of
violence and military targets. However, we view with
concern the fact that the extraordinary force that the
humanitarian agencies represent is being blocked by
the actions of terrorist organizations operating in Syria,
which, as stated in the report, are stealing humanitarian
assistance from multilateral agencies such as the World
Food Programme for reasons of propaganda. There is a
need for strict adherence to the guiding principles of the
United Nations regarding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people. All humanitarian
assistance must be coordinated with the Syrian
Government, and it is imperative that such assistance
not reach terrorist groups.
We view with concern the displacement of millions
of civilians as a result of the war. Venezuela therefore
appreciates the solidarity of the neighbouring countries
that are providing assistance in their own territories to
Syrian refugees. The complex humanitarian situation
affecting the Syrian civilian population requires a
sustained effort from the international community in
terms of ensuring the financial resources necessary to
mitigate the shortfalls in food, medicine and other basic
services that have arisen because of the armed conflict.
Funds are not currently sufficient to address the crisis,
and we therefore call on the donor community to fulfil
its pledges to contribute to such efforts.
We condemn the deliberate attacks carried out
against civilians and humanitarian personnel, as
well as the terrorist acts in Syria, regardless of the
perpetrators. We call on the parties to fully observe

15-0521815/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

the norms and principles of international humanitarian
law on the protection of civilians in time of conflict,
pursuant to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
We also condemn the recruitment of children and the
separation of families by armed groups in Syria. We
demand that these actors put an end to such practices,
which represent flagrant violations of international law,
in particular of the relevant legal instruments.
Lastly, we reiterate that overcoming the humanitarian
problems that have arisen because of the war and that
are causing suffering to the civilian population in Syria
will necessarily involve an inclusive dialogue, without
any conditions, and a negotiated political solution to the
conflict. The parties’ commitment to achieving peace
and stability in the country without foreign interference
is essential. The international community must support
all diplomatic efforts to that end.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Kang and Mr. Guterres for
their comprehensive briefings. We listened carefully
to the information provided by our Security Council
colleagues. We are grateful to the humanitarian workers
and agencies who are working under fire in Syria,
risking their lives in an attempt to alleviate suffering.
We understand the heavy burden that neighbouring
States are bearing with the overflow of Syrian refugees
into their countries.
It is clear to all that the difficulties encountered at
present by Syrian civilians in terms of access to urgent
humanitarian assistance are due to the complex security
situation, especially the activity of terrorist groups. We
are especially alarmed by the situation of people in
the governorates of Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor, which are
controlled by the so-called Islamic State. We would say
that in those areas 600,000 people in need are deprived
of access to humanitarian assistance. The situation has
worsened with the closing of humanitarian offices in
Raqqa, which were providing medicines and medical
supplies.
We were extremely disturbed to hear that Islamic
State is stealing humanitarian assistance from United
Nations agencies and then distributing it under its
banner. We understand that we must try all possible
legal means to deliver humanitarian assistance to
civilians who are under the control of terrorists, while
ensuring appropriate safeguards to prevent any more
such blatant incidents.
Turning to the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the humanitarian situation in Syria
16/25

26/02/2015

(S/2-15/124), we would like to call for an appropriate
assessment of the terrorists and their actions. It is
unacceptable refer to entities that are on Security
Council sanctions lists, including the Al-Nusra
Front and the Islamic State, as “the opposition”. It is
categorically unacceptable and politically incorrect. It
cannot happen again.
We continue to be shocked by the blatant and
reprehensible actions of terrorists. Yesterday the Security
Council unanimously and strongly condemned the
Islamic State’s kidnapping of more than 100 Christians
in north-eastern Syria. The terrorists are blocking
humanitarian deliveries into Yarmouk refugee camp.
Also unacceptable are the crimes being committed by
other groups fighting against the Government, which
are intentionally firing on residential areas of Syrian
towns using mortars and highly destructive weapons.
In the past month, such bombings have killed 1,440
people, including children, and wounded more than
200.
We call on both parties to the Syrian conflict — the
Syrian Government and the opposition — to comply
with Security Council resolutions and to observe
international humanitarian law. We share the concern
of the Security Council regarding the state of the
educational system in Syria. It would be desirable for
United Nations agencies, which are doing a great deal to
alleviate the humanitarian situation, to become actively
involved in the process of rebuilding schools and postsecondary institutions for teacher training. This is very
important for the cities to which refugees and internally
displaced persons are returning, including Homs and
Ayn al-Arab.
We call on United Nations agencies to support
constructive cooperation with the Syrian authorities. We
are convinced that this is one of the major preconditions
for constructive humanitarian engagement and
assistance. We also encourage the Syrian Government
to be in close contact with United Nations humanitarian
agencies.
In conclusion, we agree with the view of the
Secretary-General that the solution to the Syrian
conflict can be neither military nor humanitarian but
must be political. That is what the Russian Federation
has been working towards since the beginning of the
crisis, together with the Syrians, in the framework
of an inter-Syrian dialogue based on the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). This is our goal in
the context of the extremely complex efforts under way
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

with the parties and the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We expect the Syrian
Government and the Syrian opposition to go the extra
mile to ensure the success of the efforts of the Special
Envoy and thereby take the first steps towards the
restoration of peace in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I wish to thank our briefers
for their presentations and commend them for their
effective leadership in the ongoing multidimensional
effort to address the humanitarian situation in Syria.
According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/124), various factors have exacerbated
the humanitarian situation in Syria. The ongoing
conflict, administrative hurdles, inadequate funding
and the impact of the winter season have in various
ways made it more difficult to render assistance to
people in desperate need.
Despite these challenges, the United Nations
and its partners have succeeded in delivering food,
non-food items, water and medical supplies to fairly
large numbers of people using shipments from Turkey
and Jordan. We would like to express our appreciation
to the Governments of Turkey and Jordan for their
sustained support to the United Nations monitoring
mechanism.
Nigeria acknowledges the support of the Syrian
authorities, at the national and local levels, to the
humanitarian effort. However, we would like to appeal
for more expeditious approval of aid shipments in order
to help the United Nations and its partners consolidate
the successes they have achieved so far in dealing
with the humanitarian situation in Syria. Nigeria
strongly urges all parties to refrain from blocking
supplies to areas outside their control. They should
also cease restricting humanitarian access within the
areas they do control, since such restriction is clearly
an infringement of humanitarian law. All sides must
respect humanitarian principles and ensure the wellbeing of civilians, especially women and children, in
areas under their control.
Nigeria acknowledges with profound appreciation
the tremendous sacrifices that have been made by Jordan,
Turkey, Lebanon and the other countries hosting Syrian
refugees. We pay tribute to the humanitarian workers
operating in challenging circumstances on the ground
in Syria. We urge donors to scale up their support for
the Syrian humanitarian effort. As various speakers
have emphasized this afternoon, the only sustainable

S/PV.7394

solution to the humanitarian crisis in Syria lies in a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. Unless and until that
is achieved, the difficult humanitarian situation in the
country will very likely persist. We therefore encourage
all parties to cooperate with Special Envoy de Mistura
and embrace a dialogue, with a view to reaching a
negotiated solution to the conflict.
Ms. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres for their
comprehensive briefings.
We are facing the world’s largest humanitarian crisis,
one that is having a grave impact on international peace
and security. Trapped civilians, refugees and internally
displaced people are desperately waiting for the end of
the senseless bloodshed in Syria. The numbers speak for
themselves. Since the conflict began, 200,000 people
have been killed; 12.2 million, half of them children,
are in immediate humanitarian need and 3.8 million are
refugees. Thousands of civilians have fled their homes,
seeking refuge wherever they can, some of them risking
their lives to cross the Mediterranean, some finding
themselves locked into the war zone in no-man’s land.
The host countries, Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and
Egypt, have been generous to the Syrian refugees. To
cope with that extraordinary challenge, they need more
aid and development assistance.
Resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) have outlined key obligations under international
humanitarian law that should be unconditionally
respected by all parties at all times. Nothing has been
done so far. On the contrary, indiscriminate aerial
bombings, including Al-Assad’s barrel bombs, shelling
by the armed opposition and killings by terrorists and
extremists continue every day. We are witnessing the
deliberate refusal of the Al-Assad regime to carry out
its primary responsibility for protecting its civilian
population.
No one is immune in today’s Syria. Hundreds of
medical personnel and humanitarian workers are being
killed. Schools are attacked, ransacked and destroyed.
Journalists and activists documenting violations and
abuses of human rights disappear and are detained,
tortured and killed. War crimes and crimes against
humanity have been committed by the Al-Assad regime
as well as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
other terrorist and extremist groups, for which enormous
amounts of evidence have been documented by the

15-0521817/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Syria. We condemn unreservedly the widespread and
systematic violations of international human-rights
and humanitarian law and the gruesome abuses and
violations of human rights that have been perpetrated
by all parties to the Syrian conflict.
We greatly value the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and of
other United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations. Violence and insecurity, shifting conflict
lines, deliberate interference with and closing of
operations, obstructive administrative procedures and
financial shortfalls continue to constrain humanitarian
access and timely and efficient humanitarian aid across
Syria. The 2015 humanitarian appeal for Syria has
increased twelve-fold since the beginning of the crisis.
Yet only little bits of humanitarian assistance reach
those in need, in amounts that are far from enough to
help those suffering in a sustained way. But we must
continue. It is our human and moral obligation to help
those in desperate need. In that regard, we sincerely
welcome the upcoming third pledging conference for
Syria to be held in Kuwait.
There is neither a military nor a humanitarian
solution to this crisis. A political settlement must be
found. The Council should do way more to push for
a genuine and sustainable political solution, based
on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
inclusively addressing the aspirations and grievances
of all Syrians. We support the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in his
efforts to reduce violence, as a stepping stone towards
an ultimately genuinely Syrian-led political process.
All parties to the conflict must fully comply with the
relevant resolutions without further delay. We fully
support the Secretary-General’s call for the siege of
212,000 people to be immediately lifted, access for
medical and surgical supplies to all parts of the country
ensured, the practice of using denial of key services as
a weapon of war ended, Syria’s education system rebuilt
and the use of barrel bombs prohibited.
Lastly, the Council must live up to its stated
intention to take further measures in the event of
continued non-compliance. There can be no impunity
for crimes committed, and their perpetrators must
be brought to justice. The role of the International
Criminal Court should not be forgotten, although the
Council’s inaction in May created a licence for all

18/25

26/02/2015

perpetrators to kill, torture and rape again. Justice and
accountability are prerequisites for a lasting peace in
Syria for all Syrians.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank High Commissioner Guterres and
Assistant Secretary-General Kang for their briefings
and for the remarkable work that both the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
are doing to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
I welcome the fact that we are holding today’s meeting
in an open format. It is vital that our horror at the scale of
the humanitarian crisis in Syria and its neighbours, and
our condemnation of Al-Assad and his brutal regime,
be heard loudly and clearly outside this Chamber.
Next month will see the start of the fifth year of the
conflict in Syria. More than 220,000 people are dead
and 12.2 million reliant on humanitarian assistance.
Almost half of the Syrian population is displaced;
7.6 million people have fled their homes within Syria
and 3.8 million have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries, causing massive security, economic and social
challenges for all of Syria’s neighbours, particularly
Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey. Those statistics have been
heard many times in the Council, but we have failed to
take the action necessary to put an end to this terrible
conflict. Al-Assad’s regime bears direct responsibility
for the situation.
Some Member States claim that terrorism lies at the
heart of the conflict, but the Chair of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Syria was quite
clear on that point last week when he said that terrorism
was not the cause of the conflict but a consequence of it.
Al-Assad’s regime continues to target civilians and use
barrel bombs and chemical weapons indiscriminately.
He continues to abuse those held in detention, recruit
child soldiers, deny civilians access to essential medical
supplies and collectively punish them through the denial
of essential services such as water and electricity. That
has created an environment that has spawned terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). Al-Assad’s actions, and others reported
by the Commission of Inquiry, represent clear violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights,
and amount to crimes against humanity.
As Assistant Secretary-General Kang has reminded
us, we must end the shameful culture of impunity
in Syria, and hold the perpetrators of those crimes
to account. Nor should we ignore the heinous acts
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

perpetrated by ISIL and other extremist groups, which
include sexual violence, kidnappings and torture. It is
manifestly obvious that the situation in Syria should be
referred to the International Criminal Court.
A negotiated political transition based on the 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) is the only
sustainable way to end the horror. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria to
establish a freeze in aerial and heavy artillery attacks
in Aleppo, which may be a first step to a broader
political process. We encourage Mr. De Mistura to
work with both the regime and the moderate opposition
in the development of that proposal. Experience shows,
however, that we should not take the regime’s promises
at face value. In particular, we must do all we can to
avoid a tragedy such as that which took place in Homs.
The Syrian regime must allow greater humanitarian
access to besieged areas. More than 200,000 people
now live their lives under siege, and 80 per cent of
those people are besieged by regime forces. Another
4.8 million people remain in dangerous and hard-toreach areas. Last year, the United Nations submitted
twice as many requests for cross-line aid convoys than
in 2013, and yet reached less than half as many people.
A year after the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), that
is wholly unacceptable. We must preserve the few gains
we have made with regard to cross-border access and be
resolute in applying pressure on the Al-Assad regime
to grant access to other areas. I call on all Council and
non-Council members to join our efforts in that regard.
We have been able to make a difference where we
do have access. It has been over a year since the last
reported polio case, and international assistance has
averted starvation and mass malnutrition. However,
funding is not keeping up with the needs on the ground.
The needs of the Syrian people are growing at more
than six times the rate of funding. The 2015 United
Nations appeals for Syria and the region now stand at
$8.4 billion, 40 per cent higher than last year. Kuwait
has shown great leadership in agreeing to host a third
international pledging conference for the Syrian crisis
next month. We must match its leadership by pledging
the support needed to meet the growing crisis. Hundreds
of thousands of lives are at stake.
The United Kingdom is determined to play its role.
During her recent visit to Jordan, the Secretary of State
for International Development announced a further
$154 million of funding, bringing the United Kingdom’s

S/PV.7394

assistance for Syria’s humanitarian relief to $1.2 billion.
That includes $145 million to provide education,
protection and trauma care for children affected by
the crisis, and to help prevent a lost generation of
Syrians. I call on all Members of the United Nations to
do their part and pledge further funding at the Kuwait
conference.
Let me conclude by again thanking the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Guterres,
and Assistant-Secretary General Kang for their
briefings. Their input and the input from experts on
the ground are very useful for Council members. We
should be open to other such briefings, including from
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Syrian activists, in future months.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to start
by thanking Ms. Kyung-wha Kang and Mr. António
Guterres for their very comprehensive briefings about
the humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic,
and also for their tireless efforts to ease the suffering
of the many civilians affected by this civil war. Angola
highly commends the quality of their work and the
efforts they are undertaking to bring the facts to the
Security Council. They have done their job, and it is
now up to the Council to deliberate, with the same
amount of courage and objectivity, on the facts that
have been presented to it.
As we were briefed, it is most unfortunate that the
catastrophic humanitarian situation in Syria continues
to deteriorate. This is a catastrophic humanitarian
situation. The persistence of heavy fighting and the
complete disregard for international humanitarian law
have put a very burden on the civilian population, which
continues to leave and experience tragic circumstances,
including death, sickness, famine and displacment,
while the international community remains unable to
find ways to successfully mediate a peaceful solution to
the conflict. Furthermore, due to political differences,
the international community is unable to make a more
meaningful contribution to put an end to the suffering
of the women, children and peace-loving Syrians.
The staggering numbers of internationally displaced
Syrians and refugees in neighbouring countries attest
to the dimension of the humanitarian catastrophe
that has struck the Syrian people. In fact, the civilian
population is the main victim of this savage war. Rape
and sexual violence, enforced disappearance, forced
displacement, the recruitment of child soldiers and

15-0521819/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

26/02/2015

summary executions happen on a daily basis. Human
rights abuses are being perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other terrorist groups, whose
rapid advance across large areas of the Syrian territory
adds an additional element of concern. Such concern
is not only due to its severe impact on the civilian
population of Syria, but also due to their rapid spread
into most of the Middle East, North Africa and beyond.
Those terrorists must be stopped and, ultimately,
defeated.

Moscow and Cairo initiatives, aimed at restarting the
political dialogue among the parties to the conflict.

It is most unfortunate that the parties to the Syrian
conflict continue to pursue a military solution while
showing no commitment to a peaceful settlement with a
view to arriving at the inclusive politial solution that we
have been advocating for some time. It is of the utmost
importance that the international community continue
to exert pressure by urging all the parties concerned to
be fully aware of the magnitude of the humanitarian
crisis and to ensure that relief agencies are allowed
to provide the necessary assistance to the civilians in
need.

The Syrian conflict will soon enter its fifth year.
This protracted conflict has devastated the ancient and
beautiful nation of Syria, traumatized its people, spread
terrorism and placed enormous economic and social
pressures on Syria’s neighbours. In this grave situation,
the parties in Syria, the international community,
the United Nations and humanitarian agencies must
take terrible risks and overcome great difficulties
in delivering humanitarian assistance in Syria and
its neighbours, and have contributed significantly
to alleviating the humanitarian crisis. China highly
appreciates their work.

With approximately 12 million people lacking basic
humanitarian assistance, the protection of civilians is an
absolute priority. Treating and evacuating the wounded
and providing food, water, sanitation and hygiene,
health care and shelter are some of the most basic
and urgent tasks that humanitarian agencies must be
allowed to perform without interference or obstruction.
It is indeed hard to imagine that more than 3 million
Syrian citizens were forced to become refugees in
neighbouring countries. Those countries, in particular
Lebanon, are approaching a dangerous saturation point,
with more than 1 million refugees in need of shelter and
other basic needs. The situation is just as dire in Iraq,
Jordan and Turkey, with the Governments increasingly
unable to provide basic needs, including health care,
to such large numbers of refugees. Angola pledges its
solidarity with Syria’s neighbouring countries. We
look forward to the success of the third international
pledging conference, to be hosted by Kuwait.
In conclusion, may I reiterate Angola’s strong
commitment to contributing to finding a political
solution to this conflict, which must be based on the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We commend
the work being undertaken by Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and encourage his efforts to build bridges between
the opposing sides. We also encourage the diplomatic
initiatives that have been undertaken, including the

20/25

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.
I thank Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. António
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their briefings.

In the meantime, humanitarian efforts in Syria are
still confronted by a variety of challenges, including
ongoing conflict, rampant terrorism, blocked channels
of communication and grave shortfalls in funding. If
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council are to
be fully implemented and the humanitarian situation in
Syria is to be tangibly improved, the parties should, out
of their own sense of humanity, assume their respective
responsibilities, strengthen their coordination and
focus on the following aspects in the next phase.
First, we must vigorously promote the political
process to resolve the Syrian issue. That is the only
way to restore peace and stability in Syria and improve
the humanitarian situation. China appreciates and
supports the mediation efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to promote the freeze initiative. We also
support the efforts of Russia and Egypt to promote the
political process. The international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should support the
political mediation efforts of the relevant parties and
urge the Syrian Government and the opposition to find
a solution as soon as possible that is appropriate to
national conditions and accommodates the interests of
all parties.
Secondly, the parties in Syria, the international
community, the United Nations and other humanitarian
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

agencies should fully and comprehensively implement
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
The Syrian Government should bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. The Syrian
opposition should, alongside the Syrian Government,
take measures to protect civilians and support efforts
to deliver international humanitarian assistance.
Organizations such as the United Nations should follow
the United Nations guiding principles for humanitarian
assistance and strengthen communications with
the Syrian Government to win cooperation and
support. The international community should provide
constructive assistance on the basis of respect for
Syria’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and avoid politicizing humanitarian questions
and militarizing humanitarian assistance.
Thirdly, close attention should be paid to the
exacerbation by terrorists of the humanitarian situation.
Terrorist organizations inside Syria kill civilians
brutally, thereby exacerbating the humanitarian crisis
and undermining humanitarian efforts. This has
become the principal cause of the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Syria. China is firmly
opposed to all forms of terrorism and condemns all
violence against innocent civilians. The international
community should fully implement resolutions 2170
(2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), on curbing and
combatting terrorism. In that regard, counter-terrorism
and humanitarian assistance needs should be well
balanced and we must develop a comprehensive strategy
to ensure that our goals are aligned and mutually
reinforcing, and that no civilians are harmed.
Fourthly, the international community should
strengthen its support for United Nations humanitarian
assistance efforts. China appreciates the fact that Kuwait
and the United Nations will jointly host a pledging
conference. We call on the international community to
actively contribute to the United Nations Syria strategic
response plan for 2015 and to regional refugee and
reconstruction programmes so as to alleviate funding
shortfalls and ease the pressure on Syria’s neighbours
caused by the refugee problem.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to pay tribute to the

S/PV.7394

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
to the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs. I thank them for their briefings on the
humanitarian situation in my country, Syria. I would
also like to thank the presidency for issuing a press
statement (SC/11799) this morning condemning the fact
that terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
have kidnapped more than 100 Christian Assyrians
from their villages in Al-Hasakeh governorate. I would
also like to thank all the speakers who sympathized with
the humanitarian suffering being experienced by large
segments of the Syrian population as a consequence of
the persistence of the crisis. I would like to start with a
few preliminary comments.
A year ago the Security Council adopted resolution
2139 (2014), which condemns the destruction of the
cultural heritage in Iraq and Syria by ISIS and the
Al-Nusra Front. Since some Member States are not
serious about fighting ISIS and theAl-Nusra Front by
way of this resolution, ISIS terrorists demolished the
Mosul Museum today, and sold 100 pieces of cultural
heritage in London in an auction sale a few days ago.
Despite all that, we are still hearing some speakers
ignoring the errors in the policies of their Governments
towards my countries. They insist on blackmailing the
Syrian population and the international community’s
opinion by repeatedly saying, as we heard only minutes
ago, that as long as President Al-Assad stays in office,
ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front will remain strong. Such
a serious assertion reveals the identity of those who
are supporting ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front in Syria,
Iraq, Egypt, Libya and Lebanon. It also shows why a
terrorist, such as ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front are still
in the region, and it illustrates the facat that they are not
truly fighting those two terrorist organizations.
I also heard a colleague say that our air force is
targeting terrorists with what she called barrel bombs.
Regardless of the fact that there is nothing called a
barrel bomb in military terminology, it is worth noting
that the air force of that colleague has been targeting
terrorists with cruise missiles, smart bombs and other
highly destructive weapons. Why is her country allowed
to target terrorists in other countries’ territories while
our air force is not allowed to target the same terrorists
on our own territory? And why is it that a terrorist we
are targeting on our land becomes an innocent civilian
on whom we are dropping barrel bombs?
A year has now passed since the adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014) and it has been more than

15-0521821/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

seven months since the adoption of resolution 2165
(2014) seeking to deal with the humanitarian situation
in Syria. Nonetheless, the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate in some regions, begging the
question, “Why?” To answer this question, we need a
serious assessment of how we have been dealing with
this important humanitarian dossier. We also need to
define the standards that should govern our working
mechanisms in order to duly contribute to alleviating
the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian population. To
this end, we have to start diagnosing the root causes
of the problem. Secondly, we have to determine the
goals we seek to achieve. Thirdly, we must adopt the
legal grounds on the basis of which we will be working.
Fourthly, and finally, we must set out the mechanisms
governing our work. I would like to detail each of these
points separately.
First of all, let me address how to diagnose the root
causes. It is high time for some parties, after a long
period of denial, to recognize that the root cause of the
humanitarian crisis in several areas of Syria is the result
of the expansion of terrorism supported by foreign
forces. If we follow the humanitarian crisis objectively,
it can be seen that the crisis, including the refugee and
displaced person crises, has arisen only in the areas
controlled armed terrorist groups. The best example is
what happened in the city of Aleppo, which maintained
its stability and prosperity for more than a year and a
half after the onset of the crisis, without any problems,
until some countries decided to ask their terrorist
groups, which are multinational and trans-border in
nature, to enter that city and take civilians as human
shields.
We have to agree that any measure will fall short of
alleviating the human suffering of the Syrians in need
as long as the relevant Security Council resolutions are
not implemented, especially resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2199 (2014), in collaboration and
coordination with the Syrian Government. In other
words, we have to put an end to the practices of the
Turkish-Qatari-Israeli-Saudi terrorist alliance that is
supporting, funding and arming ISIS, the Al-Nusra
front, the Free Syrian Army and the other terrorist
groups that are embracing the ideology and practices
of Al-Qaida.
This was reaffirmed recently by the American
General Wesley Clark, the former Supreme Commander
of NATO, when he said that ISIS was the product of the
funding of close friends and allies of the United States.
We cannot speak about improving the humanitarian
22/25

26/02/2015

situation while weapons and training are still being
provided to terrorists under the slogan of “moderate
Opposition”. The former American Ambassador to
Syria recently recognized that this so-called moderate
Opposition is collaborating with the Al-Nusra Front
and defending it.
Secondly, we must determine the goal we are
seeking to achieve. Here we need to answer the
following questions: Is the goal to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria or is it for some to
exploit the suffering of the Syrian people as a means
of pressuring the Syrian Government? If we agree that
the objective is indeed to improve the humanitarian
situation, we should do the following. First, we should
deal with the terrorist phenomenon as I explained
previously. Secondly, we need the immediate lifting
of the unilateral compulsory measures that have been
imposed against the Syrian people by some countries,
including members of the Security Council, that claim
to defend the Syrian people. I would like to note that the
European Union, for instance, has imposed sanctions
prohibiting the provision of fuel to civilian aircraft,
as well as sanctions against the Ministers for Relief,
Electricity and National Reconciliation. Thirdly, we
must refrain from politicizing humanitarian issues
in Syria, including in the reports submitted by the
Secretariat.
We have conveyed to the Council the comments of
the Syrian Government on the report currently under
discussion, but I would like to give just two examples
of such politicization. The first example has to do with
the allegations that the Syrian Government is besieging
some regions and preventing access of humanitarian
assistance to those regions. I would like to ask how
it can be said that those areas are besieged while
munitions are still finding their way to those regions
from terrorist-supporting countries? Those weapons
are then being used to launch indiscriminate missile
attacks and undertake suicide bombings in Damascus,
Aleppo, Homs, Dara’a and elsewhere, which had,
as of 22 February, claimed the lives of 17,186 Syrian
civilians, including 1,867 children.
Some report authors have come up with a new
denomination to describe the terrorist groups. They
have been calling them the “armed Syrian Opposition”,
ut we all know that the opposition in any given country
cannot be anything other than a peaceful political
opposition. As for the groups carrying weapons outside
of State authority, recruiting thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters and destroying, killing and wreaking
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

havoc, these can only be called terrorist groups,
according to the Security Council’s own definition in
this regard.
I would like to mention that there are far more than
212,000 people being besieged in Syria. The correct
figure is 23 million Syrians. Some 23 million Syrians
are being besieged by countries supporting terrorism
and imposing sanctions against the Syrian people.
The second example concerns allegations that
barrel bombs are being used and that seek to portray
the Syrian Government as evil. The Syrian army is
fighting terrorism and protecting civilians in line with
international law while taking great care to spare the
lives of civilians living in the regions under terrorist
threat. Our army is totally committed to the safety
of those civilians, which has prevented us in many
instances from uprooting those terrorists.
Thirdly, we need to define the legal grounds on
which humanitarian assistance is to be provided. Here
we need to agree that it is necessary to work according
to United Nations guidelines for the provision of
humanitarian assistance in emergencies, as per General
Assembly resolution 182/46, especially with respect to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Fourthly, let me turn to the mechanisms governing
our methods of work. Given the shortfalls in the provision
of humanitarian assistance, we need to undertake the
following actions in order to avoid such shortfalls in
future. We need first to reinforce the coordination and
collaboration with the Syrian Government in order to
guarantee access for humanitarian assistance for those
who truly need it, by which I mean the civilians in the
various Syrian regions without discrimination. We
must make sure that humanitarian assistance does not
fall into the hands of terrorist groups. We know that
early this month ISIS seized assistance sent by the
World Food Programme through Turkey.
Furthermore, we have to make sure that the
humanitarian assistance is provided from within Syrian
territory. While assistance was provided within Syrian
territory to some 3.4 million beneficiaries in January
2015 alone thanks to the efforts and collaboration of
the Syrian Government and thousands of volunteers
from the Red Crescent, we have witnessed the limited
number of beneficiaries of assistance channelled across
the borders, only 5 per cent of whom were reached.
This proves that the measures adopted by the United
Nations and implementing resolutions 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014) were not effective. Moreover, some have

S/PV.7394

insisted on dispatching humanitarian assistance across
the borders to implement a hidden agenda and achieve
their goals through so-called humanitarian corridors,
well aware that Turkey and Saudi Arabia are exploiting
those resolutions by sending weapons and terrorists
from Turkey or Jordan through the same corridors used
by the United Nations.
Thirdly, there is a serious funding shortfall. At a
time when the Syrian Government is responsible for
delivering the majority of the humanitarian assistance
being distributed in Syria, the humanitarian plan was
funded at only 48 per cent in 2014, whereas the funding
for terrorist attacks in Syria was at 100 per cent or
more, thanks to the generous contributions of Qatar,
Turkey and Saudi Arabia.
I take the opportunity offered by Mr. Guterres’
presence here today to discuss the issue of Syrian
refugees. I have already said that the crimes committed
by the armed terrorist groups have forced Syrians
to leave their homes in some regions and to become
internally displaced persons or refugees in camps
in neighbouring countries, where they are used to
leverage political pressure and justify intervention and
as pretexts for requests for financial assistance. Adding
insult to injury, some of these camps are being used
to train terrorists and recruit children who will later
be sent to Syria, as confirmed in several international
reports. If the Security Council truly wishes to help
Syrian refugees, it must first help them return to Syria,
in cooperation with the Syrian Government, which
has repeatedly reiterated its readiness to provide for
all their basic needs, including shelter, until they can
return to the homes they fled.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the Syrian crisis can
be resolved only through a peaceful, political settlement
based on the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The settlement should also be based on intra-Syrian
dialogue, under exclusively Syrian leadership and free
from all forms of foreign interference in our internal
affairs. We thank all those who are helping to alleviate
the humanitarian suffering of our people with integrity
and without hidden political agendas or manipulation
of the grave situation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Four years into the conflict
in Syria, the international community remains unable

15-0521823/25

S/PV.7394

The situation in the Middle East

to stop the collapse into bloodshed and chaos of a
country with one of the most ancient societies and
rich civilizations on our planet. That tragic cycle of
violence has left more than 200,000 people dead, many
more wounded, 6.5 million— if not more — internally
displaced persons and over 3 million refugees in
neighbouring countries, not to mention the magnitude
of physical destruction.
For four years, the Council, which is the organ
entrusted by the Charter of the United Nations with
maintaining international peace and security, has failed
to facilitate the realization of a political solution that
would put an end to the protracted conflict. By failing
to assume its role, the Security Council has not only
failed in its mission and indeed failed Syria, but it has
also failed its neighbours and allowed for a dangerous
increase in regional instability, a situation well
illustrated by the fact that the conflict has produced a
massive humanitarian crisis and one of biggest waves of
human displacement since the Second World War. That
has pushed the societies, economies and infrastructure
of neighbouring counties to the brink, not to mention the
negative impact it has had on the security environment
throughout the region and beyond. As members know,
terrorism, fanaticism and sectarianism are on the rise,
threatening the stability of neighbouring countries and
international peace and security.
Lebanon today is home to more than 1.1 million
registered Syrian refugees and 350,000 Palestinian
refugees, including 45,000 Palestinian refugees from
Syria. That is about a third of my country’s total
population. Lebanon is the smallest country of the
region in terms of both geographic size and population,
but it hosts the largest number of refugees. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Lebanon is the country hosting the
highest number of refugees per capita. It ranks second
in the total number of refugees, behind only Pakistan,
whose geographical size and population are respectively
approximately 80 and 50 times that of my country.
The economic impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon
has been detrimental. The World Bank estimated the
total losses to Lebanon’s economy as a result of the
crisis at about $7.5 billion, and that was in the summer
of 2013. The total economic loss today is almost double
that amount. Eighty-six per cent of Syrian refugees live
in local communities, in regions that are home to 68 per
cent of the poorest Lebanese. Poverty in the country
has risen by 61 per cent, Lebanese unemployment
levels have doubled, economic growth stumbled,
24/25

26/02/2015

and the national infrastructure for education, health,
energy and water is stretched beyond its capacity. In
response to the growing challenge of the refugee crisis,
my Government, in coordination with the relevant
United Nations agencies and other partners, adopted
in December 2014 the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan
2015-2016, with an estimated cost of $2.1 billion.
Allow me to reiterate today what we have stressed
on several previous occasions. Lebanon cannot cope by
itself with the humanitarian rights and needs of Syrian
refugees on its soil and continues therefore to call
for real burden-sharing and greater assistance to host
communities through official delivery channels.
Under the able leadership of Mr. Guterres, Ms. Amos
and Ms. Kang, the United Nations agencies have done
an excellent job of seeking to alleviate the suffering of
the refugees. Once again, I would like to commend their
work and that of all the members of their respective
teams. The international community has also shown
tremendous generosity in response to the humanitarian
crisis. In particular, Kuwait ought to be commended for
continuing to host the donors conferences. However,
more — and in reality, much more — still needs to
be done. In fact, only 52 per cent of the $1.7 billion
estimated as needed under the regional response plan
for Lebanon in 2014 was met.
It is of utmost urgency that the international
community increase its humanitarian support to the
Syrian refugees and to their host communities in
neighbouring countries. But more importantly, there
remains a need for the Council to live up to its duties in
helping to bring about a political solution to the Syrian
conflict. The reality is that, beyond the responsibilities
of the Security Council as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, what is at stake today in Syria is
our humanity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang and High
Commissioner Guterres for their briefings. Turkey
appreciates the tireless work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to alleviate the suffering of the millions of displaced
Syrians, as well as their advocacy in that regard.
I would like to share with the Security Council
what Turkey has been doing in response to the Syrian
15-05218

26/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

crisis. The humanitarian operations of the Turkish
Government are carried out on three tracks. First, we
maintain an open border policy and comply with the
principle of non-refoulement. More than 1.6 million
Syrians are now living in Turkey. More than 239,000
Syrians are registered in 25 shelters. All their needs,
including food, non-food items, health and education
services as well as psychological assistance, vocational
training and social activities, are provided by the
Turkish Government.
Secondly, to assist Syrians who live in various
towns outside the shelters, we are taking measures
to provide them with basic services, including free
health care. In that respect, as a reflection of our strong
commitment to humanitarian values and principles, the
law on foreigners and international protection came
into force in April 2014. Furthermore, the temporary
protection regulation for Syrians came into force on
22 October 2014.
The third track pertains to extending humanitarian
relief items to the northern parts of Syria. Turkey has
continued to ensure that humanitarian relief reaches the
northern parts of the country through the border’s zero
point, in conformity with its international obligations
and in support of the United Nations campaign. The
total value of the aid channelled to Syria through this
type of operation is in the range of $365 million.
Lastly, as the Secretary-General’s monthly
reports have repeatedly stated, Turkey is also closely
cooperating with the United Nations to enable the
Organization’s cross-border humanitarian operations
to succeed in northern Syria.
As resolution 2191 (2014) and numerous monthly
reports to the Council have suggested, the humanitarian
needs in Syria remain enormous, and much more needs
be done, especially in terms of scaling up cross-border
and cross-line humanitarian assistance. Turkey will
remain committed to continuing its contributions.
However, we also need to be on the receiving side
through burden sharing. The financial burden on the
Government is currently almost $6 billion, whereas
the total contributions we have received bilaterally and
multilaterally so far stand at $300 million.
I must stress that the current situation is not
sustainable, neither for Turkey nor for any other country

S/PV.7394

in the region. Syria’s neighbouring countries, including
Turkey, have so far assumed an unfair share of the
humanitarian burden of the Syrian crisis. They should
not be left alone in coping with this humanitarian
tragedy, which requires a genuine partnership among
all members of the international community. That
partnership has to include addressing the needs of
Syrians who have been forcefully displaced, building
the resilience of host communities and increasing
resettlement efforts, while at the same time bearing
in mind the future human resources needs of Syrian
society for the sustainable development of post-conflict
Syria.
We are gravely concerned by the continuing
deterioration of the situation in Syria and increasingly
feel the strain of the current state of chaos. Instability
in the region — and the terrorist organization Daesh
in particular — represents a threat to international
peace and security. On this occasion, let me express
our strongest condemnation on the recent abduction
of Syrian Christians, as well as other barbaric acts
committed by Daesh.
In that regard, the international community needs a
comprehensive and coordinated strategy with political,
security and humanitarian pillars. The international
community has to make the crisis in Syria a shared
priority and address the root causes of the problem
in order to bring about a genuine political transition
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
through the establishment of a transitional governing
body with authority to exercise full executive powers.
On 15 March we will mark the fifth year of this crisis.
It is high time for the international community to act.
I will refrain from taking Council members’
valuable time by responding to some of the accusations
and statements made against us. As we have done in the
past, we will continue to stand by the Syrian people in
these difficult times.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

15-0521825/25
