A/RES/74/258

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 January 2020

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 146
Administration of justice at the
United Nations

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 27 December 2019
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/74/433)]

74/258.

Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001 and its resolutions
57/307 of 15 April 2003, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005,
61/261 of 4 April 2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007, 63/253 of 24 December 2008,
64/233 of 22 December 2009, 65/251 of 24 December 2010, 66/237 of 24 December
2011, 67/241 of 24 December 2012, 68/254 of 27 December 2013, 69/203 of
18 December 2014, 70/112 of 14 December 2015, 71/266 of 23 December 2016,
72/256 of 24 December 2107 and 73/276 of 22 December 2018,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations 1 and on the activities of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services, 2 the report of the Internal Justice Council on
administration of justice at the United Nations 3 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 4 as well as the letter dated
12 November 2019 from the President of the General Assembly to the Chair of the
Fifth Committee, 5
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations 1 and on the activities of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services, 2 the report of the Internal Justice Council on
administration of justice at the United Nations 3 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 4

__________________

A/74/172.
A/74/171.
3
A/74/169.
4
A/74/7/Add.10.
5
A/C.5/74/10.
1
2

19-22724 (E)

170120

*1922724*

A/RES/74/258

Administration of justice at the United Nations

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of
the Advisory Committee, subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
I
System of administration of justice
3.
Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in the
system of administration of justice;
4.
Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the
system of administration of justice, regardless of their duty station;
5.
Acknowledges the evolving nature of the system of administration of
justice and the need to carefully monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains
within the parameters set out by the General Assembly;
6.
Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of its resolution 61/261,
to establish a new, independent, transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced
and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent with the relevant
rules of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to
ensure respect for the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability
of managers and staff members alike;
7.
Welcomes the ongoing outreach efforts, and urges the Secretary-General
to continue to implement the outreach strategy, with a view to continuing to raise
awareness of the role and functioning of the various parts of the system and the
possibilities that it offers to address work-related complaints, paying particular
attention to field missions and offices;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure a strong culture of
accountability throughout the Secretariat and that all categories of personnel who may
have been subjected to prohibited conduct in a wo rk-related situation have access to
effective remedies; 6
9.
Notes the ongoing efforts to continuously strengthen the policy on
protection against retaliation for reporting misconduct and for cooperating with duly
authorized audits or investigations, 7 and in this regard requests the Secretary-General
to report, in the context of his next report on the system of administration of justice,
on progress made in protecting staff members who lodge cases before the United
Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal against retaliation;
10. Reiterates that retaliation against complainants or staff appearing as
witnesses constitutes misconduct, and notes with appreciation the policy on
protection against retaliation for reporting misconduct and for cooperating with duly
authorized audits or investigations as well as the efforts to continuously improve the
framework for protection from retaliation;
11. Encourages the Secretary-General, in his capacity as the Chair of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to promote
protection against retaliation across the system;
12. Underscores the inherent and explicit authority of the Dispute and Appeals
Tribunals to issue protective orders, consistent with their statutes, rules of procedure
and code of conduct, in order to protect complainants and witnesses against
__________________
6
7

2/6

ST/SGB/2019/8.
ST/SGB/2017/2/Rev.1.
19-22724

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/74/258

retaliation, stresses the importance of fully implementing such orders, and requests
the Secretary-General to report on the application thereof;
II
Informal system
13. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an
efficient and effective option both for staff who seek redress of grievances and for the
participation of managers;
14. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of
the system of administration of justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be
made of the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary litigation, without
prejudice to the basic right of staff members to access the formal system, and
encourages recourse to the informal resolution of disputes;
15. Also reaffirms the importance of the informal dispute resolution process in
the Organization, which represents an effective method of dispute resolution as
compared with the formal process, and requests the Secretary-General to include
recommendations to address the current underservice of staff i n the field in his next
report;
16. Notes the efforts of the Mediation Service of the Office of the United
Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services to ensure that timely and high -quality
mediation processes are available to address the diverse needs of the Org anization,
including through the Secretary-General’s civility campaign, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to provide detailed information on the mediation
activities of the Office, including measures to increase the utilization of these
services;
17. Welcomes the continued analysis of the root causes of conflict included in
the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the United
Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, stresses the importance of improving
management performance and staff communication, urges the Secretary-General to
continue to address the direct feedback and systemic issues identified in the report in
order to mitigate and prevent work-related conflicts, including through the
improvement of the policies and procedures of the Organization, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide information on progress resulting from the actions taken
in the context of his next report;
18. Notes the need for the Organization to develop and employ a holistic
managerial approach, including management training for addressing conflict,
including efforts to identify and address inappropriate behaviour that affects staff
even when it does not amount to misconduct, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide an update on the actions taken in the context of his next report;
19. Encourages the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services to continue its outreach activities, especially i n the field, in order to promote
informal dispute resolution;
20. Notes the five initiatives of the Secretary-General to improve the
prevention and resolution of disputes involving non-staff personnel, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide in his next report detailed information on the ongoing
initiatives, mentioned in his report; 1
21. Requests the Secretary-General to submit new proposals, bearing in mind
the need for budgetary discipline, in the context of his next report, on reviewing
formal policies and issuances concerning dispute resolution with consultants and
19-22724

3/6

A/RES/74/258

Administration of justice at the United Nations

individual contractors, including but not limited to drawing on more cost -effective
features of the expedited arbitration procedures for consulta nts and individual
contractors;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with a view to informing
the discussion at the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, an overview on
the functioning of the pilot project to offer access to informal dispute -resolution
services to non-staff personnel up to the time of reporting, including on the nature of
conflicts, average length of time spent on cases, rate of resolution and disag gregated
data on each category of non-staff personnel, and the results of the pilot project on
resolving disputes with respect for the principles of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services;
III
Formal system
23. Recognizes the ongoing positive contribution of the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance to the system of administration of justice;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the accountability of
managers whose decisions have been established to be grossly negligent, according
to the applicable Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, 8 and which have
led to litigation and subsequent financial loss, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
25. Commends the Secretary-General for the creation of the toolkits for selfrepresented applicants, encourages the Secretary-General to continue to provide
assistance to self-represented applicants and enhance their understanding and ability
to utilize the system and mitigate efficiency concerns, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to continue to monitor the issue of self-representation and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
26. Notes with concern the dual presidency of the Dispute Tribunal and its
impact on case disposal, stresses that the Dispute Tribunal is an independent judiciary,
which is expected to manage its affairs in accordance with its statute, rules of
procedure and code of conduct, and requests the Secretary-General to examine
recommendations 11, 12 and 13 contained in the report of the Internal Justice Council,
with a view to improving the accountability of the Tribunal, for consideration during
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly;
27. Welcomes recommendation 9 on judicial efficiency and accountability
contained in the report of the Internal Justice Council, and urges the Dispute Tribunal
and the Appeals Tribunal to review and amend their respective rules of procedure
subject to the approval of the General Assembly, with a view to streamlining and
harmonizing their approach to case management, including by ensuring that the first
judicial action in a case is taken no later than 90 days from the date on which an
application is filed;
28. Notes the large number of pending cases and of ageing cases at the Dispute
Tribunal, acknowledges the efforts made by the Dispute Tribunal and the Principal
Registrar of the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal to develop and implement
a case disposal plan, as requested in its resolution 73/276, and the reduction in the
number of cases pending in 2019, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
report on the implementation of the case disposal plan at its seventy-fifth session;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the Internal Justice Council to
provide its views on the implementation of the system of administration of justice,
__________________
8

4/6

ST/SGB/2018/1.
19-22724

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/74/258

including the timely delivery of judgments, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
30. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to track the data on the
number of cases received by the Management Evaluation Unit and the Dispute
Tribunal in order to identify any emerging trends and to include his observations on
those statistics in future reports;
31. Requests that the judicial directions of the Dispute Tribunal and the
Appeals Tribunal that are of general application be posted online and thus made
available to all stakeholders, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
32. Recalls paragraph 32 of its resolution 73/276 and that half-time judges are
to be deployed only as required by caseload, encourages the Dispute Tribunal to make
full use of telecommuting in the deployment of half-time judges so as to promote
efficiencies, and requests the Secretary-General to review and report on the use of the
six half-time judges to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
33. Notes the overall trend of increase in the workload of the Office of Staff
Legal Assistance, expresses its satisfaction that the majority of requests for legal
assistance received by the Office were settled or otherwise disposed of without
recourse to any formal mechanism, and acknowledges that the Office should be
adequately resourced;
34. Also notes the continuing high opt-out rates from the voluntary staff
funding mechanism, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to continue
to strengthen incentives for staff not to opt out, particularly in locations and United
Nations entities where the participation rate is low;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to provide further analysis and
clarification on the proposed amendments to articles 2 and 7 of the statute of the
Appeals Tribunal on pension matters, 9 and invites the Sixth Committee to consider
the legal aspects of the report of the Secretary-General on the administration of
justice, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth Committee as the Main Committee
of the General Assembly responsible for administrative and budgetary matters;
IV
Other issues
36. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report to
be submitted by the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth
Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with responsibilities for admini strative
and budgetary matters;
37. Stresses that the Internal Justice Council can help to ensure independence,
professionalism and accountability in the system of administration of justice, and
requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Council with including the views of both
the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal in its reports;
38. Welcomes further views of the Internal Justice Council in its next report to
the General Assembly on possible ways to improve judicial and operational
efficiency;
39. Recalls paragraphs 36 and 37 of its resolution 62/228, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide an overview of and recommendations on the conditions
__________________
9

19-22724

See A/73/217/Add.1.
5/6

A/RES/74/258

Administration of justice at the United Nations

of service and appointment requirements of the members of the Internal Justice
Council, in particular professional qualifications, for consideratio n by the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
52nd (resumed) plenary meeting
27 December 2019

6/6

19-22724
