S/PV.7923

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7923rd meeting

Wednesday, 12 April 2017, 4.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms Sison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (5/2017/208)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09932 (E)
*1709932*

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.

including the Republic of the Congo and Uganda
have offered to host future summits of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2017/208)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/208, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit: I would like to thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief it on the progress
on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, and on the challenges to it.
I would like to begin by highlighting some of
the progress that has been made in implementing
the Framework during the period under review. On
26 October, as a result of the successful reform of the
governing structures of the Framework initiated by
my Office with the support of the other guarantors,
Angola hosted the seventh Summit of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism in Luanda, the first meeting of
the Mechanism to take place in a signatory country
since the Framework agreement was signed four
years ago. The Summit generated renewed ownership
and commitment by the leaders of the region to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. I am pleased to report that other countries,
2/22

12/04/2017

The persistent activities of the illegal armed groups
remain one of the main threats to the security of the
populations and to the stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. We should
therefore continue to beef up efforts aimed at
neutralizing the illegal armed groups, including the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and others, building
on the progress made so far by the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the support of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
In that regard, it is important to further strengthen
the cooperation between the two forces. It is equally
important, as stressed in resolution 2348 (2017), that
the Force Intervention Brigade, with the support of
MONUSCO as a whole, enhance its offensive operations
targeting the armed groups.
I welcome the launching on 18 February by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Tanzania
and Uganda of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism to
address the growing threat posed by the ADF. I call
on the participating countries to contribute actively
to that Mechanism and provide it with the necessary
resources to allow it to effectively perform its mission.
Against that background, the recent incursion into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the elements of
the former Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) rebel group,
previously cantoned in Uganda, was a setback to the
commendable efforts deployed by the leaders of the
region to address that recurrent problem in the east
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, through the
signing of the famous Nairobi Declarations in 2013.
Following that incident, I engaged together with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Sidikou and authorities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda to encourage an early resumption
of the joint consultations, which we facilitated last
year — as the United Nations, together with the
guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework — between Government officials and exM-23 representatives on the implementation of the
Nairobi Declarations. We shall pursue those efforts.
We have also been assisting the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan to
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

address the issue of the presence of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition elements in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Similarly, we
will continue to work closely with the other guarantors
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
the countries of the region and partners to tackle the
daunting challenge of the repatriation of disarmed
foreign combatants in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and neighbouring countries.
Although relations between countries of the region
have been affected by the activities of illegal armed
groups, which have generated suspicion and mistrust,
the reporting period witnessed promising steps towards
the strengthening of economic cooperation. I encourage
the signatory countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework to continue to engage in
joint development projects that contribute to further
enhancing regional integration and stability.
During the reporting period, my office, together
with country teams and the other United Nations
entities in the region, has continued to support efforts
to address the root causes of conflict in the region, in
line with that mandate. In addition to ongoing efforts
to support the empowerment of women in the region,
we are currently promoting initiatives on displacement,
illicit exploitation of natural resources, youth
unemployment and fighting impunity. jointly with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other partners.
(spoke in French)
I have continued to support the inter-Burundian
dialogue by being in direct contact with the Facilitator,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and by encouraging increased
commitment from leaders in the region. In that regard,
the next summit of the Community of East African
States will certainly provide an opportunity for Heads
of State in the region to reiterate their support for the
Facilitator’s efforts and to show greater commitment to
Burundian stakeholders in the quest for a consensusbased solution to the issues the country faces. In close
collaboration with my colleague, Mr. Maman Sidikou,
I will also continue to encourage inter-Congolese
dialogue, which was facilitated by the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO) and led to the
signing of the comprehensive and inclusive political
agreement on 31 December 2016 and to the subsequent
negotiations on the specific arrangements.

S/PV.7923

I take this opportunity to commend CENCO’s
laudable work. When it concluded its mediation on
27 March, CENCO called for the personal involvement
of and accountability from the Head of State, as the
nation’s guarantor of the swift implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement. Since then, President
Joseph Kabila has appointed a Prime Minister.
That appointment was met with opposition from
the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
de la République démocratique du Congo acquises
au changement, headed by Félix Tshisekedi and
Pierre Lumbi.
I call on the parties to strictly implement the
31 December 2016 agreement, in order to create the
conditions for the holding of transparent, inclusive and
peaceful elections, through dialogue and an ongoing
quest for consensus. I implore them to refrain from
engaging in any action that could spark violence.
I reiterate the United Nations readiness to support
and assist the Congolese parties in implementing the
31 December 2016 agreement, in accordance with
resolution 2348 (2017). In that regard, it is important
for the United Nations, the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, as guarantor
of the framework agreement to continue to work
closely and coordinate their actions to facilitate the
implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreement.
I would like to recall that, apart from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Kenya and Rwanda will
also hold elections in the coming months. I encourage
all stakeholders in those countries to create conditions
that are conducive to the holding of transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, I wish to commend the leaders and the
people of the Great Lakes region for their monumental
achievements in overcoming the tragedies and conflicts
of the past and for charting the way forward towards
shared peace and prosperity. I encourage them to
pursue their efforts through decisive steps to address
the outstanding issue of the illegal armed groups. I
also encourage the leaders of the region to remain
committed to assisting Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan to address the persistent crisis in those
countries. In their efforts, the countries of the region
can count on the continued support of the United

17-099323/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Nations, working closely with the African Union and
subregional organizations.
The President: I thank Mr. Djinnit for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to warmly thank Mr. Djinnit for his excellent
work and unwavering commitment to achieving peace
in the Great Lakes region. I am pleased that we have
been given the opportunity to speak with him in this
format, where we can take a step back and consider
all of the region’s challenges. The regional dimension
of the crisis in the Great Lakes region should not
be neglected.
France is concerned about three main mutually
reinforcing issues in the region: the continued slow
process of implementing of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, the ongoing political crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the situation
in Burundi, both of which can significantly destabilize
the region if they are not resolved. The Security Council
must take joint, decisive action thereon in order to
prevent a regional crisis from erupting.
Turning first to the Addis Ababa Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, I would note that despite
some headway, as underscored by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2017/208), which was presented
by Mr. Djinnit, negative forces continue to make their
presence felt in the region. Although the era of reciprocal
destabilization by armed groups is, fortunately, over,
the legacy of that time remains, and certain armed
groups are still active. This legacy of the past continues
to fuel suspicion and mistrust between the countries
of the region; it must be definitely resolved so that the
region can finally move forward and forge healthy ties
of cooperation. To that end, decisive steps will need to
be taken in three areas, and regional organizations, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), have a key role to play in this respect.
First, with respect to a military response to
the armed groups, a key role will be played by the
Force Intervention Brigade, provided by SADC. The
renewed mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) will enable it to rebuild
4/22

12/04/2017

its capacity for mobility in order for it to engage in
decisive offensive actions, as it did with respect to the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M23).
Secondly, political action must be taken in order to
demobilize, repatriate and reintegrate these combatants
in their countries of origin. Here I am thinking of
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) and former members of M23, as well as those
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition, who have been in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo since last year. This will require joint
action and a commitment at the highest level of the
political leaders concerned.
The Addis Ababa agreement, which experienced
a welcome revitalization thanks to the efforts of
Angola in 2016, must be fully implemented, and
the Technical Support Committee of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism must undertake this task. Its
upcoming meeting in Brazzaville in October will be an
opportunity to address the issue.
Thirdly, I turn to the issue of tackling the illicit
trafficking in natural resources. Armed groups use such
traffic to meet their needs, contribute to their survival
and fuel an economy of war and predation. So long as
that illicit trafficking continues, no lasting solution to
the instability in the region is possible. Therefore there
needs to be strong, harmonized action by the countries
of the region as well as a sustained commitment of
international partners to ensure that we can stamp out
illicit trafficking in natural resources with the support
of the international community. We must work for
transparency in the mining industry and ensure greater
traceability of minerals.
Turning to the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, France is very concerned. At the political
level, the failure to implement the 31 December 2016
agreement threatens any potential resolution of the
crisis. All of the legislative bodies in the country
have now overrun their mandates, and therefore
their legitimacy going forward depends entirely on
the 31 December 2016 agreement and the consensus
that characterized its signing. The appointment of a
Prime Minister who does not enjoy consensus support
following a process that does not respect the provisions
of the 31 December 2016 agreement is a very worrying
step. The agreement is the only credible road map for
an end to the crisis, and its violation could seriously
threaten the stability and the future of the country.
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

In keeping with resolution 2348 (2017), which was
just adopted by the Security Council unanimously,
France reaffirms the need for the urgent and
unconditional implementation of the 31 December 2016
agreement, including the lifting of restrictions on rights
and freedoms, so as to enable the holding, in suitable
conditions, of elections by the end of 2017, as agreed,
thus paving the way for the first peaceful transition of
power in the history of the country.
It is crucial that international partners, the Security
Council, the African Union and the SADC, all of which
welcomed the 31 December 2016 agreement, work to
ensure its implementation. France will stand side by
side with its partners to achieve that purpose.
The deterioration of the security and human rights
situation is also a source of great concern to us. Violence
in the Kasai region has soared to levels that we had
hoped never again to see in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is therefore pressing that the situation
be brought under control. France condemns the acts of
violence that we have seen in the region over the last
few months and looks forward to the outcome of the
joint inquiry of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO into violations and assaults on human
rights and humanitarian law in the region.
The cowardly murder of two United Nations experts
in that region underscores once again the deterioration
of the situation in the area. France calls for full light
to be shed on this very tragic event, so that those
responsible can be identified and stand trial for their
crimes. We once again underscore our full support for
the United Nations Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of Congo, whose members play a key role.
Turning finally to the situation in Burundi, here
we have to note that, regrettably, there has been no
noticeable improvement. As the Secretary-General
states in his report,
“The inter-Burundian dialogue, facilitated by
the East African Community, has yet to produce a
breakthrough”. (S/2017/208, para. 14)
Despite the efforts of the Facilitator, Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, which France welcomes, a genuine and
authentic commitment to this dialogue is still lacking.
Observers from the African Union have not yet been
deployed, nor have the police officers specified in
resolution 2303 (2016); on the contrary, the situation
seems to be getting worse by the day. I think that no one

S/PV.7923

could fail to be shocked by the images of the video that
has been circulating in which young members of the
Imbonerakure militia call for rape and murder. These
images and the hate speech that goes with it conjure
up extremely painful memories in the Great Lakes
region and is a source of grave concern for France. Such
behaviour cannot be tolerated. The leadership of the
Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces
pour la défense de la démocratie has condemned these
acts, and France hopes that appropriate measures will
be taken to put a definitive end to such behaviour and
that the perpetrators of human rights violations in the
country will be prosecuted and sentenced.
Burundi could, with the restoration of peace and
security, play a stabilizing role on the continent, as it
was able to do in the past by sending peacekeepers to
the Central African Republic and Somalia. For that to
happen, the resolutions of the Security Council must be
implemented and peaceful relationships restored with
the United Nations agencies that have been supporting
Burundi for 20 years towards a return to peace. The
resumption of cooperation with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights would be a positive
step along these lines.
This will require finding a political solution to
the current crisis through inclusive, open and honest
dialogue by way of the mediation efforts of the East
African Community (EAC) and full respect for the
Arusha agreement. Only such a dialogue, strengthened
by a firm rejection of violence and by guaranteeing the
security and fundamental rights of all Burundians, will
can allow Burundi to find its way back to the path of
peace and stability.
France hopes that the EAC Summit at the end
of April will be the first step in a positive process
and that the Government will honestly commit to
moving forward.
Our most deeply cherished wish as a close-knit
partner of the region and a permanent member of the
Security Council is to see Burundi pursue the cause
of peace and lasting stability so as to finally benefit
from its wealth in natural resources and be able to focus
on development and the well-being of people. This
will require a strengthening of political stability and
the democratic legitimacy of institutions, as well as a
fight against impunity. This is not a given, and France
is concerned. We hope that political leaders will meet
the challenges and put the process back on track. It is

17-099325/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the responsibility of the Security Council to support
them in this difficult task so as to ensure that years of
tremendous investment on the part of the international
community are not jeopardized and that the peoples of
the region do not suffer as a result.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, for the update that he
has provided in the wake of the report submitted by the
Secretary-General in March 2017 (S/2017/208) on the
implementation of the framework agreement for Peace,
Security and Cooperation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region.
During the past few weeks, the Security Council has
devoted several meetings to the countries of the Great
Lakes region, including the review of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/206) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the process
for the renewal of the mandate of that Mission pursuant
to resolution 2348 (2017), which the Security Council
adopted on 31 March. Moreover, the present meeting
comes at an opportune time in that it allows us to
focus on the regional dynamics, which are essential
for the peace and security of the States of the region.
In that regard, the Senegalese delegation reiterates its
support for the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy,
Mr. Said Djinnit, in particular in the areas of preventive
diplomacy and the promotion of peace and security in
the Great Lakes region.
In the area of security, the ongoing situation in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a
matter of concern, with the resurgence of the Movement
of March 23 (M-23), which has been observed during
the past months. The resurgence of M-23, once again,
underscores the crucial question of the implementation
of the Declaration of Commitments by the Movement
of March 23, known as the Nairobi Declarations, and
therefore poses new challenges to regional cooperation.
Such regional cooperation is absolutely necessary to
achieving peace, security and sustainable development
in the Great Lakes region. It continues to be the only
viable mechanism to overcome the decades-long threat
posed by armed groups in and beyond the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For example, such
regional cooperation could well provide the appropriate
framework for finding a solution to the problem
generated by the presence of elements of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition in
6/22

12/04/2017

eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo following
last July’s clashes so as to not further complicate
the already fragile security situation of the area.
Accordingly, all efforts by the United Nations as well as
the countries of the region must contribute to the search
for an appropriate solution to that problem.
Furthermore, with regard to security, the spread
of outbreaks of community violence beyond eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a matter of
great concern to us. We therefore call for a rapid
response to that emerging threat, including through
political responses.
One of the most tangible consequences of the
regional security situation, which remains fragile, is
the large number of refugees and displaced persons
representing respectively more than 3.5 million and
6 million individuals in the region. The Senegalese
delegation shares the satisfaction expressed by the
Secretary-General with regard to the hospitality of
the countries and peoples of the region who have
welcomed that flow of people with the limited means
and resources at their disposal. Those host countries
and communities deserve increased support from the
international community.
At the political level, we note that instability
persists in some countries of the region despite the
political processes and dialogue that were initiated and
aimed at peacefully resolving crises that, for the most
part, are associated with issues pertaining to electoral
processes. I would like to take this opportunity to
encourage the Special Envoy to pursue his coordination
work with the organizations and countries of the region
to support the inter-Burundi dialogue facilitated by
the Economic Commission for Africa and the ongoing
political process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, among others.
In that regard, my delegation would like to call
upon the various parties concerned by those political
processes to further explore the inexhaustible
possibilities for dialogue in a spirit of enhanced mutual
trust, respect for human and civil rights and ensuring
public order, while, above all, showing a genuine desire
for compromise.
Concerning more specifically the implementation
of the Framework Agreement, we note with satisfaction
the progress made in the establishment of a joint
follow-up mechanism to address the threat of the
Allied Democratic Forces. The mechanism, it should
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

be recalled, was agreed by the Heads of State of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Kenya
and Tanzania on the sidelines of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) in
June 2016. The same dynamic should be implemented
in connection with repatriating and disarming the
combatants of the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda and M-23, which, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, are making limited progress.
It is also necessary to recall that the implementation
of the Framework agreement includes a component
which concerns the international community, in
particular the United Nations. In that regard, we
welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy to promote
international support for the Framework agreement,
as well as the operationalization of the Great Lakes
Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017, which we
endorsed here in March 2016 with the adoption of
resolution 2277 (2016).
Finally, the Senegalese delegation would like to
speak on behalf of the other countries of the region
who believe that the fight against insecurity in the
Great Lakes region should proactively take charge
of the trafficking and illegal exploitation of natural
resources that fuel conflicts and support armed groups.
In that regard, we look forward to the holding of a
meeting jointly organized by the Executive Secretary
of the ICGLR and the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on the illegal exploitation and trade in natural
resources by armed groups, as was requested by the
Defence Ministers for member States of the ICGLR and
Southern African Development Community in Nairobi
on 20 July 2016 (see S/2016/840).
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Said Djinnit, for his briefing
on the implementation of the Framework agreement on
peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes Region. We believe that it is
the cornerstone for ensuring stability in the Great Lakes
region. We are in favour of the full implementation of all
the commitments by all signatories, including respect
for sovereignty, non-interference in other countries’
internal affairs and strengthening confidence-building
measures among the countries of the subregion.
In that regard, we note the effective interaction
between the Congolese leadership and neighbouring
countries in the region in August 2016, as well as the

S/PV.7923

beginning of the joint follow-up mechanism established
through the collective efforts of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania to counter
the Allied Democratic Forces. The positive outcome
was the meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
for Peace, Security and Cooperation Agreement, held in
Luanda on October 26, that showed that the mechanism
exists and acts independently without external support.
We should note that, three years following its
signing, the military provisions of the Framework
agreement remain far from being implemented. We
commend the work of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which remains committed
to combating gangs and stabilizing the situation,
and welcome the resumed full-scale cooperation, in
June 2016, between Kinshasa and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in that area. But
the armed groups remain active in the country and in the
region, in general, and their activities prolong the ethnic
conflicts, provoke the illegal spread of weapons and
worsen the humanitarian situation. It is clear that there
is no military solution to the conflict. Comprehensive
measures are needed to eliminate its underlining
causes, including through the strengthening the State
authorities in the liberated areas.
We are concerned about the situation with respect
to the repatriation of several hundred of ex-combatants
from the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) from Uganda,
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Of
course, the ongoing contacts between the Congolese
authorities and the leadership of the M-23 is welcome
news, but the lack of progress in this area has already
led to repeat offences by the combatants. In this
regard, we are naturally concerned by the repeated
mutual accusations about supporting combatants and
recruiting refugees into their ranks. We think that the
sides have to display maximum restraint and avoid an
escalation including through using the expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism, which is provided for in the
Framework agreement.
Another challenge for the Framework agreement
is the issue of having the allies of Mr. Riek Machar
present on the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Without going to the genesis of the problem,
we call upon Mr. Djinnit and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Maman Sidikou to do everything
they can to make sure that the relevant provisions of
resolution 2348 (2017) are implemented. We know the

17-099327/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

role played by the Special Envoy in trying to bring
private investors into the region and in providing a
new dynamic to the economic cooperation among
countries in the region, thereby strengthening peace
and cooperation there.
A number of country signatories to the Framework
agreement are still on the Security Council agenda
because of the still-unresolved conflicts. The
continuation of these conflicts is fed by social networks
via the Internet. We call for putting an end to the rhetoric
of hate on the part of members of the opposition and
spoilers who have found refuge in Western countries,
in particular those from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in Belgium and South Sudan in the United States
and the United Kingdom. Without this, the provisions
we have in resolution 2327 (2016) will make no sense.
Africans, should not have to pay with their lives so that
the citizens of those countries can enjoy the freedom
of expression.
Many countries in the region are at a stage where
they are the creating or reforming their democratic
institutions. Some of them are in the pre-election
period. We welcome the effective mediation efforts
and good offices of the United Nations, the African
Union and the East African Community, which helped
launch a national mechanism for political dialogue
in Burundi and helped to bring the negotiating
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
a successful conclusion. At the same time, there is no
doubt that political conclusions will lead to lasting
stability only if they are arrived at by the members of
the political processes themselves. Trying to provide
them with recipes or to interpret agreements achieved
is unacceptable.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Envoy Djinnit for his informative briefing. Against the
complex backdrop of the Great Lakes region, his good
offices have been invaluable in promoting regional
ownership and commitment to revitalizing the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework agreement. The
Framework agreement remains essential to achieving
sustainable peace and stability in the region. Japan
reaffirms its support for Mr. Djinnit’s efforts in this
regard. Let me underline two major challenges the
region faces today.
First, with respect to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we recently renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
8/22

12/04/2017

Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in order to make it more efficient and
focused on key tasks. We are encouraged by the strong
commitment of the Southern African Development
Community, as reaffirmed in this Chamber by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic
of Tanzania, to continuing to work together with
MONUSCO to assist the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in achieving sustained peace.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is at a critical juncture. The Security Council has
been closely following the status of the implementation
of the 31 December Political Agreement. Three
months have already passed without the establishment
of transitional institutions. Japan renews its call on
President Kabila Kabange for further leadership and
urges all political actors to accelerate the political
process. Successful elections are the only viable way to
sustain the gains made by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region thus far.
The second challenge is the situation in Burundi.
Japan welcomes the recent meeting between President
Nkurunziza and the Chair of the Burundi country
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. It is
important that this window of dialogue be kept open.
However, we remain deeply concerned about the
continued suspension of cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and reports of serious human rights violations,
especially the climate of impunity surrounding
Imbonerakure. We strongly encourage the Government
of Burundi to constructively engage with international
partners, especially the United Nations, to re-establish
cooperative relations based on mutual trust. Japan
reiterates that maintaining some level of United
Nations presence in Burundi will benefit Burundi
itself. In this regard, Japan emphasizes the importance
of engagement by the African Union (AU), including
through the deployment of AU observers.
I would also like to assure the Council of Japan’s
full support for the mediation led by the East African
Community (EAC) and Mr. Mkapa’s facilitation role.
We look forward to the forthcoming EAC Summit
on 20 April in Dar Es Salaam. We are confident that
the heads of State in the subregion will seriously
consider the situation in Burundi and provide strong
guidance to Mr. Mkapa so that he can lead an inclusive
dialogue process.
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

In closing, I would like to announce that the Japan
recently decided to provide $18 million in assistance
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Rwanda, Tanzania and Zambia, with particular focus
on refugees and food security. Japan will continue to
support the people of the Great Lakes region as they
seek more peaceful, stable and prosperous lives.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased to see
our good friend and brother, Ambassador Said Djinnit,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region, among us today. He is our encyclopedia
for African politics including those of the Horn. We
thank him for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in the region and his steadfast efforts
aimed at promoting peace, security and stability, in line
with the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
We have been discussing the situation in the Great
Lakes region in one form or another over the last couple
of months when we were dealing with country-specific
issues, but today’s briefing gives us a comprehensive
and holistic picture of the political and security situation
in the Great Lakes region. We believe that this is
important because the political instability and conflict
in some of the countries has a regional dimension, and a
concerted regional and international effort is needed to
promote peace and stability in the wider region.
In this regard, we take note of the progress made in
addressing the challenges that remain, as highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/208).
We remain seriously concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in the Great Lakes. No doubt the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is at the epicentre
of the security dynamics in the region, and whatever
is happening in the country will have implications for
the wider region. That is why we are worried about
the activities of armed groups in the eastern part of
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the resurgence
of negative forces which could undermine regional
peace and stability. We appreciate the cooperation
between the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the country’s national army, and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
response to the activities of these illegal armed groups
and negative forces.
We appreciate the efforts being exerted by the
Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region to address
the issue through consultations with the countries of

S/PV.7923

the region and the guarantors of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework (PSC) for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region . In that
connection, we welcome the reform of the structures
of governance within the framework of PSC and the
renewed commitment of the signatories and guarantors
to accelerate its full implementation. Regarding
reports of an incursion of ex-M-23 combatants into
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we support the
call made by the guarantors for all concerned parties
to remain committed to the full implementation of the
Nairobi Declarations and to refrain from any actions
that might jeopardize their implementation.
As far as the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is concerned, we cannot overemphasize
the need for the full implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations. In the spirit of the political agreement
reached on 31 December 2016, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must pave the way for ensuring a successful
transition and continued peace and stability in the
country. All parties should be called upon to resolve any
outstanding issues in the spirit of compromise. They
should also be urged to cooperate with mediators of the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo (CENCO),
whose role continues to be important in ensuring
the implementation of the agreement. It will be very
damaging if there is an inclination to set aside the
agreement of 31 December and marginalize CENCO.
We also believe that the support of the countries
of the region, as well as the African Union and the
United Nations, acting in unison and putting their
full weight behind the effort, are critical in order to
ensure a smooth transition process and ensure that the
holding of elections takes place as envisaged in the
31 December agreement. We commend the Special
Envoy for continuing to play an important role through
his good offices and in close coordination with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic republic of the Congo, Mr. Sidikou,
while engaging the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the African Union, as well as
regional leaders, in support of the effort.
Regarding Burundi, we understand that the security
situation has improved relative to past years. However,
we note that allegations of violations of human rights,
including forced disappearances and targeted killings,
have not ceased. We believe that intra-Burundian
dialogue, under the auspices of the East African
Community (EAC) mediation effort, remains an

17-099329/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

important platform for the search for a solution to the
political crisis in Burundi. We recognize that there
appears to be a veritable stalemate in the peace process.
We support the call made by the facilitator for the
convening of an extraordinary summit on Burundi in
order to stop the political gridlock. We also appreciate
the Special Envoy’s engagement on the issue, as well
as his continued interactions with the facilitator
and other regional leaders, aimed at reactivating the
intra-Burundian dialogue and encouraging parties to
show flexibility and readiness for compromise. We
think that there is a need for the EAC, the African
Union and the United Nations to coordinate effectively
in order to ensure that facilitation is supported in the
best way possible.
Finally, the peace and security of the Great Lakes
Region is critical. The resolution of the situation has
broad implications in that regard. Therefore, the
sustained engagement of the Council in supporting
ongoing mediation efforts and ensuring the long-term
stability of the region will be significant in line with
the commitments made within the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank the United States for convening this meeting,
and the Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Djinnit, for his briefing. China will continue to
actively support his work.
The Great Lakes Region lies at the heart of the
African continent and the countries of the region
share the same destiny, with interconnected interests.
China appreciates the efforts of the countries of the
region to actively implement the Peace, Security and
Cooperation (PSC) Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region and promote
peace and stability in the region. At the same time, the
countries of the region face numerous challenges in
terms of addressing the threats posed by armed groups
and attaining sustainable development. They need the
assistance and support of the international community.
I will emphasize the following four points.
First, we must continue to energetically implement
the PSC Framework. China encourages the countries
of the region to respect one another’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. They must build
up political trust, strengthen good neighbourly relations
and solve their differences through dialogue and
10/22

12/04/2017

consultations. We hope that the international community
will, on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and
opinion of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, help the country to implement political
agreements, deepen the reform of the security sector,
strengthen governance in the eastern areas of the
country, promote national reconciliation and work to
attain peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region.
Secondly, we must strengthen the security
cooperation among countries of the region. China
welcomes the cooperation among those countries in
addressing the threats posed by armed groups. We
encourage those countries to actively implement the
Nairobi Declarations and expedite the repatriation of
ex-M-23 combatants. We hope that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will, in accordance with its
mandate from the Security Council , play an active
role in helping the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo to fight armed groups.
Thirdly, we must promote the economic development
of the region. Poverty and underdevelopment are
two of the fundamental causes behind the incessant
conflicts of the Great Lakes Region. China calls
upon the international community to increase its
investment in countries of the region in the fields of
agriculture, energy, infrastructure, communications
and tourism, and promote the economic integration
and interconnectedness among those countries, so
that those countries can share the dividends of peace.
We hope that the relevant donors will honour their
assistance commitments and lend strong support to the
countries of the region for their economic development
and the improvement of peoples’ livelihoods.
Fourthly, we must give full play to the role of
regional and subregional organizations. The African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the East African Community enjoy
unique advantages in solving the question of Burundi,
the question of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other questions. All of those organizations have
played important roles. China supports Africa in
solving African problems in African ways. We support
African regional and subregional organizations as
they continue to promote the political settlement of
regional hotspot issues through dialogue, mediation
and good offices. We hope that the United Nations will
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

strengthen its coordination with other African regional
and subregional organizations so as to create synergies.
China has consistently supported the countries
of the Great Lakes Region in their efforts to promote
the peace process. On many occasions, China has
dispatched its Special Representative for African
Affairs to countries of the region for mediation. China
participates actively in the peacekeeping operations
of the United Nations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, while helping regional and subregional
organizations to maintain peace in the region. We stand
ready to work with the international community and
will continue to play a constructive role in achieving
peace and stability and promoting development in the
Great Lakes Region.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Djinnit, for
his briefing to the Council. Italy welcomes his efforts,
which have opened the door to positive results in
terms of a reform process and the revitalization of
the follow-up mechanism to the Partnership Africa
Canada framework.
The active engagement of the Governments has
proved the effectiveness of that mechanism. Of course,
there is still a need to act, since we still have reason
for concern. The Special Envoy has given us a clear
depiction of the challenges that lie before us today. The
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
critical. The bishops of the Congolese Catholic Church
have decided to put an end to their mediation efforts. We
supported their mediation efforts from the beginning,
and we thank them for all that they have done.
President Kabila has appointed a new Prime
Minister, who does not enjoy consensus support. That
has led to a swift reaction by the opposition, which
considers that appointment to be a non-event. Moreover,
the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
de la République démocratique du Congo acquises
au changement has called for mass demonstrations
to protest that appointment. That shows us that the
31 December agreement provides the only possible
road map for a political transition that is peaceful,
credible and inclusive. The United Nations has already
demonstrated its willingness to stand with the people
of that country. It has already been recalled that the
Council unanimously voted in favour of resolution
2348 (2017), which renewed the mandate of the United

S/PV.7923

Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
enabling the implementation of the 31 December 2016
agreement and the electoral process.
This year could mark a turning point in the history
of the country. We would like to launch an appeal to
the political leaders in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Political leaders, both those in the Government
and those in the opposition, have to demonstrate their
sense of responsibility by renewing dialogue, and must
allow themselves to be guided by the interests of the
country and the aspirations of the people.
The security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is also of concern. Italy is watching with
grave concern the increase in the theatres of instability in
the country, and calls for an end to the violence targeting
civilians. The serious situation in Kasai province in
particular was condemned by the United Nations, the
African Union, and the International Organization of la
Francophonie. We are deeply concerned by the recent
discovery of mass graves in that region. We encourage
the relevant authorities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to undertake all the necessary measures to
ensure that in-depth investigations are carried out in
order to shed light on that episode.
We also recall that, as the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court stated, the aforementioned
violence could constitute crimes that fall within the
purview of the Court. In that regard, it is our wish that
those responsible for the despicable murder of the two
United Nations experts be brought to justice. Allow me
to once again express our grief at the loss of Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan, who contributed enormously
to the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Continuing our examination of the security aspect,
we must, of course, consider the regional dimension.
The reappearance of the Mouvement du 23 mars and
the persistence in the east of such negative forces as
the Alliance of Democratic Forces and the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda require
strengthened regional cooperation so as to ensure that
the progress achieved in the fight against those groups
is not lost.
With regard to the presence of the Sudanese
People’s Liberation Movement in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — a situation

17-0993211/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

that must be resolved quickly — we encourage all
stakeholders to pursue dialogue in coordination with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The
fragility of the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is reflected in other countries in the region.
Chronic instability enables the illegal exploitation of
and illicit trafficking in natural resources, feeding a
vicious circle that also fuels armed groups.
In addition, instability continues to grow in terms
of the number of refugees in the region. Beyond the
traditional eastern border of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda has become the main host of
refugees. There are now new inflows of refugees. In
order to offer its assistance to the population in need in
the Great Lakes region, the European Union yesterday
announced funding amounting to €32 million. However,
international assistance is not enough. In our view, we
must encourage the countries of the region to adopt
coordinated strategies aimed at promoting long-term
solutions, while recalling the importance of obligations
under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and the protocols thereto.
Although the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
the cornerstone of stability in the region, there are other
situations that require the attention of the Council.
Here I would briefly turn to the subject of Burundi
and reiterate our call to the countries of the region,
which play an indispensable role in the inter-Burundian
dialogue. The mediation process led by the East
African Community (EAC) is significant in that regard,
but requires the support of regional Powers in order to
make progress. We have just received discouraging
news. The summit of the Heads of State of the EAC,
which was scheduled to take place on 28 April, has
been postponed once again for unforeseen reasons.
We hope that that was not due to the serious crisis in
Burundi and that a specific date for that meeting will
be set this week.
In conclusion, the complexity of the problem in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
requires a multidimensional response, which is provided
by the African Union Peace and Security Council’s
Framework agreement for peace. It is a vital mechanism
for stability in that corner of the African continent.
While ensuring our support for the Special Envoy in
his efforts to uphold that framework agreement, we
encourage the countries of the region to continue to
work to ensure its effectiveness. In particular, as stated
by the representative of the African Union, we invite
12/22

12/04/2017

them to reactivate those various mechanisms in order to
deal with the recent security developments.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my appreciation for the
valuable briefing given by Mr. Said Djinnit, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, and for his relentless efforts to develop
cooperation among the States of the region.
The Great Lakes region is in the heart of the African
continent. Therefore, building peace in the region will
have an impact on the development and stability of the
entire continent. Despite their considerable capacities,
the States of the region continue to face tremendous
security, stability, democracy and development
challenges. Most prominent among those challenges
are armed groups, which are the main obstacle to State
authority and which pose a great threat to the lives
of civilians. They also play a role in stealing natural
wealth, thereby depriving the people of the region of
a significant development resource. Moreover, the
humanitarian situation is a source of serious concern,
with the presence of a great number of refugees and
displaced persons.
Egypt believes that efforts to face those challenges
require, first and foremost, cooperation among the
States of the region, in line with their collective
responsibility to work to achieve stability. Nationally
owned sustainable solutions must also be sought
through the promotion of regional and international
partnerships, in particular with the African Union and
the United Nations.
Therefore, and in line with our position as a
co-opted member of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, we hosted a high-level
workshop on 27 February in Cairo. Many ministers
and officials of the States of the region participated,
along with representatives of the United Nations, the
African Union and other regional organizations. In the
discussions on a global response to threats to peace
and security in the Great Lakes region, emphasis was
placed on three key areas.
The first was to address current challenges and
proactively exploit opportunities to transform the
region into one of stability and prosperity. The most
fundamental of those opportunities is provided by
the ongoing political processes, such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the
Central African Republic. Those processes enjoy great
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

attention from the international community. Moreover,
there is a considerable institutional structure and a
valid political framework for cooperation among the
States of the region, which should be put to use.
The second area of focus was the role of peacekeeping
operations and sustaining peace, especially given that
the region hosts a great number of such operations. The
workshop stressed the importance of developing and
ensuring the consistency of peacekeeping-operation
mandates, so that they align with the actual needs
of the countries concerned at the various phases and
can help to preserve and build peace in line with the
relevant principles, thereby laying a strong foundation
for sustainable peace. Diverse and integrated regional
efforts, as well as security, political, development and
humanitarian tools, are also of importance.
Lastly, the workshop stressed the importance of
promoting the role of society in conflict settlement and
peaceful coexistence, including in the fight against
terrorism and extremism, and in efforts to prevent new
fighters from joining armed groups, in mediation, and
in promoting the role of women and young people in
peacebuilding frameworks. We stress the importance of
the Peace and Security Council Framework agreement
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region. It is the basic framework
for stability. We also agree that the States of the region
should commit to the Framework agreement and
continue their efforts.
On the other hand, several developments require
the attention of the international community, including
the hurdles facing the African initiative to eradicate the
Lord’s Resistance Army after several regional actors
and partners announced that they wanted to withdraw
from that initiative. The situation calls for an ongoing
dialogue among the members of the initiative so as
to overcome those hurdles and prevent the loss of the
progress achieved in efforts to halt that movement.
Moreover, the growing security challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo attest to the great
responsibility of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and in that regard we need to provide the
Mission with the necessary capacities and resources.
At the political level, we are fully confident in the
ability of the Congolese people to get through this critical
crossroads. We take note of the latest developments,
especially the appointment by the new President of

S/PV.7923

a Prime Minister and the reactions to that decision
by various political forces. We stress that all parties
should shoulder their responsibilities, give priority to
the national interests and settle their differences. That
will enable the full implementation of the political
agreement of 31 December and national concord. We
also stress the important role of international and
regional partners in helping the Congolese parties to
overcome their differences, and of the good will of the
African Union and the region.
With regard to the situation in Burundi, despite
the progress in the security situation there is no
alternative to a sustainable political solution through
a comprehensive national dialogue in line with the
mediation of the East African Community. We also
call on the international community to pay heed to
the economic and humanitarian consequences of the
conflict in the country and to establish a constructive
dialogue between Burundi and its partners. We
stress the importance of the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has assisted in putting together the
Government and its partners and in building trust.
Egypt presides over the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we want to
promote the role of that committee, which seeks to
ensure stability and security in the country. In that
regard, we express our deep condolences to the families
of the two experts who lost their lives in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I join other colleagues in
thanking the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes region, Mr. Said Djinnit, for his
briefing on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation (PSC) Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Ukraine welcomes the efforts and commitments of
the parties to the Framework with regard to its further
implementation, which they demonstrated during the
reporting period. In addition, we commend the efforts
undertaken by regional organizations, in particular the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community and the
African Union (AU).
Nevertheless, we are concerned that some of the
priority provisions remain unimplemented. On the
one hand, we have statements on the part of all parties
to the PSC Framework regarding their readiness to

17-0993213/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

implement those provisons. On the other, we see a lack
of meaningful action — and by that I mean collective
actions by all actors. Hence, the absence of a political
will to comply with the promises and obligations made
is a root cause of the delayed implementation of the
PSC Framework.
That factor creates distrust among all regional
members and provokes tensions among them. As a
result, at the beginning of the year, an incursion of
former Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) elements into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo led to an exchange
of accusations between the two neighbouring countries
regarding their alleged failure to uphold regional
commitments in the PSC Framework. To prevent the
repetition of that situation in the future, Ukraine urges
all signatories of the Nairobi Declarations to accelerate
their efforts to resolve the issue of the M-23 as soon
as possible.
The importance of such actions is highlighted by
the fact that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is currently preparing to conduct long-awaited
presidential, parliamentary and provincial elections in
2017. The challenges posed by the non-implementation
of all of the provisions of the PSC Framework should
not undermine or impede that process. In that regard,
we believe that all regional actors should make it a
priority to eliminate the threat of the Allied Democratic
Forces and the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
There is also an urgent need to resolve the issue of
the presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
combatants of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition. We commend the readiness of the
President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni, to host
those combatants who wish to relocate to Uganda, and
urge the Government of South Sudan to consider that
option as a possible way out of that situation.
We are also counting on the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to address, in a
proper way, the new threat that recently emerged
in the Kasai province, namely, the activities of the
Kamiuna Nsapu gang, which allegedly killed two
members of the United Nations Group of Experts on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, we
urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to spare no effort in investigating all human
rights violations and abuses in that region, committed
14/22

12/04/2017

by both State and non-State actors, and to bring those
responsible to account.
Two weeks ago (see S/PV.7910), the Security
Council considered the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and adapted the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the current
realities and challenges in the country.
In the context of the political situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we want to express
our concern regarding the recent appointment of
Mr. Bruno Tshibala as Prime Minister of the country.
As was clearly stipulated in the political agreement of
31 December, the opposition was given the prerogative
of picking a candidate for the prime ministerial post.
Thus, that appointment may, in our view, further
exacerbate the political tensions among all stakeholders.
We urge all national stakeholders to comply with their
obligations under the agreement.
Another challenge in the region is the human rights
situation in Burundi and the influx of Burundians into
neighbouring countries. We are deeply disappointed that
serious human rights violations and abuses continue,
including killings, gender-based violence, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, particularly of children, torture
and ill-treatment, the intimidation of civil-society
organizations and journalists, as well as restrictions
on fundamental freedoms in that country. In our
view, the lack of serious efforts to investigate human
rights abuses and overcome the climate of impunity in
the country only encourages perpetrators to commit
new crimes. Ukraine also calls on the Government
of Burundi to follow the example of the Gambia and
South Africa, which reversed their previous decision to
withdraw from the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
The refugee crisis is a one of the main indicators
of the worsening political and security situation in
Burundi and in neighbouring countries. That situation
requires urgent action aimed at delivering adequate
assistance and at providing shelter and other necessary
support to the vulnerable, including basic social
services, ensuring child protection, the tackling of
sexual and gender-based violence and helping people
with special needs.
It is quite upsetting that the situation in Burundi is
worsening, while the implementation of key elements
of Security Council resolution 2303 (2016) has stalled.
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

We believe that increasing the human rights monitoring
capacity and establishing a police component, as
envisaged by resolution 2303 (2016), including the AU
deployment of human rights observers and military
experts, is urgently needed in order to reinforce
peace-restoration efforts in Burundi.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Said Djinnit, for having taken the time to meet with
the Security Council this morning. I also thank him
for his presentation of the Secretary General’s report
(S/2017/208).
Four years after the adoption of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, Uruguay
wishes to recognize the efforts and commitments of the
signatory parties and the guarantor organizations as
they work to implement the provisions of the agreement.
High-level meetings have taken place over recent
months, including the seventh high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism, held last November in
Angola. They testify to the timeliness and relevance
of the provisions of the Framework agreement as a
political and diplomatic platform for addressing the
challenges facing the Great Lakes region. I would also
like to commend the Governments of the Republic of
the Congo and the Republic of Uganda for offering to
host the eighth and ninth high-level meetings, this year
and the next, respectively, which will help to maintain
political momentum on the issue.
However, despite some progress in implementing
the agreement, it should be noted that we continue to
see very complex political, security and humanitarian
challenges to peace and sustainable security in the
Great Lakes region. We share the Special Envoy’s view
that what has been achieved so far may be negatively
affected by the continued presence of non-State armed
groups, mainly in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are concerned about the
appearance since August 2016 of a new militia, inspired
by the Kamuina Nsapu chieftaincy and led by JeanPierre Mpandi, that is especially active in Kasai, KasaiCentral, Kasai-Oriental and Lomami. It is particularly
violent and has been recruiting minors under 14 years
old, some of whom have been given drugs. In theory,
this group was also responsible for the murder of United
Nations experts Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, to
whom the Security Council paid tribute on 31 March

S/PV.7923

(see S/PV.7910). However, the crackdown in response
has been extremely tough and at times excessive and
in situations such as have been described, the civilian
population feels terrorized, seemingly defenceless
and trapped between two equally hostile forces. The
commitment and concerted action of all the countries
that are signatories to the Framework agreement will
be essential if the destabilizing actions of armed groups
such as I just mentioned is to be effectively addressed.
The humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes
region is also very worrying, especially in South
Sudan, where it is simply a disaster. But there are also
other countries in the region, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the Central African
Republic, that are still facing serious humanitarian
problems, with millions of people displaced and whose
most basic humanitarian needs are not being addressed.
I would like to commend the tireless efforts of the
thousands of humanitarian workers who have put their
lives in the service of peace and the effort to save the
lives of millions of civilians.
On the political front, we have still not seen
concrete results from the dialogue processes ongoing in
various countries in the region. We should emphasize
how vital it is to ensure in every case that the political
dialogue is inclusive, transparent and peaceful but,
most importantly, that it is genuine and conducted in
good faith by all the interested parties. At the same
time, it should also guarantee the protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms. We must never stop
emphasizing the fact that dialogue is the only possible
way to resolve differences. Uruguay would also like
to commend all the mediation and facilitation efforts
being made by eminent people working on behalf
of Africa’s regional and subregional organizations.
However, the Security Council must remain vigilant
and condemn any violations of human rights that could
further provoke the parties in conflict and work directly
to prevent armed clashes — the effective prevention of
conflict that we all want.
In conclusion, Uruguay urges the Governments
of the region and the international community as a
whole to come together to promote political and social
stability of the Great Lakes region through the full
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
signatories to the Framework agreement.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank Mr. Said Djinnit, the Special Envoy of the

17-0993215/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Secretary-General, for his briefing today, as well as for
his untiring commitment to seeing stability in the Great
Lakes region.
Kazakhstan commends the ongoing efforts of the
signatory countries to implement the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which is vital
to achieving stability in the Great Lakes. We welcome
the signatories’ growing ownership of the efforts to
implement the Framework and realize the ongoing
reforms. Any prolongation of the political impasse in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
could turn the acute tensions into full-fledged conflict.
Maintaining the momentum and positive dynamics
of the current political processes will be crucial to
stabilizing the situation in the region. That depends
on the political will of the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. We
note the recent appointment of a new Prime Minister
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
it has led to a swift reaction from the opposition, and
the consultations between President Kabila and the
Rassemblement should therefore continue. Where
Burundi is concerned, we believe it should continue its
dialogue with the opposition through the good offices
of the East African Community-led dialogue facilitator
and with the broad engagement of the European Union
and the United Nations.
The growing violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo caused by the incursions into the country
of former elements of the Mouvement du 23 mars and
by clashes in the Kasai and Tanganyika regions, as
well as the presence of illegal armed groups. These
remain the chief threats to the security not only of
the country but of the entire region. We hope that the
recent priorities introduced into the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
reforms of the Mission itself, will help to improve the
security situation on the ground, especially in the light
of the country’s upcoming elections.
The humanitarian situation on the ground is dire
and closely tied to the area’s political and security
instability and prevailing lack of development. We
commend the efforts of the Governments and their
peoples in the region in hosting refugees and internally
displaced persons, and encourage the international
16/22

12/04/2017

community and regional and subregional organizations
to increase their support to those host countries.
Kazakhstan supports the countries of the region
in organizing the forthcoming African Great Lakes
Conference in Uganda. It is clear that a shared,
comprehensive approach involving political dialogue
and close cooperation among all the States of the region
is the only way to achieve peace and security in the
Great Lakes.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/208) and
his Special Envoy, Mr. Said Djinnit, for his briefing
today and his efforts to see the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region implemented. I would also
like to commend him for exercising his good offices
and advocating with regional partners, as well as his
efforts to include meaningful participation by women
peacemakers in the implementation of the Framework.
The situation in the Great Lakes region remains
volatile and unstable. Many of the challenges are
transnational, transcending national borders. Violations
of international humanitarian law and abuses of human
rights, carried out with impunity, contribute to the
cycles of conflict. The scale of displacement, with
9.5 million refugees and internally displaced persons,
is a clear indication of the political and security
challenges that still plague the region. It is clear that
a regional approach is needed if the interconnected
nature of the crisis is to be addressed. The Great Lakes
region has witnessed some success in its integration in
recent years, especially in terms of trade and economic
activity. We also commend the generosity and solidarity
of the people and countries of the region in hosting
their displaced neighbours, often for very long periods.
However, more must be done to overcome the obstacles
to peace and stability facing the region and to come
to terms with the armed groups in the area, including
through improved implementation of the Framework.
We are deeply concerned by the continued and
increased levels of violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as by the deteriorating humanitarian
situation there. There is a risk that political uncertainty
and the lack of progress in the implementation of the
comprehensive political agreement of 31 December
2016 will exacerbate instability. That includes the
situation in the east and the activity by armed groups;
the resurgence of the Mouvement du 23 mars M23 is one
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV.7923

such example. The Council has repeatedly and clearly
signalled to the Congolese parties how important it is
that they implement their agreement. That includes
the need for a transitional Government supported by
all the parties in order to prepare for elections. The
legitimacy of the Government is linked to respect for
the agreement. The active participation of women,
including in the elections, also adds both legitimacy
and sustainability to the political process.

actions of regional actors who seek to move the region
beyond insecurity, uncertainty and political division.

Regional actors have an essential role to play in
moving the political process forward. We welcome
the efforts of the Southern African Development
Community to support progress in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A visit by representatives of the
Southern African Development Community’s Organ
on Politics, Defence and Security has the potential to
provide momentum for the implementation of the New
Year’s Eve agreement and that momentum is urgently
needed. The Regional Oversight Mechanism meeting
in Luanda in 2016 and the African Union Peace and
Security Council statement in support of the reactivation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
and the Nairobi Declarations-related mechanism to deal
with the security challenges in the region are examples
of positive regional efforts. Influential regional actors
should coordinate so as to ensure coherent messages. It
is important that the Security Council provide backing
for and align itself with such efforts. We should support
Mr. Djinnit’s efforts in the same way.

In recent years, owing to multidimensional factors,
namely, wars of decolonialization, the arbitrary or
artificial nature of borders established in colonies,
the serious conflicts spawned by the Cold War, which
included wars of secession and conflicting state interests
and civil wars caused by economic factors and fuelled by
external actors, an environment replete with conflicts
and wars has emerged in the brotherly continent of
Africa. Such multidimensional factors were mentioned
by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his report
to the Security Council (S/1998/318), published in April
1998, on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
The report cited natural resources as the main cause of
conflict. They have been and will continue to be key
determinants in the spread of socioeconomic conflicts
through the financing of armed groups and the control
of countries and their populations.

Constructive regional engagement in Burundi
by the East African Community (EAC) deserves full
support, in particular the inter-Burundian dialogue
under the Mediator, President Museveni, and the
Facilitator, Mr. Mkapa. An EAC summit, including on
the situation in Burundi, at the earliest possible time,
is important, as it would add further momentum to the
quest for stability and progress in Burundi. Meanwhile,
the political and human rights situation continues to
cause concern. It is therefore important for agreements
to be reached to allow for the full functioning of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
African Union military and human rights observers.
Despite some progress, the challenges in the Great
Lakes region remain significant. The international
community remains committed. However, ultimately it
will up to the countries of the region to find peaceful
solutions. We must fully support the constructive

Mr. Fernández Revollo (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia welcomes the briefing by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr
Said Djinnit, and thanks him for the arduous efforts
that he and his team have made to meet the challenges
of maintaining peace and security in the region.

The Great Lakes region, which is one of the
world’s richest in natural resources, is an example
of an environment created by large multinationals
and international consortiums that undermine State
capacity by encouraging the purchase of diamonds,
copper, cobalt, coltan and other resources that are
mined illegally by armed groups, which fuels wars by
providing such groups with the means to perpetuate
conflict. In that regard, Bolivia voices its concern about
the illegal activities of armed groups in the region, such
as the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda,
the Allied Democratic Forces, the Lord’s Resistance
Army and the reappearance of former members of the
Mouvement du 23 mars, as well as inter-ethnic conflicts
in various areas of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which all undermine efforts to foster stability
and security.
At the same time, insecurity and violence have
continued to heighten tensions in the region, resulting
in many deaths. During the reporting period of the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2017/208),

17-0993217/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

12/04/2017

published in March, Burundi’s Environment Minister
was murdered at the beginning of 2017, and in Uganda,
on the border with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, a clash occurred between security forces and
local militia groups, which left at least 87 people dead.

approach to regional stability is needed. We support
work to reform and reinvigorate the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. It needs needs active
engagement from its members and guarantors to have
high impact, and that impact, as we have heard, is vital.

We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the region, which makes the conflicts
increasingly complex. There are more than
6 million internally displaced persons and 3.5 million
refugees — considered to be the most vulnerable
population groups. Despite the major conflict,
Bolivia is optimistic about the outcome of efforts by
regional and international associations, whose goal
is to provide ongoing and coordinated support for the
implementation of agreements that have been brokered
primarily in order to build on the Nairobi Declarations,
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which are all connected to the United Nations Great
Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017. The
priority is to encourage dialogue, the neutralization of
armed groups, the promotion of the rights of women
and young people, and civil-society participation. We
highlight the progress made in preparing for elections in
the brotherly countries of Angola, Kenya, Rwanda and,
in particular, the promise by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that presidential elections will be held at
the end of 2017 in an inclusive political process.

Today I personally want to focus on two countries
in the region, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi.

In conclusion, with regard to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the countries
of the Great Lakes region, we encourage all parties and
the international community, as a whole, to continue
to assist with technical support and economic and
humanitarian cooperation by pooling their efforts to
achieve stability and lasting peace through a process of
disarmament, dialogue, reconciliation and reintegration.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s important meeting
and for maintaining the Security Council’s focus on
conflict prevention in Africa. I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Said Djinnit for his briefing, but also for
the critical role that he has played in keeping preventive
diplomacy active and in including women in peace
processes, as already mentioned by the representative
of Sweden and others.
As Mr. Djinnit and others have made clear
today, the Great Lakes region continues to face many
challenges. In response, it is clear that a structured
18/22

As we heard last month, the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains deeply
troubling. I pay tribute to the Conférence nationale
épiscopale du Congo for its mediation efforts, but it
is up to the Government and the opposition to deliver
the 31 December agreement in letter and in spirit, with
purposeful speed. What we have actually seen is stalling
and obfuscation, particularly by the Government. This
is not only hindering implementation of the agreement,
but also is distracting attention from the real prize that
is at stake: peaceful and credible elections to take place
this year, enabling the first democratic transition of
power in the country’s history.
Sadly, the obstacles to this goal go beyond inertia.
The appointment of a new Prime Minister by President
Kabila last week was an active step, and I agree with
France that it is a worrying one. It went against both the
spirit and the letter of the agreement. This appointment
will not help to restore the broad national consensus
that lies at the heart of the agreement. Until that
consensus is built, the uncertainty of the politics of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo risks being mirrored
in the security situation, which continues to deteriorate.
We are particularly concerned about the increase
in violence and reports of atrocities in the Kasai region.
This underlines the importance of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Joint
Human Rights Office investigating violations and
abuses of human rights and international law. Those
who commit human rights violations must be held
to account.
We are also concerned about the ongoing threat
from armed groups, including the resurgence of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate the
need for dialogue, not just a military effort, in order to
tackle armed groups. The resumption of talks between
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the M23 is vital, as is the implementation
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

of the Nairobi declarations and the repatriation of M23
and Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
rebels. We support the Special Envoy and his efforts to
make progress on these issues.
The presence of Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition elements in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is destabilizing. We welcome the efforts by
Special Representative Sidikou as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to find a
solution and their engagement with regional partners.
We need to find a regional solution urgently to avoid
exacerbating tensions in fragile local communities. We
ask that the Secretariat keep the Council updated.
Turning to the concerning situation in Burundi, the
regime claims that normality is returning to the country.
It is not. A climate of fear persists as disappearances,
arbitrary arrests and killings continue almost daily. The
Government still shows no sign of acting in the interests
of its people and seems to be concerned only with
clinging onto power. Moves by President Nkurunziza
to enable him to remain in power for a fourth term, and
possibly beyond, risk bringing the country to the brink
once again.
The Government’s refusal to engage with the
international community is especially worrying, and
some of the language and activity of the Imbonerakure,
as others have said earlier in this meeting, is truly
horrific. Here, in this open meeting, I call on the
Government of Burundi to participate fully in the talks
being led by former President Mkapa. These talks,
which must be open and sincere, as France has said,
remain the best hope of resolving the crisis peacefully.
We urge the Government to enable implementation of
resolution 2303 (2016) and to allow the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to conduct its
work without hindrance and cooperate fully with the
commission of inquiry which was mandated by the
Human Rights Council. I agree with Egypt and Sweden
that the Peacebuilding Commission has an important
role to play in all of this.
We know how difficult it is to bring peace and
stability to a country or region after conflict, but we
also know that it can be done and that there is nothing
inevitable about the future. The Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi can step
back from their current courses; they can take decisions

S/PV.7923

in the interests of their people, and they can avoid
bloodshed and instability in this very fragile region.
It is the duty of all countries in the Council to
support that course and to do all we can to implement
our own resolutions. Given the significance that
Ethiopia has already talked about in terms of the wider
strategic posture in this region, it is really important
that we all do our best right now.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.
I thank Special Envoy Djinnit for his work to advance
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Two weeks ago, we renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
That vote was an important step in reinvigorating
efforts to set the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
a path towards a democratic transition of power. That
is the only way to ensure the long-term stability of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Certainly the
challenges in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
immense, and we are deeply disturbed by the violence
and reports of mass graves in the Kasais.
We recognize the importance of investigating
these atrocities and urge the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to work with and
not act as an impediment to MONUSCO and other
relevant parts of the United Nations to swiftly conduct
these investigations. We are also deeply disappointed
by the lack of progress in the implementation of
the 31 December political agreement between the
Government and the opposition. We continue to support
this agreement, which represents the best path forward
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
for ensuring upcoming elections and a peaceful
transition of power. The United States continues to
urge both the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the opposition to resolve outstanding
issues, make concessions and work constructively in
the implementation of the agreement.
It remains clear that our collective efforts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be matched
with strong simultaneous efforts to address all the
regional sources of instability. Now more than ever
we need the focus of Special Envoy Djinnit to be on
addressing problems related to the armed groups

17-0993219/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

12/04/2017

operating in the region and the legacies of past conflicts.
In this regard, we appreciate the efforts made over the
past six months to reform the Government structures
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
to reinvigorate its implementation. We are also pleased
that there have been some improvements in relations
among the Great Lakes countries, most notably between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.

and our allies to advanced stability in the Great Lakes
region, but those efforts cannot advance without strong
and consistent engagement from the region. I urge
him to continue engaging all of the stakeholders in the
region to reinforce the importance of following through
on the commitments that they have made. We are here
to make things work, and, if they do not work, we need
to change them.

However, we share the concern of the SecretaryGeneral, as mentioned in his recent report (S/2017/208),
that the continued presence of armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
wider region pose acute challenges. In the last six
months, we have seen Mouvement du 23 mars (M23)
and South Sudanese fighters cross into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These militants are in addition
to Allied Democratic Forces, Forces Démocratiques
de Libération du Rwanda and Lord’s Resistance Army
fighters, and numerous local militias that are already
operating in the region. Their arrival in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo comes at a time of increasing
inter-ethnic violence.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

We echo the Secretary-General’s call for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the leadership of the former M23 to resume their
implementation of the Nairobi declaration and ask
Special Envoy Djinnit to redouble his efforts in support
of these and other efforts aimed at reducing the threat
of armed groups.
Now is the time to advance the agreements and
processes that chart a path towards peace.
We must see honest, good-faith efforts by all
countries in the region to repatriate combatants and
stop support for armed groups. The problems are there,
and they are at risk of growing.
In our focus on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we must not lose sight of continuing challenges
in Burundi. We are grateful to President Mkapa for his
facilitation of the inter-Burundian dialogue, but stronger
and more sustained leadership from the region will
be necessary to generate the pressure needed on both
sides to make the dialogue a success and ensure that the
crisis in Burundi does not become an increasing source
of instability for the region. The current situation in
Burundi is not sustainable or acceptable.
We know that Special Envoy Djinnit has a very
challenging job. We will continue to work with him
20/22

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me, Madam President, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April, and to say how honoured we are
to see the United States of America, a friendly country,
preside over today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank you for having taken the initiative of convening
this meeting on the Great Lakes region and the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. I would also like thank all members of
the Security Council for the exemplary readiness and
determination that they have always shown on every
occasion when they have been called upon to consider
the situation in my country.
We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/208) on the implementation of the agreement
on the Framework that Mr. Said Djinnit, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, whose presence I welcome, just presented to
us. Although the report does not, in general, make
any major observations, for our part we would like,
nevertheless, to briefly make several comments that my
delegation deems important.
With regard to the security situation, the SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights the efforts of the Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
working in cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), to neutralize
foreign and domestic armed groups. My delegation
would like to reassure the Council that those efforts will
continue until the those groups are totally eradicated.
17-09932

12/04/2017

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The report also acknowledges the relevance of
the Congolese Government’s request to MONUSCO
to rapidly evacuate elements of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition who
remain on Congolese territory, while at the same
time underlining the situation concerning members
of the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda who
are cantoned in three sites and continue to wait to be
repatriated to their countries of origin or sent to a third
host country. It is important that the Council devote
attention to those two situations, which continue to be
of concern for my country, instead of deferring them to
other countries in the region.
Within the framework of the commitments obligating
the countries of the region not to harbour or, under any
circumstances, provide protection to persons accused
of war crimes, crimes against humanity, acts of
genocide and crimes of aggression, or to persons under
a United Nations sanctions regime, and to facilitate the
administration of justice through judicial cooperation
in the region, my country has apprehended various
high-level leaders of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) sought by international
justice, who have been extradited to Rwanda through
MONUSCO. Among the names of those high-level
persons to be held accountable, one can cite those
of General Léopold Mujyambere, Colonel Félicien
Nsanzubukire, Colonel Mucebo Habyarimana, Colonel
Anastase Munyaneza, Major Vainqueur Nzabimana,
Captain Théophile Twagiramungu, Captain Ladislas
Ntanganzwa and Mr. Martin Gatabazi .
On the other hand, several international arrest
warrants submitted to other countries in the region
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo within the
framework of regional judicial cooperation in pursuit
of Congolese nationals who are the alleged perpetrators
of crimes against humanity and war crimes remain
outstanding. Yet those individuals continue not only to
move about freely within neighbouring countries, but
are also carrying out destabilizing activities directed
against my country. Iin that context, especially
concerning members of the former Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23), the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reaffirms its determination to fulfil its commitments
under the Framework agreement signed at Addis Ababa
and calls on the other parties to the agreement, in
particular Uganda and Rwanda, to do the same.
During previous Security Council meetings, my
delegation has spoken at length on the subject of the

S/PV.7923

M-23. I believe that it is useful to resume that discussion
by saying that the efforts taken by my Government,
which have gone so far as to propose to members of
M-23 their unconditional repatriation, have not achieved
their goal, due to the refusal of the leadership of that
movement, which took the former rebels hostage, and
to a lack of genuine cooperation with the neighbouring
countries that are lodging them. That is why my country
has always asked for the Council’s involvement, so
as to make such cooperation possible with a view to
definitively resolving that situation.
Concerning the political situation, after the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo reported on
its mission to the President of the Republic, as everyone
knows, he endeavoured to undertake consultations with
the political opposition and the presidential majority.
At the conclusion of those consultations, based on
the proposals made to him by the Rassemblement
des forces politiques et sociales de la République
démocratique du Congo acquises au changement, he
appointed on 7 April — in keeping the promise made
in his speech given before Congress — Mr. Bruno
Tshibala to the post of Prime Minister. Mr. Tshibala is
a member of the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès
social — the party of the late Étienne Tshisekedi — and
of the Rassemblement. The latter is already conducting
consultations, so as to put together a Government of
national unity in the coming days. My delegation
believes that the Council must refrain from becoming
involved in the conflict within the Rassemblement,
the ins and outs of which the Council is not familiar
with. In favouring one faction of the Rassemblement,
as some members have just done, they risk reigniting
the conflict.
Moreover, my delegation would like to draw the
attention of the Council to the fact that the political
agreement of 31 December 2016 does not replace
the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Defended yesterday in the Chamber by a large
number of Council members, the political agreement of
31 December 2016 only regulates a temporary situation
linked to the elections, while legitimacy and the source
of power rest in the Constitution.
With regard to the Conseil national de suivi de
l’accord, the President of the Republic has asked the
relevant stakeholders to make a concerted effort to
appoint staff quickly by consensus.

17-0993221/22

S/PV.7923

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Before concluding, we believe that it is important to
point out that the political opposition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is governed by article 8 of
the Constitution, and that its status is determined by
statute. Consequently, paragraph 65 of the report, which
designates as the head of the Congolese opposition an
individual who has not been designated as such by the
opposition parties or recognized by the law has no place
in the report.
In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm that
the Government and the people of the Democratic

22/22

12/04/2017

Republic of the Congo place much hope in the Addis
Ababa agreement on the Framework — a hope to build
a lasting peace, promote harmonious coexistence with
the countries of the region and place the foundations of
stability for all our States without which it is difficult
to pave the way forward for regional and mutually
advantageous cooperation. That is why my country
will always remain attached to the agreement and will
pursue its implementation so that it can truly achieve
the objectives for which it was conceived.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

17-09932
