S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6590th meeting
Tuesday, 26 July 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Berger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Hodžić
Mr. Rizzo
Mr. Yang Zhiyu
Mrs. Escorcia
Mr. Beaumont
Mr. Lembouma
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Ramadan
Mrs. Aguwa
Ms. Teixeira Coelho
Mr. Zhdanov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Day
Ms. Germain

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-43171 (E)

*1143171*

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I give
Kyrgyzstan.

the

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate at such a crucial time,
when popular protests and major political changes are
continuing in the Middle East. In addition, we do not
see any tangible progress in the Israeli-Palestinian
political process.
The Middle East remains at the centre of the
world’s attention due to the recent well-known
revolutionary upheavals. Despite some undeniable
differences, these events have a great deal in common.
The causes behind them are based on Governments’
inability to adapt to new conditions of social
development and to carry out effective reforms. The
peoples and Governments of the region face not only
tremendous social and political challenges, but also
new opportunities and perspectives. We strongly
condemn the use of force against peaceful
demonstrations and urge all parties to show utmost
restraint. Kyrgyzstan, which has gone through similar
revolutionary changes recently, believes that the only
way to address these problems is through dialogue and
reforms.
Kyrgyzstan strongly calls for the resumption of
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations as soon as possible. In
this regard, we support the statement of the Middle
East Quartet of 20 May 2011 with an appeal to
overcome the current obstacles and resume direct
bilateral negotiations without delay. But we regret that
the most recent meeting of the Quartet, held on 11 July
in Washington, D.C., ended without substantive
agreement. It is essential that a new meeting be held as
soon as possible to take active measures to promote the
negotiation process. We consider it important that this
process continue in order to find ways to achieve a
long-term settlement of the situation and to reach a
peace agreement providing for the coexistence of two
States in peace and security, in accordance with

2

previously
defined
and
accepted
parameters.
Kyrgyzstan hopes that the Quartet will play an active
role in finding a solution acceptable to all parties
concerned.
Kyrgyzstan favours the settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict through political diplomatic means
on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map of the Middle East Quartet. I would like to note
that the time to consider the accession of Palestine to
membership in the United Nations is rapidly
approaching, as we have discussed that issue at length
both informally and formally. In that regard,
Kyrgyzstan considers it extremely important to achieve
rapid progress in the peace process and to overcome
the current worrisome impasse. We also urge the
parties to demonstrate their strong will and unwavering
commitment to peace and to eliminate all obstacles
impeding the resumption of direct talks.
For us, it is quite obvious that the continuing
construction of Israeli settlements in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem, and those regular announcements
of its expansion, will not contribute to an early solution
of the problem. Quite the contrary — at least as we
have seen from recent events — it leads to even greater
disturbances, escalating violence and civilian deaths.
Kyrgyzstan supports the implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions concerning Jerusalem and
calls for a stop to the building of Israeli settlements.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that the peoples
of the Middle East have been suffering from conflict
and confrontation for several decades. The time has
come to reach a final and comprehensive settlement
that would resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
believe that maintaining the current situation is totally
unacceptable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): As the Security Council
holds another open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, a great transformation in the region is
firmly under way. Universal notions such as freedom,
equality, dignity, human rights and the rule of law have
all become rallying cries for millions who rightfully
demand a more just and promising future for
themselves and their fellow citizens. While achieving
meaningful change may take some time and may not
necessarily always be smooth sailing, that process of

11-43171

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

historic restoration cannot be reversed, undermined or
corrupted.
Meanwhile, as that major upheaval runs its
course, the Palestinian question still remains in limbo.
Palestinians in their millions, whether in Gaza, the
West Bank or refugee camps across the region,
continue to suffer an unfortunate fate not of their own
making. That is an anomaly and must be addressed as a
matter of utmost urgency.
The truth is that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
lies at the heart of the many disputes in the region and
beyond. The international community cannot expect
the momentum towards positive change to be
maintained in the Middle East and North Africa while
occupation and subjugation are a day-to-day reality for
the Palestinian people.
Recent and past events stand as testament to how
the plight of the Palestinian people has repercussions
far beyond its own geographical scope. If we are to win
the hearts and minds of the Arab people and to support
them in meeting their aspirations, we must be able to
show them our collective determination to reach a just
and viable peace in the region to which everyone can
relate. That is why it is crucial that the search for a
lasting and comprehensive settlement not take a back
seat to other developments in the region. On the
contrary, it must once again be the priority.
At the moment, there is neither peace nor a
process in the region. Instead, there is an impasse that
is neither reassuring nor promising for Israelis or
Palestinians. The parties seem to be drifting further
apart. The Security Council and the Quartet have been
unable to pronounce themselves in an effective manner
and to inspire genuine engagement.
The people want solutions from their leaders, not
empty rhetoric. Overall, there is a prevailing sense of
abandonment and uncertainty, which fuels mass
frustration, especially among the most disenfranchised.
That is a troubling picture, reminiscent of a tinderbox.
Turkey rejects violence in any shape or form by
any party as unacceptable and unjustifiable. We also
believe that that there is no genuine alternative to a
negotiated
settlement.
However,
meaningful
engagement that inspires confidence on both sides
cannot happen while settlement activity continues,
including in occupied East Jerusalem.

11-43171

Israel’s latest position on the construction of
more than 300 new settlement units is another example
of its illegal activities in the occupied territories. As
such, it is unacceptable and cause for deeper doubt
about Israel’s sincerity towards furthering the peace
process.
Once again, we call on Israel, based on its Road
Map commitments, to cease all settlement activity and
to return to direct negotiations with the Palestinian
side. That is not much to ask, and it is currently the
only way to pave the way towards the realization of a
two-State solution based on the well-established
principles by which Israel and Palestine will forever
live side by side in peace and security.
The Palestinians have been working hard for the
past two years to lay the institutional groundwork of
their future State. Through its deeds, the Palestinian
Authority has proven beyond any doubt that it is ready
to assume all the rights and obligations of an
internationally recognized State, even though Palestine
continues to be under occupation and therefore in need
of international support.
Turkey believes that it is high time for Palestine
to be recognized as a fully fledged Member State
within the international community, based on the 1967
borders. The very notion of a two-State solution, going
as far back as 1947, is the firm and clear basis for that.
The international community must not turn a blind eye
to the legitimate appeal of Palestine to be recognized
as nothing less than an equal and, ultimately, to be
admitted to the United Nations as a full Member.
Turkey will work with Palestine to realize those critical
goals. Ultimately, in the absence of a meaningful peace
process, the Palestinians cannot be expected to remain
a prisoner of Israel’s will forever.
The situation in the Gaza Strip continues to be a
cause for serious concern. The plight of the
Palestinians in Gaza must urgently be alleviated, and
the reconstruction and rehabilitation requirements of
the people should immediately be addressed.
Resolution 1860 (2009) must be implemented as a
whole. The current humanitarian and human rights
conditions of the civilian population in Gaza are
unsustainable and unacceptable and, ultimately, are not
in the interests of any of those concerned. The periodic
escalation of tension among the parties clearly proves
that the situation is tenuous at best. Minimalist
approaches aimed at public diplomacy will not work.

3

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

Israel must lift its unlawful and inhuman blockade of
Gaza immediately.
Meanwhile, Turkey welcomes the unity
agreement reached among the Palestinians. That very
important development comes at a time when the
whole region has begun a democratic transformation.
Thus it is a step in the right direction. We hope that
that process of national reconciliation can be concluded
soon with the formation of an inclusive and
democratically representative Government that will
take the Palestinian nation to free and fair elections.
Turkey calls on the Palestinian groups to embrace
the reconciliation process once and for all and to
partake in the creation of a Palestinian State that will
exist side by side with Israel in peace and security. As
Palestinians seek harmony among their ranks, the
international community should also play a positive
role by supporting the process and not prejudging its
outcome.
It has been more than a year since the deadly
attack by Israel on the international humanitarian
convoy sailing to Gaza. Israeli forces ruthlessly killed
nine civilians and wounded many. The passengers were
subjected to all forms of maltreatment until they left
Israel. The Panel of Inquiry established by the
Secretary-General in accordance with presidential
statement S/PRST/2010/9 of 1 June 2010 has
concluded its work. The Chair and Co-Chair produced
their report, which is now sealed and waiting for
submission to the Secretary-General.
We have provided an exit to Israel out of this
situation. It must apologize and pay compensation.
There will be no normalization of relations between
Turkey and Israel unless the Israelis deliver what is
expected of them. Turkey will resolutely pursue the
matter until justice is done.
In conclusion, let me reiterate once more
Turkey’s strong support for the establishment of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region based on
the two-State solution, as well as our determination to
assist our Palestinian brothers and sisters in attaining
their long-delayed goal of a viable, peaceful and
prosperous State of Palestine.
The President: I
representative of Japan.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank the
President for giving us the opportunity to address the

4

situation in the Middle East. I thank Mr. Serry for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mansour and Ambassador Prosor for their
statements.
Japan strongly supports a two-State solution,
under which Israel and a Palestinian State would live
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.
Japan supports the vision that the borders under a twoState solution should be defined through negotiations
and based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed
swaps, in a way that would achieve peaceful
coexistence between a viable Palestinian state and
Israel with secure and recognized borders. Through
such a two-State solution, the Palestinians would
exercise their rights to establish an independent State,
Israel would enjoy a greatly enhanced security
environment, and both parties would be able to launch
full-fledged cooperation for mutual prosperity.
A two-State solution can be achieved only
through sincere negotiations. Japan has been
encouraging both sides to resume direct negotiations in
cooperation with the international community. Japan
strongly supports the speech made by President Obama
in May, which laid out a foundation for resuming
negotiations. We call on both sides to engage with the
United States and the international community and to
take steps that would create an environment conducive
to restarting direct negotiations.
Japan will not recognize any unilateral measures
that prejudge the outcome of the final status
negotiations. The two parties must abide by their
obligations under previous agreements, most
importantly the Road Map. We call on Israel again to
freeze its settlement activities in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. At the same time, we call
upon the Palestinian Authority to continue its efforts to
improve security and fulfil its commitments to ceasing
violence and working against incitement. Japan has
strongly supported the State-building efforts of the
Palestinian Authority, and will continue to provide
assistance in that regard.
Japan remains concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip. We continue to call for the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Japan is
keenly monitoring the Palestinian efforts to establish a
unified Government that will genuinely seek a twoState solution.

11-43171

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our call on
the parties to make the utmost effort to resume direct
negotiations. Japan, along with the international
community, will continue to make efforts to help
realize a just and comprehensive peace in the region.
The President: I
representative of Jordan.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Palestinian people has aspired for decades to enjoy the
same political, economic and social rights enjoyed by
the rest of the world, foremost among which is the
right to sovereignty over their own national territory,
freedom and dignity. They have a basic, universally
recognized right to an independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
within the borders of 4 June 1967.
Jordan warns against the outbreak of conflict, war
and anarchy due to Israeli intransigence in addressing
the Palestinian question. Israel continues to
procrastinate and to squander opportunities to establish
peace. It must return to a pragmatic, practical and
enlightened vision free from ideological paradoxes that
can only negatively impact the situation and have
adverse repercussions on international peace and
security. It takes courage to make difficult decisions.
Jordan therefore calls for a swift return to direct
negotiations towards a final solution to the Palestinian
question.
However, Jordan believes that negotiations will
be in vain so long as settlements continue to be built.
Israel must also define a clear and precise position visà-vis the peace process. Jordan is deeply concerned
over Israel’s ongoing violations in the occupied Arab
territories and its attempts to Judaize them, which will
have a negative impact on the holy places of East
Jerusalem. On the basis of our active role in the
maintenance of the holy Christian and Islamic places in
the occupied territories, we call for international
intervention to put an end to these violations and the
Judaization process. We also call for an end to the
ongoing suffering of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees languishing in Israeli prisons.
We welcome the recent signing of the Palestinian
national reconciliation agreement. It is a step in the
right direction on the path towards Palestinian
reunification, and will fulfil the hopes of the
Palestinian people for unified, responsible leadership
that can meet the aspirations of the Palestinian people

11-43171

to establish their independent State. Jordan calls on the
international community to work towards the lifting of
the illegal embargo and blockade of the Gaza Strip. An
international community that insists on the enjoyment
of human rights, freedom and dignity cannot remain
silent about the collective punishment of an entire
nation.
The President: I give
representative of Malaysia.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Zainul Abidin (Malaysia): Let me first
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your delegation’s
presidency of the Council. I align my delegation with
the statements by Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and by Kazakhstan, on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Here at the United Nations, we are used to
experiencing and marking milestones. The creation of
the United Nations itself marked the end of World War
II and the beginning of global peace — the first of its
many milestones. But some of those historic events are
sad marks in our civilization. Last month, we marked
another such occasion: the longest foreign military
occupation — for June 2011 marked the forty-fourth
year of occupation of the Palestinian territories by
Israel.
Forty-four years is a long time to languish under
the thumb of another, especially in this day and age.
Chunks of land that were once Palestine have now been
appropriated and their inhabitants squeezed out. The
construction and expansion of settlements and the
separation wall, the demolition of Palestinians’ homes
and infrastructure, and the revocation of Palestinian
residency rights in East Jerusalem are all part of
Israel’s illegitimate policies and practices designed to
supplant inhabitants and erase history. These actions
are not only illegal but also render the two-State
solution more elusive than ever.
Last month also marked the fourth year of the
inhumane blockade of Gaza by Israel. The living
conditions facing 1.6 million Gaza inhabitants continue
to be a matter of concern. Dependent on international
aid, Gaza residents are robbed by the blockade of their
right to live in dignity. On 31 May 2010, we also saw
nine deaths added to the more than 1,400 people who
were killed as a result of Israeli military aggression
since the end of 2008. Those nine were the
humanitarian activists killed in international waters,
messengers of relief efforts to alleviate the plight of the

5

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

people of Gaza. In this regard, we urge Israel to fully
implement resolution 1860 (2009) and to lift
completely the illegal blockade, which is a form of
collective punishment forbidden by international law.
It is now more than imperative that a just solution
be found on this issue. The parties concerned must step
up to their mark as honest parties to this peace process,
lest we continue to remain in the untenable state we are
in. On this note, the establishment of an independent
State of Palestine, on the basis of pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
with Israel in peace and security, in accordance with
the established parameters as defined by resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003),
1850 (2008), the Madrid terms of reference, including
the land-for-peace principle, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map, is extremely crucial in addressing
the Palestinian question, which has been the crux of the
Arab-Israeli conflict for more than 60 years.
The Security Council is duty-bound, under its
mandate, to do whatever is necessary to ensure the
implementation of its own resolutions. We need to
ensure that all parties resume peace negotiations.
Anything less would make a mockery of the very
Organization we seek to uphold.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr.
Kafeero
(Uganda):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I also
thank Special Coordinator and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert Serry, for his
briefing.
Today the Israeli and Palestinian parties, as well
as the international community, are at a critical
juncture. It is regrettable that, despite efforts by the
parties and the support from regional and international
actors, no tangible progress has been achieved and the
peace process remains deadlocked. It was the
expectation of my delegation that the recent meetings
this month of the Quartet and the Arab League would
result in the resumption of the stalled direct
negotiations, leading to an agreed framework.
This is a defining moment. It is a test of
statesmanship on the part of the Israeli and Palestinian
leaders. While the support of the international
community is vital, the primary responsibility for
negotiating and reaching a comprehensive and lasting

6

peace lies with the Israeli and Palestinian parties.
Uganda reiterates its call upon both parties to urgently
resume negotiations and summon the necessary
courage to take bold decisions, bearing in mind that the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians for statehood
cannot be delayed much longer and that the legitimate
security concerns of Israel must be addressed.
My delegation remains deeply concerned about
recent approvals for the construction of new settlement
units by Israel and once again calls for a complete
freeze on all settlement activity.
We commend the Palestinian leadership for their
State-building efforts and for fulfilling their obligations
under the Road Map, particularly in the sectors of
security and economic development. We also commend
their efforts at forging unity and reconciliation.
We remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and the continued obstacles to the
movement of goods and persons to and from Gaza. We
call on Israel to lift the blockade on Gaza, and we
reiterate our call on all parties to fully implement
resolution 1860 (2009).
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to
underscore that the current situation is unsustainable.
We encourage the Israeli and Palestinian parties, with
the support of the international community and the
Security Council in particular, to overcome the current
stalemate and work towards the realization of a twoState solution, in the interest of peace, security and
prosperity for their people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): Iceland firmly
supports a peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the two-State solution. Since the Oslo
process was launched, almost two decades ago, we
have been betting on the peace process to lead to such
a result, which would make a comprehensive peace
achievable in the region as a whole, as foreseen in the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Now, however, the peace process is at a complete
standstill. While Iceland urges the parties to return to
the negotiating table, we feel that the time has come
for the international community to become more
directly involved. The United Nations had a historic
role in the creation of the State of Israel and the time
might be approaching when it would be appropriate for

11-43171

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

the General Assembly and the Security Council to
re-engage themselves for the purposes of solving the
Palestinian question.
If the Palestinians decide to bring the issue
directly to the General Assembly, Iceland stands ready
to support them. This was clearly stated by the
Icelandic Minister for Foreign Affairs when he met
with President Abbas and Foreign Minister Al-Malki
during his to trip to Ramallah earlier this month. At
that time, our Minister stated that Iceland would
support a resolution on Palestinian statehood, based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as
well as a resolution on the full membership of Palestine
in the United Nations, should the Palestinians decide to
seek such resolutions in the autumn.
Iceland’s position is that the pursuit of
recognition of a Palestinian State does not contradict
the wish for a negotiated settlement of the conflict. It
might, quite to the contrary, be seen as the means to
stimulate serious negotiations. There is a need to
address the asymmetry of power between the two
parties. That can only be done through a more forceful
participation by the international community, including
through emphasizing the international law applicable
to the occupation.
In the absence of a political solution the situation
on the ground needs to be improved. First of all, we
echo those worldwide who urge the Israeli Government
to lift the blockade of Gaza immediately. Enough of the
currently closed legitimate crossings and established
channels for goods in and out of Gaza should be
opened to be able to reach the pre-blockade capacity
for imports and exports. The markets in steel bars and
cement should especially be liberalized by the Israeli
authorities.
The decision of the Israeli Government to
continue with its settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem, is
incompatible not only with its obligations under
international law but also with the Road Map. We note
that this illegal activity continues and that the use of
violence, house demolitions and forceful evictions in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East
Jerusalem, remains a serious concern. The international
community should be careful not to send messages that
can be perceived as accommodating existing illegal
settlement activities. Creating facts on the ground that
are contrary to international law and constitute an

11-43171

obstacle to achieving a two-State solution should not
be rewarded. The settlements are reversible.
Iceland would also like to voice concern over
increased settler violence against the Palestinians,
including their so-called price-tag policy. This is a very
worrying development, and Israel is under the
obligation to do its utmost to prevent such violence
and, when it does occur, to ensure that those involved
are held accountable.
Finally, Iceland welcomes the reconciliation
agreement between Fatah and Hamas and their
intention to form an interim Government in preparation
for presidential and parliamentary elections in
Palestine. We urge the Palestinian parties to heed the
calls of their own people to work towards realization of
the agreement and to become united in their pursuit of
a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to deliver this statement to the Security
Council on behalf of the States members of the Arab
Group. First, however, let me express our support for
the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the representative of Egypt, as well as
for the statement to be made by the representative of
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
The meeting is a demonstration of the importance
that the international community attaches to the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, who have
suffered for more than 60 years under the occupation
and practices of Israel and its refusal to abide by its
international commitments and its flouting of all
international resolutions.
The peoples and States of the region place great
hopes in the ability of the international community to
assume its political, legal and moral responsibility visà-vis the return of occupied Arab territories, putting an
end to Israeli intransigence and arrogance and
compelling Israel to comply with and fully implement
the resolutions of international legitimacy, particularly
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Israel
persists in ignoring those resolutions as it continues to
pursue illegal and aggressive measures and practices in
the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly East
Jerusalem and its environs, with a view to altering their

7

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

demographic status, character and composition. That is
in addition to continuing violations by Israel, the
occupying Power, of international law and the rules
and regulations relating to human rights.
Such practices make a mere fantasy of any talk of
the existence of an Israeli partner having sincere
intentions about achieving peace. They also
demonstrate beyond any doubt that, through its
practices and policies and the declarations of its
officials, Israel is working as hard as it can to
undermine every international effort to resume peace
talks based on the solution of two States within the
framework of the borders of 4 June 1967.
Furthermore, all practices such as Israel’s
continued and intensified campaigns to rapidly
construct thousands of settlement units and its
persistent demolition of Palestinian properties and
buildings affirm its expansionist intentions and
contradict the claims of the Israeli Government that it
wishes to resume the peace process and move towards
a two-State solution.
The existing situation in the Gaza Strip represents
yet another manifestation of Israel’s violations of
resolution 1860 (2009) and its disregard of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. As the oppressive Israeli
blockade enters its fifth year, Palestinian civilians
continue to be subjected to collective punishment,
leading to increased poverty in Gaza and to severe
deterioration of the economic, social and humanitarian
situation there.
It is not strange, therefore, that the blockade has
resulted in terrifying statistics — for example, a rise in
the unemployment rate to 65 per cent. Also, the air
raids that the Israeli air force conducts from time to
time — despite the fact that such raids contravene the
most basic rules of international law, which prohibit
such attacks on areas populated by civilians — are
tantamount to terrorist actions against unarmed
Palestinian people.
The international community must send a clear,
unequivocal message to Israel that it must lift the
blockade and open the crossing points immediately,
permanently and without conditions, in order to allow
access for humanitarian assistance, construction
materials and goods, and the movement of people.
Israel must also be punished for its persistence in
violating international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law. It must be held

8

accountable for the war crimes it has committed so far,
for its practice of State terrorism, and for the
systematic violations of human rights it has committed
against unarmed Palestinians, the perpetrators of which
must be prosecuted.
The Arab Group demands that the Security
Council take all measures to pressure Israel to
implement Council resolution 497 (1981), which calls
for Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the lines of 4 June 1967. It also reaffirms that the
measures taken by Israel aimed at changing the legal,
physical and demographic situation there are
considered null and void and having no legal basis, as
well as violating international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
The Arab Group also demands that Israel cease its
continued violations of Lebanese sovereignty and
infringement on Lebanon’s territories, air space and
territorial waters. The Group also demands Israel’s
complete withdrawal from the northern part of the
town of Al-Ghajar, the Shebaa farms and the hills of
Kfar Shouba.
A comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict — a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution — can be reached only by implementing the
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy,
particularly Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008). It
must also be based on the principles of the Madrid
Peace Conference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, and the Road Map as
endorsed by the Quartet.
The Arab Group affirms its full support for the
efforts by the Palestinian Authority to obtain
membership in the United Nations at the upcoming
session of the General Assembly, in accordance with
what has already been confirmed at the meeting of the
Ministerial Committee of the Arab Peace Initiative held
in Doha on 14 July.
More than six decades have passed while Israel
has persisted in defying the international community. It
has gone too far in carrying out its illegal and
unilateral policies, while the Palestinian people have
deferred their dreams and aspirations year after year,
for more than six decades, waiting and hoping to build
a national home that will embrace them all.

11-43171

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

For six decades the demands of the Palestinian
people, and our demands, have been very clear. What
we need most is implementation of United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Security Council,
and the exercise by the Palestinians of their right to
self determination and to live a free, independent and
dignified life within an independent, sovereign State
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Rosales Díaz (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): As a member of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, Nicaragua fully associates
itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt in his capacity as Chair of our
Movement.
Nicaragua reiterates once again its most profound
condemnation of Israel’s illegal occupation of all the
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories and
demands its immediate withdrawal from them. We
condemn the Israeli policies and practices of
construction and non-dismantling of settlements, as
well as the inhumane blockade of Gaza, the policy of
severing the West Bank and other Palestinian
territories.
The Security Council is meeting on the eve of a
historic moment, which must lead us to make an
incontrovertible reality of a Palestinian State that is
recognized and fully welcomed into the fold of this
Organization, thereby finally implementing all the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which calls specifically for the creation of two States
in Palestinian land — one Arab, the other Jewish.
Indeed, it is no longer possible to allow the logic
of the denial of the very existence of a Palestinian State
to continue. Since the triumph of the revolution of
1979, Nicaragua has been in a privileged position to
witness the struggle of the Palestinian people and the
substantial concessions made by Palestine, which have
been shamelessly met by Israel with more illegal
settlements, more humiliations, more deaths, more
systematic assassinations of Palestinian leaders, more
destruction of homes and more plundering, including
of East Jerusalem.
In short, we have been witnesses to a policy that
is truly aimed at cornering the Palestinian people — a
policy that is supported by an unspoken determination

11-43171

on the part of the Israelis to deny all Palestinian
citizens their very humanity.
For all of these reasons, Nicaragua reiterates the
need to put an immediate end to the insufferable
impunity that Israel has been enjoying, which has been
ensured, irresponsibly, by the Security Council, and
more specifically by the indiscriminate use of the veto
by those who have become the major accomplices of
Israel.
The time has come for the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities and demand that Israel
commit to peace. Threats of the use of veto must end,
and the international community must cast aside
rhetoric in favour of concrete action.
To that end, Nicaragua calls on the Security
Council and the General Assembly to recognize the
State of Palestine on the basis of its 1967 borders. That
is the only way to bring about a stable and lasting
peace that would enable both peoples to effectively
enjoy all of their rights, thereby putting a definitive
end to an unacceptable and inexplicable injustice.
Mr.
Raza
Bashir
Tarar
(Pakistan):
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to thank you
for convening today’s debate. Allow me to express, on
behalf of the people and the Government of Pakistan,
our deepest condolences and commiseration to the
people and the Government of Norway in connection
with Friday’s terrorist atrocities. Such dastardly acts
only harden our resolve to combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as with the
statement to be delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Kazakhstan on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Pakistan believes that the time is ripe for a lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestine conflict, based on two
independent and sovereign States living side by side
and at peace with each other.
The Palestinian Authority’s progress in
establishing State institutions is an auspicious augury
for peace. Numerous independent sources have
confirmed that Palestinian statehood by September
2011 is well within reach. This has been acknowledged
in the reports of many international bodies and
mentioned in past statements of the Middle East

9

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

Quartet. The relative reduction of violence in the
region recently has also helped strengthen the
conditions necessary for lasting peace. It is in our
common interest to embrace and strengthen the
achievements of Palestine as an invaluable opportunity
for lasting peace in the region.
The positive developments in Palestine can be
sustained only with an active engagement on the part
of the international community. In order for a durable
peace in the Middle East to be achieved, it is
incumbent upon the Security Council and the Middle
East Quartet to honour their long-standing
commitments to a final settlement and to work in
tandem to achieve this goal. The well-known terms of
reference of the Middle East peace process provide a
navigational guide for the road to peace in the Middle
East. Despite the clarity of our common goal and nearunanimity on the rules of engagement, the Security
Council and the Middle East Quartet increasingly
appear unable to act. This does not augur well for the
region. Their inaction may cause the present
opportunity for peace to be lost and lock the region
once again in cycles of violence and mistrust.
The challenges to peace in the Middle East are
not due only to the international community’s inaction,
but are rooted also in Israel’s expansionist policy,
characterized by the planning and building of new
settlement areas. The recent approval of new
construction areas in occupied Jerusalem, Bethlehem
and Nablus are cause for serious concern. The
demolition of Palestinian homes and structures in East
Jerusalem and the Jordan Valley has resulted in the
displacement of many Palestinian families.
Settlement activity is a clear violation of
international law and should be treated as such. Each
block of these settlements constitutes a major
roadblock in this journey to peace. Israel must stop
building new settlements and using settlement activity
as a political tool in the peace process. Settlement
activity and the peace process cannot move ahead
together.
Israel’s continuing blockade of Gaza is neither
conscionable nor tenable. We call for the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1860
(2009). Life in Gaza cannot return to normal without
the free movement of persons and goods, including
essential reconstruction material. We hope that Israel
will facilitate the completion of reconstruction

10

projects, including those undertaken by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Pakistan is supportive of lasting peace for all the
inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of religion,
ethnicity or nationality. The framework for peace in the
Middle East is laid down elaborately in Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008); the Madrid
terms of reference; the Arab Peace Initiative; and the
Quartet road map. Mustering and sustaining the
political will to implement the framework is
imperative.
We hope that the Security Council and the Middle
East Quartet will engage meaningfully with the
protagonists concerned to realize the collective
objective of the international community: an
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living side by
side and in peace with all of its neighbours. Pakistan
shares and supports this objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela welcomes the briefing by
Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority.
We endorse the statement made by Ambassador
Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Mr.
Maxwell
Gaylard,
United
Nations
Coordinator for Humanitarian and Development
Activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
warned recently that thousands of Bedouins would be
affected by the demolitions that are being carried out
by the Government of Israel in Jerusalem with a view
to expanding illegal settlements of Israeli citizens.
According to Mr. Gaylard, this year more homes have
been demolished than in all of 2009 or 2010, leaving
homeless refugees who have been living in that area
since 1948.

11-43171

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

This serious situation threatens to displace 80 per
cent of the Bedouins who inhabit the region. In
addition, thousands of Palestinian families have been
forcibly displaced from their residential areas. The
increased illegal Israeli settlements, home demolitions
and the prohibition on new Palestinian construction
must all be condemned. All of those illegal and
inhuman acts are obvious examples of the apartheid
system imposed by the Israeli Government and are
carried out with total impunity by the occupying
Power, highlighting the Council’s inaction.
Pursuant to the right to self-determination, the
immediate recognition of the State of Palestine and its
incorporation as a full member of the General
Assembly have been proposed. My delegation
reaffirms the sovereign right of peoples to choose their
own destiny. Venezuela reiterates its call on the
Government of Israel to fully respect the provisions of
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War within
the Palestinian territories, including Eastern Jerusalem
and the other occupied Arab territories.
Bradley Burston, senior editor at the Israeli
newspaper Haaretz, has pointed out that
“[t]here is nearly nothing which more effectively
delegitimizes Israel — and makes Israel look
more like an uncaring blockhead state — than
does the siege of Gaza”.
There is no doubt that the fragile humanitarian
situation of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip is deplorable.
The blockade imposed in that region is inhuman and
illegal, as is the wall built by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem and its
surroundings.
The unacceptable and relentless actions of the
occupying Power against suffering Palestinian citizens
have resulted in the most shameless violations of their
human rights. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
firmly demands once again an unrestricted and
immediate end to those inhuman, illegal and unilateral
measures.
Venezuela expresses its concern over the serious
events that took place in the occupied Syrian Golan on
15 May and 5 June, when Israeli soldiers massacred
numerous Palestinian citizens who were peacefully
protesting against the occupation. Venezuela once
again calls on Israel to withdraw from that territory, in

11-43171

compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. We also again request the State of
Israel to respect the sovereignty of the State of
Lebanon in order to avoid a conflict such as that which
took place in July 2006.
My country proclaims the values of freedom,
independence and sovereignty, which must continue to
be strengthened in order to achieve peace between
peoples. Again, without justice there can be no peace.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. Kim Yong Song (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): My delegation would first like to
thank Mr. Robert Serry for his detailed briefing this
morning. My delegation also aligns itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Egypt on behalf of the States members of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The resolution of the Palestinian issue in the
Middle East is a top priority among efforts to ensure
peace and safety in the region. For that reason, the
international community continues to devote its
attention to the Palestinian question and to make every
effort towards its resolution.
I would like to particularly underline a positive
development that may decisively affect the resolution
of the Palestinian question, with the strong support of
the international community. It is noteworthy that the
Palestinian people’s struggle for an independent,
sovereign State is gaining momentum now more than
ever before. The key to victory in this struggle should
be in the hands of the Palestinian people, as it is certain
that key is the unity of the Palestinian people
themselves. The adoption of a final reconciliation
agreement between Palestinian political forces in May
will surely serve to strengthen the unity of the
Palestinian people and firmly encourage their struggle
for an independent, sovereign State.
Notwithstanding the positive developments,
obstacles and challenges to the Middle East peace
process still lie ahead. Israel has not withdrawn from
the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, in spite
of increased denouncements by the international
community. Israel has continued to further expand its
settlements in East Jerusalem and the Arab territories,
directly challenging international demands. Settlement-

11

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

building is part of Israel’s ambitious effort at territorial
expansion, and its impact is now having serious
consequences. It is because of the expansion of the
Israeli settlements that the Palestine-Israel talks,
arranged after a laborious process of twists and turns,
are now deadlocked.
Support for the founding of an independent,
sovereign State of Palestine is becoming a trend of
international society that no one dares to stop. Many
countries recognize Palestine as an independent,
sovereign State, and their number has now reached
more than 120. The Palestinian people’s struggle to
regain its occupied territory and set up an independent,
sovereign State is more than justifiable; its victory is
ensured.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express our full support to and solidarity with the
justified struggle of the Palestinian people to recover
their legitimate sovereign rights, including the
founding of an independent, sovereign State.
The President: I give
representative of Bangladesh.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): I thank Germany
for scheduling this very important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. Allow me to express our
appreciation to the Minister of State of the Federal
Foreign Office of Germany for chairing this debate. I
also convey our thanks to Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing this morning.
The Bangladeshi delegation aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the representatives of Egypt
and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively. In addition, I wish to briefly
make certain points that Bangladesh believes to be of
importance.
A durable and sustainable resolution of the ArabIsraeli conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which
is the core of the long-lasting crisis, must be our
collective strategic objective. All Member States
should pledge complete commitment to this objective
and throw their full moral, diplomatic, political and
economic support behind its early realization.
The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental rights to self-determination and to live

12

freely in their own land, and displaced Palestinians
have been denied their rights to return home and live in
dignity and safety. Unfortunately, it appears to be a
collective failure on the part of the international
community, and especially the people of Israel, who
themselves having suffered deprivation failed
nevertheless to rise to the occasion and guarantee the
people of Palestine their fundamental rights to selfdetermination and to live in a sovereign State of their
own, side by side with Israel. In order to achieve a
lasting solution in the Middle East, it is very important
to address the key issue, which is the prolonged and
illegal occupation of the Arab territories by Israel.
We express our concern at the occupying Power’s
extensive destruction of property, homes, economic
institutions, agricultural lands and orchards; the
construction of the wall; the confiscation of land; and
the continued imposition of checkpoints, contrary to
international law, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, which have
seriously hampered the already dire socio-economic
situation facing the Palestinian population.
We commend President Mahmoud Abbas’
leadership of the Palestinian Authority and continued
Palestinian State-building efforts, especially in the
areas of governance, rule of law and human rights,
livelihoods and productive sectors, education and
culture, health, social protection and water.
But we are worried owing to the Israeli military
operations and the continuing Israeli policy of closures
and severe restrictions on the movement of persons and
goods, including humanitarian personnel, as well as
food, medical, fuel and other essential supplies, in the
Gaza Strip, which are causing civilian casualties. We
therefore call for maximum restraint and respect for
international humanitarian law. In this regard, it is very
unfortunate that a French civilian boat, which was
sailing to provide humanitarian support, was recently
seized.
My delegation believes that the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the land-for-peace
principle, and the Madrid Conference terms of
reference, which guarantee Israel’s withdrawal from all
occupied Arab and Palestinian territories to the lines of
4 June 1967, the Road Map, and the Arab Peace

11-43171

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

Initiative are the best guides for achieving a two-State
solution.
The principled support for the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination that has come
from all corners of the globe, both bilateral and
multilateral, has been an essential pillar of Palestinian
resilience over the decades. My delegation welcomes
in this regard the Palestinian Authority’s plan,
“Palestine: Ending the Occupation, Establishing the
State”, a plan for constructing the institutions of a
Palestinian State by September 2011.
Let us turn to the situations in Lebanon and the
occupied Syrian Golan. It is sad that the occupying
State is violating Lebanese sovereignty and repeatedly
breaching Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). It
is also of concern that there have been various
measures and actions to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh’s longstanding position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of violence, unrest and destabilization in the region.
Let me also reiterate our full support for a lasting
peace for all inhabitants of the region, both Arabs and
Israelis, and our strong commitment to the realization
of an independent, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living
side by side and in peace with all its neighbours.
The President: I give
representative of Morocco.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, let me express our profound gratitude to you
for having convened this open debate. I also thank
Mr. Robert Serry for his thorough briefing on the latest
developments in the Middle East. As is customary, my
delegation endorses the statements delivered by the
representatives of Egypt, Kazakhstan and Kuwait on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Arab
League, respectively.
At the outset, I would like to express our
profound concern at the protracted deadlock facing
international and regional efforts to reinvigorate the
talks between the Palestinians and the Israelis,
particularly in the light of the legal aspirations of the
Palestinians with regard to September 2011. There can
be no doubt that there is unanimous agreement at the

11-43171

international level when it comes to the two-State
solution and the need for a comprehensive settlement
in the Middle East, in keeping with international
legitimacy. Consequently, the international community
must be strict and effective in order to create an
environment conducive to negotiations, free from
provocative, illegal, unilateral measures by Israel, so as
to bring peace and prosperity to the region.
We are deeply concerned at the obstacles
impeding direct talks between the two sides. At the
same time, we are convinced that the peace process is a
necessary choice that must lead to a comprehensive,
just and legitimate peace for all peoples in the region.
In this context, Morocco is closely and
optimistically following the several initiatives — by
the United States, the Quartet, the European Union and
other regional and international actors — to promote a
return to direct negotiations. Our hope is that these
efforts will bring about a resumption of serious
negotiations in good faith, in keeping with
international law, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road
Map and the previously achieved agreements between
the sides.
Morocco warmly welcomed the commitment
made by President Obama of the United States remarks
his speech on 19 May 2011 on a comprehensive and
just peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis and
creation of an independent Palestinian State, within the
1967 borders and living side by side in peace with
Israel.
We express the hope that this position, which is
shared by the entire international community, will
enable the Palestinian people to reclaim their
legitimate rights and establish an independent State
with its capital at Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
In this context, Morocco, whose King,
Mohammed VI, is presiding over the Jerusalem
Commission, would like to state its concerns to the
Council and to condemn the measures taken by Israel
in East Jerusalem with a view to changing its
demographics, legal status and religious profile and
Israel’s expulsion of Palestinians in order to build
roads and settlements and Judaize the area. All of these
actions impede a final settlement, and, given the
crucial importance of Al-Quds Al-Sharif in any
comprehensive settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
question, we call on the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, to assume their full

13

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

responsibilities to ensure that Israel end these illegal
practices, respect the international efforts aimed at
bringing about early talks and to cooperate with them.
In these sensitive historical circumstances, the
eyes of the world are focused more than ever on the
United Nations and the international and regional
forces working to uphold their political and moral
responsibilities towards the Palestinian people and to
restart direct negotiations. This could give new
momentum and optimism to the process to achieve the
peace to which we all aspire.
The Palestinian Authority, strengthened by its
national reconciliation, continues to show itself to be
the genuine and effective partner in the peace process
that it has always been, and to demonstrate its
commitment to achieving a lasting solution. The Arab
States, through the Arab Peace Initiative, have
expressed their sincere desire for lasting and just
peace.
Morocco places the issue of Palestine at the very
centre of its regional and international interests, and
will continue its efforts to resolve this matter through
direct negotiations. This will happen only after Israel
withdraws from all Arab and Palestinian territories
occupied since June 1967, and through the creation of
an independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital, and respect for the legal rights of the brotherly
people of Palestine.
The President: I give
representative of Kazakhstan.

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I have the honour
to make the following statement on behalf of the States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC). I would like to emphasize again that, on 1 July,
the name of that Organization changed and is now the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. I speak in my
country’s capacity as Chair of the OIC.
We are grateful to Germany for convening
today’s meeting devoted to the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. The
continuation of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole continues to threaten
international peace and security. This issue is at the
centre of security problems and challenges, the
negative implications of which are not confined to that
region, but are felt well beyond and across the globe.

14

It is most unfortunate that the Security Council’s
efforts to address this conflict have repeatedly failed
due to the refusal by Israel, the occupying Power, to
comply with international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions, as well as the lack of political will
among Member States to implement the Council’s
resolutions. This is a regrettable fact, despite the
Council’s unequivocal demands from the outset for the
withdrawal of Israel, the occupying Power, from the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, in accordance with the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force.
The Council has consistently adopted resolutions
calling for an end to the Israeli occupation and the
realization of the two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders as the guarantor of peace and security
between the two peoples.
We are shocked and extremely disturbed by the
escalation of Israel’s illegal practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Israel,
the occupying Power, has increased its military
operations throughout the West Bank, even raiding a
summer camp for children and forcing these children to
endure harsh interrogations. The occupying forces
continue to spread fear among the civilian Palestinian
population, including women and children, and
continue to carry out arrest operations, increasing the
number of Palestinians illegally imprisoned and
detained by Israel.
At the same time, Israel continues to intensify its
illegal and destructive settlement campaign in the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially in and around
occupied East Jerusalem. We condemn Israel’s flouting
of international law and of the unanimous calls for a
complete cessation of such illegal actions. The spate of
settlement activities and the demolition of homes have
reached an unprecedented level recently in a clear
attempt to further colonize the occupied Palestinian
territory and to create even more illegal alterations to
the historical and religious landmarks, demographic
composition, characteristics and status of the territory.
The OIC group is highly perturbed by the attacks
not only on Palestinian civilians, but also on peace
activists
and
volunteers
from
international
non-governmental organizations. The OIC group
reiterates that it is disturbed by the fact that, for the
past four years, about 1.5 million Palestinians have
been suffering in immeasurably grave conditions in the
besieged Gaza Strip as a result of Israel’s illegal and

11-43171

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

inhumane blockade, a most condemnable form of
collective punishment. We reiterate the call for the
immediate lifting of the blockade and for Israel’s
compliance with all of its legal obligations under
international humanitarian law.
The OIC is deeply concerned over the stalemate
in the negotiations between Israel and Palestine, and
the recent failure of the Quartet during its meeting in
Washington, D.C., to deliver results that would enable
the resumption of negotiations. At its thirty-eighth
session, held last month in Astana, the OIC Council of
Foreign Ministers reiterated the need for an early
settlement of the Palestinian issue and expressed full
support for the Arab Peace Initiative, which is aimed at
reaching a lasting, comprehensive and just resolution
of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The OIC member States have also applauded the
significant
institution-building
efforts
of
the
Palestinian National Authority, and called on the
international community to acknowledge the progress
achieved and to recognize the independent, sovereign
State of Palestine on the basis of the borders of 4 June
1967. The OIC also joins the international community
in reaffirming that all measures and actions taken or to
be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the
legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as well as
to impose jurisdiction and administration there, are null
and void and have no legal effect.
The international community, including the
Security Council, cannot afford to lose any more time.
It should uphold its responsibility and take immediate
and decisive action to bring Israel into compliance with
international law, including its obligations under the
Fourth Geneva Convention, relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet Road Map. This is the most urgent step to
salvage the two-State solution for an independent,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side and in peace with Israel.
The President: I give the floor
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

to

the

Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Security Council is meeting yet again to
discuss the deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab
territories under the agenda item “The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question”. This

11-43171

item is centred exclusively on the Arab-Israeli conflict,
the Palestinian question and how to compel Israel to
end its occupation of Arab land in implementation of
resolutions of international legality, including
resolutions of the Security Council. It does not refer to
any other issues that are not covered by the historical
definition of the item.
However, instead of focusing on the substance of
this agenda item, some unfortunately attempt to engage
the Council on other issues in order to dilute the
essence of the item, under which the Security Council
seeks to effectively engage in reviving the peace
process, ending Israeli occupation of occupied Arab
land and establishing a Palestinian State on the basis of
the 1967 borders. However, the reality on the ground
reaffirms that there is a systematic Israeli pattern of
behaviour that some do not want to hold to
international accountability. This pattern contradicts
the core provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law and demonstrates
Israel’s disregard for international legality.
Among Israel’s most egregious practices are its
great colonialist theft of territory through its history of
settlement, including land confiscation, the demolition
of homes, the expulsion of citizens from their homes
and replacing them with foreign settlers, the
construction of the racist separation wall, the
Judaization of occupied Jerusalem, support for settlers’
oppressive and extremist racist practices against
unarmed Palestinians, under the protection of the
occupying forces, and the unjust imposition of the
blockade against Gaza.
On 15 May and 5 June, on the anniversary of
Israel’s occupation of their land, Israel fired live
bullets at unarmed demonstrators, claiming the lives of
many martyrs and wounding a great number of people.
That is the underlying aggressive nature of the State
terrorism practiced by Israel. Israel continues to refuse
to return the occupied Syrian Golan to its motherland,
Syria, and to implement resolutions of the international
community, in particular resolution 497 (1981), which
declared the annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan
null and void and without international legal effect.
Israel pursues its policy of intimidating and
oppressing Syrian citizens in the Golan. It continues to
confiscate land, expand settlements and plunder the
riches and resources of the Golan, distorting its history

15

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

and robbing its historic monuments. It continues to
plant mines on the territory.
Comprehensive and fair peace will be achieved
only through complete Israeli withdrawal from all Arab
territories to the 4 July 1967 lines, and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. The Security Council
is called on to sincerely and effectively commit to
finding a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict without
delay or partial solutions. The Security Council has an
important opportunity to prove its ability to play its
Charter role by supporting the internationally backed
and fair Palestinian request to establish an independent
State on its territory, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital. That would be achieved by accepting Palestine
as a full Member of the United Nations, pursuant to the
resolutions of international legality.
In that regard, we recall General Assembly
resolution 273 (III) of 1949, which established the
conditions for Israel’s admission as a full Member of
the United Nations: its commitment to the principles of
the Charter and respect for the rights of the Palestinian
people to establish its independent State and of
Palestinian refugees to return to the homes from which
they had been forcibly expelled.
However, some speakers have used non-objective
and exaggerated language in their statements to
describe recent domestic events. They have sought to
engage the Council in internal affairs on fragile and
unfounded pretexts that have nothing to do with the
Council’s role or responsibilities. That is why I wish to
underscore that the goal and substance of this agenda
item are clear. I would like to make the following
points.
Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad has declared a
comprehensive reform programme that the Government
has begun to implement to promote democratic
national reconciliation and to increase the participation
of all citizens in the political and economic process, as
well as to sanctify national unity and to ensure law and
order for all citizens. We sent a letter to the SecretaryGeneral, issued under the symbol S/2011/353, in which
we stated our position vis-à-vis recent developments in
Syria.
Syria has held consultations on new bills
concerning pluralism and the participation of political
parties in Syria. The consultations recommended the
establishment of a supreme human rights council and a

16

political committee to revise the Constitution to ensure
pluralism and to promote human rights, social justice,
the rule of law and the rights of women and children.
I wish to comment on the statements made by
certain representatives when a group of young people
demonstrated outside the French and United States
embassies to voice their views on interference by those
embassies in our internal affairs. We stress that the
Syrian authorities are committed to protecting the
security of those two embassies. We recall that the
Syrian embassies in certain countries have been
attacked and that the countries where those attacks
took place did little to protect them.
It is clear that any internal reform undertaken by
a Member of the United Nations should comply with
the United Nations Charter and should be respected.
Those outside the country advocating reform should
not deliberately ignore serious reform measures or
undermine the Syrian model of tolerance and
coexistence among all citizens. They should not draw
conclusions from or base their analysis on fabricated
and false information. They should ignore neither our
reform efforts nor the sabotage and crimes being
committed by organized terrorist groups in Syria.
We would have hoped to hear in those statements
even a single word of condemnation of Israel’s use of
live fire against unarmed civilian demonstrators on
15 May and 5 June. That is the behaviour at the heart
of this issue and falls within the purview of the
Security Council’s mandate, pursuant to relevant
resolutions.
The President: I give the floor to
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

the

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to express our appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening this important open debate at this critical
juncture in developments in the Middle East. This
meeting will surly provide us with an overview of the
current state of affairs in the region and the path
forward to bring peace to the Middle East.
The question of Palestine, from its occupation
until today, has remained one of the biggest challenges
and problems of the world. The occupation represents
the most painful and biggest tragedy of humankind in
modern history. More than six decades of massacres,
home demolitions, embargos, the abduction and
imprisonment of people, attacks on neighbours and

11-43171

S/PV.6590 (Resumption 1)

others, and violations of international law and international
humanitarian law have followed this occupation.
The Israeli regime continues to defy international law
in its pursuit of an unlawful and inhuman blockade of the
Palestinians, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which has
entered its fifth year. A recent report of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East indicates that broad unemployment in Gaza in
the second half of 2010 reached an unprecedented 45.2 per
cent, one of the highest rates in the world. The seizure of
another civilian boat, the Dignité-El Karama, by the Israeli
regime was yet another violation of international law. The
inhumane blocked is a source of grave concern to people all
over the world, who have expressed their support for such
humanitarian gestures as the freedom flotilla and the
Dignité-Al Karama and called for the immediate lifting of
the Gaza blockade.
States supporting the Israeli regime have brought
shame on themselves because, on the one hand, they claim
to advocate human rights and international law and
international humanitarian law, while at the same time they
support the occupation, illegal settlements and all violations
of international law by the brutal regime occupying
Palestine. The history of the Israeli regime is nothing but
crime, the killing of men, women and children, the use of
banned weapons and the stockpiling of nuclear weapons,
blind assassinations, attacks on civilians and aid convoys in
international waters, and war crimes in Lebanon and
Palestine. All these inhumane acts have become the routine
doings of the occupying regime. There is no doubt that
support for this regime is tantamount to support for
occupation, massacre, assassination and the violation of
human rights.
Attaining a peaceful and just settlement of the
question of Palestine is imperative to the realization of
comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East and beyond. In our view, achieving lasting peace in
Palestine and the region will be possible only by ensuring
justice, putting an end to discriminatory and racist policies,
and ending the occupation of Palestine and other occupied
territories. Today, we are seeing more and more States
joining the ranks of those that have already recognized
Palestine as an independent State. This is a very clear
indication that the cause of Palestine is gaining new
momentum.
On Syria, there have evidently been attempts to incite
sectarian sensitivities and denominational tensions and
divisions, a known tactic of hegemonic regimes. Such

11-43171

mischievous attempts are worthless and vain and will have
no effect on the stability of the country. The enemies of
humankind do not want and have never wanted the people
of Syria to remain united, independent and developed. But
the people of Syria know that the key to their independence
and dignity is unity and resistance to mischievous and
subversive attempts.
The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
policies towards Lebanon by constantly violating its land,
sea and air space and refusing to withdraw from occupied
Lebanese villages. These occupations and acts of
aggression should stop immediately.
Before concluding, I would like to react to the
reference made to my country by the representative of the
Israeli regime in this Chamber this morning. It is no
surprise that, in levelling baseless allegations against Iran’s
nuclear programme, the Zionist regime has preposterously
attempted to deflect attentions from its long and dark
catalogue of crimes and atrocities, such as occupation,
aggression, militarism, State-terrorism, and crimes against
humanity. It is a widely recognized fact that the Israeli
regime’s clandestine development and unlawful possession
of nuclear weapons poses a uniquely grave threat to
regional and international peace and security. The Israeli
regime has clearly defied the demands of the overwhelming
majority of the United Nations Member States that have
time and again called on it to renounce nuclear weapons
and accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Regrettably, the inaction of the relevant United
Nations organs in the face of such Israeli policies and
practices has emboldened this dangerous regime. The
Council is expected to condemn the Israeli regime for the
possession of nuclear weapons, compel it to abandon
nuclear weapons, urge it to accede to the NPT without
delay, and demand that it promptly place all its nuclear
facilities under the full-scope safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Indeed, peace and
stability cannot be achieved in the Middle East so long as
the massive Israeli nuclear arsenals continue to threaten the
region and beyond.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

17
