S/PV.8427

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8427th meeting

Monday, 17 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Edjang Nnaga
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Letter dated 14 December 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Serbia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2018/1111)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44297 (E)
*1844297*

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Letter dated 14 December 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Serbia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2018/1111)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, President of the Republic of
Serbia, and request the Protocol Officer to escort him
to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim
Thaçi to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1111, which contains a letter dated
14 December 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of Serbia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: Since the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
briefed the Security Council on 14 November (see
S/PV.8399), a number of developments in Kosovo have
heightened tensions between Belgrade and Pristina.
On 21 November, following Kosovo’s failed bid to join
INTERPOL, the Government of Kosovo announced an
2/20

17/12/2018

increase in the tariff on goods imported from Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina from 10 to 100 per cent. In
response, the mayors of the four Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities of northern Kosovo announced their
resignations and the decision of the respective municipal
assemblies to cease all official communication with the
Pristina authorities. The main Kosovo Serb political
party — the Serbian List — has organized daily
protests, centred in North Mitrovica, that have at times
involved up to 5,000 people.
Belgrade, for its part, stated that Pristina had
violated the Central European Free Trade Agreement
and stressed that it would resume its involvement in
the European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue only
once Pristina revokes the import tax. Key international
partners, including the European Union, also urged
the Government of Kosovo to revoke the tax, while
in Pristina Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tanin issued a statement expressing concern
about the potential impact of the decision on the
population of Kosovo and on the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
Amid the tense atmosphere, the Assembly of
Kosovo adopted on 14 December three laws, namely,
the law on the Kosovo Security Force; the law on
service in the Kosovo Security Force; and the law
on the Ministry of Defence. The laws do not change
the name of the Kosovo Security Force, which would
require a constitutional amendment, yet they provide
for substantial changes to be implemented over a
period of time to the mandate, role and strength of the
Kosovo Security Force. The Kosovo Government, in
a statement issued following the adoption of the laws,
underscored the right of Kosovo to have “an army; a
multi-ethnic and professional force built under the
highest NATO standards”. In Belgrade, the Serbian
authorities condemned the adoption of the laws as
an act of “political aggression” against Serbia and a
violation of resolution 1244 (1999). They also called on
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) not to allow the operation of
any Kosovo army on the territory of Kosovo.
Among international partners, the SecretaryGeneral of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) declared that the transition of the Kosovo
Security Force is, in principle, a matter for Kosovo
to decide upon. He nevertheless expressed regret at
the decision of the Assembly of Kosovo, which he
characterized as ill-timed and in disregard of the
concerns previously raised by NATO. He also stressed
18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

the continued commitment of NATO, through KFOR, to
a safe and secure environment in Kosovo. The European
External Action Service stated that the mandate of the
Kosovo Security Force should be changed only through
an inclusive and gradual process, in accordance with
Kosovo’s Constitution, and expressed the expectation
of the European Union that Kosovo would continue
to uphold its obligations under the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
April 2013 and its security arrangements.
The Secretary-General has noted with concern
the adoption of the laws by the Assembly of Kosovo.
He underscored that resolution 1244 (1999) provides
the sole legal framework for the international security
presence, the Kosovo Force, which is entrusted with the
responsibility of ensuring a safe and secure environment
in Kosovo and that “any restriction to the discharge
by KFOR of its security responsibilities would be
inconsistent with that resolution.” The SecretaryGeneral has called on all parties concerned to exercise
restraint and to refrain from actions that could raise
tensions and cause a further setback in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue for the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. Special
Representative Tanin issued a similar statement in
Pristina.
The recent developments in Kosovo have further
deteriorated relations between Belgrade and Pristina,
which have been strained for some time, with no progress
on the EU-facilitated dialogue. We are concerned by the
risk of tensions on the ground, particularly in northern
Kosovo. It is therefore crucial that Belgrade and Pristina
avoid any steps that could further worsen the situation,
but rather find ways to re-engage in the dialogue aimed
at the normalization of their mutual relations.
In adhering to its status neutral approach, UNMIK
is committed to working closely with KFOR, in line
with resolution 1244 (1999), as well as with other
international actors in Kosovo. Under the leadership of
Special Representative Zahir Tanin, the Mission will
continue to focus its activities, among other priorities,
on intercommunity trust-building, which is essential
to the long-term normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar
Vučić, President of the Republic of Serbia.

S/PV. 8427

President Vučić: I am profoundly grateful to the
Council for convening this meeting at such short notice.
We think that it was very important and very right to
do so, owing to the terribly difficult situation on the
ground that has led to us face more and more difficulties
in the area of Kosovo and Metohija. I have to say that
I am very worried, concerned about and even a bit
afraid of and for the future not only of my people and
our country, Serbia, but of the entire region. I listened
very carefully to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
I would like to say something different than what he
said, although I agree with many of the things that he
expressed.
First of all, I would like to tell the Council that
Serbia has invested huge efforts and great endeavour
in maintaining the peace, tranquillity and stability
of the entire region of the Western Balkans. We have
done everything that we could have done, refraining
from responding to different types of provocation
from Pristina. We have always been very restrained
and we do not accept the kind of phrase that has
become customary when two sides are called upon to
do something or not to do something. Serbia has done
almost everything in its power to implement everything
that has been agreed so far.
As the Council members knows, we signed the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina in April
2013. Serbia has fulfilled all of its obligations under
the Agreement. We made a lot of concessions and it
was very difficult for our people to accept them, but
we signed it and we have fulfilled it. On the other
hand, the only obligation that had to be delivered by
Pristina — the only one, and the first 6 of the 15 items
in the Brussels Agreement are all related to that one
obligation — was the formation of a Serb community. It
does not matter whether it is called a community or an
association. That was its one and only obligation, and
yet today, almost 2,070 days later, Kosovo has failed to
put that into action and has no intention to do so in the
future.
Serbia, on the other hand, has fulfilled everything,
including the police arrangement, the justice and
judiciary arrangement, the telecoms arrangement and
participation in municipal elections under the Kosovo
law — absolutely everything that we signed. But that
was not enough. We warned Pristina and the European
Union (EU), because we have an ongoing negotiating
process under the auspices of the EU, as the Council is

18-442973/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

aware. We proposed that we should resolve all of our
problems within the framework of our dialogue process.
We asked that they not force us into difficult situations
that would create a terrible atmosphere between us
when Kosovo wishes to join different international
organizations, which we consider to be a provocation,
because Serbia is the only sovereign and independent
State under resolution 1244 (1999), unless something
has changed that we have not been informed about.
We begged Kosovo not to apply for full-fledged
membership of INTERPOL, UNESCO, the European
Network of Transmission System Operators for
Electricity and other organizations and international
bodies. But Kosovo wanted to do so because it was
counting on the support of the United States and several
EU countries in the belief that it would win — and it
lost. With regard to INTERPOL, in the first round of
voting it obtained less than 50 per cent of votes — 76
votes in favour against 78. They then started to blame
Serbia, as it were our fault, as if we had to support
them, as if that were our obligation. Of course, it was
not. Many countries, important countries in various
parts of the world, voted against their membership. But
all of a sudden, they imposed tariffs, in contravention
of the Central European Free Trade Agreement and
the Stabilization and Association Agreement, against
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. First, it was 10 per
cent. When they saw that their Albanian public audience
reacted well to that measure, they increased the tariffs
up to 100 per cent.
In effect, they killed any kind of trade between
central Serbia and Kosovo. What is more, they
jeopardized the entire Serb community in Kosovo,
because that is the only way for those people to earn the
money to survive, to obtain medications, to go to Serbrun hospitals and health-care centres; that has always
been the only way for them to live.

17/12/2018

derive all their competencies and authorities from that
document. It was not NATO’s decision; it was a decision
by the Security Council to provide these competencies
to KFOR in Kosovo. What happened? Since 2014 they
had been announcing their strong wish to form their
own military.
Let me remind the Council that Serbia, in a letter
by its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ivan Mrkic, dated
March 2014, warned Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
of the possibility of creating a very dangerous situation
in the region through the creation of the so-called
Kosovo armed forces. Here is Mr. Ban Ki-moon’s reply:
“Let me also stress that Security Council 1244
(1999) remains the legal framework for the
continuing international security presence in
Kosovo and clearly outlines its mandate, which is
to provide for a secure environment for all. To this
effect, UNMIK will continue to work very closely
with the international security force in Kosovo in
the fulfilment of these responsibilities.”
Let me remind the Council of something else.
Paragraph 4 of annex 2 to resolution 1244 (1999) reads
as follows:
“The international security presence, with
substantial North Atlantic Treaty Organization
participation, must be deployed under unified
command and control and authorized to establish
a safe environment for all people in Kosovo and
to facilitate the safe return to their homes of all
displaced persons and refugees.”
In addition, paragraph 9(b) of the resolution
clearly envisages not only the demilitarization of the
Kosovo Liberation Army but of all other armed Kosovo
Albanian groups; this is absolutely clear.

Not to mention the fact that they violated and
breached all those agreements, a fact to which even the
European Union (EU) made reference. They put it all
aside. But can you imagine someone in the twenty-first
century in effect banning and forbidding the free flow
of goods, capital and people just because they did not
like a political decision from the other side?

Aside from that, there is another question: from
which document — and that is my open question to
all present — do they derive their so-called sovereign
right to form their own military? Where is that
written? In which document? It is not even written
in that form in their own Constitution, because their
own Constitution — which we admit we do not
recognize — states in its article 144, paragraph 2:

Even that was not enough. Now I must say
something regarding resolution 1244 (1999). Not only
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) but the Kosovo Force (KFOR)

“Any amendment shall require for its adoption
the approval of two thirds (2/3) of all deputies of the
Assembly including two thirds (2/3) of all deputies
of the Assembly holding reserved or guaranteed

4/20

18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

seats for representatives of communities that are
not in the majority in the Republic of Kosovo.”
Of course, they could not find seven Serbs to vote
for that, and then, who cares? Who cares about the law?
Who cares about the facts? They made a decision, and
they formed the so-called Kosovo armed forces.
Unexpectedly, even surprisingly, they received
tremendous support for that from various Western
countries. Here I wish to quote a statement by the
EU-8 — the five EU members of the Security Council,
that is, France, the Netherlands, Poland, Sweden and
the United Kingdom, as well as Italy, Belgium and
Germany — that I received only five minutes before
I entered this Chamber: “The initiation of the process
of transition of the Kosovo Security Force is Kosovo’s
sovereign right.”
My question to all present is: from which
document, from which article, paragraph or rule did
they derive that right? Where is it written? I can tell the
Council the answer in advance: nowhere. It is just an
interpretation — a very bad interpretation — by some
countries because it is in their own political interests.
I have just mentioned the safe return of all returnees
to their homes. I must inform the Council that Kosovo
and Metohija is officially the territory with the lowest
rate of returnees in the world. Imagine — only 1.5 per
cent of people have gone back to what are the mainly
charred remnants of their homes. Only 1.5 per cent. The
Council has dealt with many different issues here in
this Chamber, but there is no similar issue in the entire
world. They created an army and started to threaten to
violate and breach even more of the arrangements that
we had signed with various organizations, arrangements
we had with those organizations, including their
presence in the northern part of Kosovo. Regarding
arrangements with NATO, the only possibility for
them to go with their armed forces to the north is to
get consent from NATO, first, and also from the Serb
local community. They have already breached that rule
several times, even beating the Serbian chief negotiator
just because he was sitting at a round table in north
Mitrovica discussing an issue related to our dialogue
with Pristina.
I will give one important example that best depicts
what is happening in Kosovo and Metohija: that of
Bogdan Mitrovic, a Serb expelled from Musutiste
village. He had wanted to go to what I referred to earlier
as the charred remnants of his village, together with his

S/PV. 8427

wife and their three daughters and 6-year-old grandson.
Instead of being able to visit their devastated house,
he was arrested, viciously treated in the presence
of his daughters and grandson and then taken into
custody, where he remained for months. There were no
indictments or further investigations. That is not the
only such case. It is just one example of what they do to
Serbs who, not daring to go back to the homes they left
behind, go only to visit them.
Mr. Lacroix said that people from Pristina were
angry with us because of an issue related to Kosovo’s
bid to join INTERPOL. We begged them not to go there
without finalizing their dialogue with Serbia, but they
wanted to go there. We were just defending ourselves.
We were just defending the sovereign and independent
State of Serbia in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations — nothing more than that. Some people
claim that Kosovo reacted that way because we started
a campaign to revoke its independence. I want to
inform the Council that since we started our dialogue in
2012 — which resumed in 2013 — Kosovo has received
an additional 19 recognitions from all over the world
and we have not said a single word. We have not been
angry. We have not caused any problems in the field.
We have not attacked anyone. We have not threatened
anyone. However, when reversal process started, all of
a sudden it was our fault.
I just want to tell the Council that Serbia has
always done everything it could to maintain stability,
tranquillity and peace in the entire region. We will
refrain from taking the wrong steps in the future as
well, because we have suffered a lot in the past and
we cannot allow any more of our children to be killed
in different types of wars, hostilities and clashes. But
we beg all members of the Council — and this is my
biggest plea tonight — for someone to curb and tame
those people because, to put it very lightly, the measures
that they have taken recently are not coherent with the
twenty-first century.
Ultimately, they do have one sovereign right. They
have formed another negotiating team that includes
former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army who
are under investigation for committing terrible crimes
against Serbian civilians. But that does not matter — I
will set that aside. There is something more important.
They have articulated all of their prerequisites for the
future dialogue, which include our recognition of the
independence of Kosovo and our understanding that
Kosovo gets to determine its own borders. And they are

18-442975/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

17/12/2018

not even going to change their State’s form, which is
unitary. As a result, Serbs are not going to get anything.

them. The Council was our voice when we did not have
one.

My question for everyone here is: What should that
future dialogue be about? Should it be about coloured
marbles that kids play with in the schoolyard, or what?
Despite everything that I have said, Serbia is always
ready to resume the process of dialogue. We would
like to call on the United Nations to play a bigger role
in the future. We have nothing against the European
Union-sponsored dialogue, but we need the United
Nations to become more involved in the entire process.
We need to see some steps taken by Pristina. It needs to
withdraw those terrible tariffs and take other actions.
That will enable us to ensure the safety of our people.
In conclusion, let me speak just two sentences in the
Serbian language with regard to the people who are
living in Kosovo and Metohija.

However, we are here today two decades after
that bloody war and ten years after Kosovo gained
its independence. We have been summoned for an
extraordinary meeting during a time of complete
normality and substantial progress in Kosovo.
This is a time to demand a serious review of the
degree of engagement of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and when the
Council is called on to address the real problems the
world is facing today.

(spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by
the delegation)
I want to commend my Serbian brothers and sisters
for everything they have lived through and the torture
they continue to face. I want them to know that Serbia
will always stand by them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank President
Vučić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I am
honoured to speak before the Council today on behalf
of the institutions and the people of the Republic of
Kosovo.
I want to thank the United Nations and the Security
Council for their continued focus on Kosovo and the
developments in the region. I will never forget the
voices of hope and calls for peace that echoed in this
Chamber during the darkest days of the citizens of
Kosovo, including myself. My people and I will never
forget that when we were facing our toughest moments,
the Council became our voice. We will remain forever
grateful for that. Thanks to the Council, the world
learned of the many ills that were suffered during the
war with Serbia, including systematic violence, ethnic
cleansing, the deaths of thousands of innocent people,
the many thousands who are still missing, and the more
than 20,000 women who continue to live with the pain
and stigma of the sexual violence that was inflicted on
6/20

Nothing extraordinary happened in Kosovo last
week. In fact, what happened was a totally normal
decision, both in its mission and in its purpose. If
Kosovo has made any mistake, it is that of having
waited unnecessarily for five years to establish an army.
The decision to establish an army may be belated, but
it is in no way wrong. It is belated because we waited
for goodwill from those who never showed goodwill
towards Kosovo. However, the Republic of Kosovo,
which is a sovereign and independent State, has now
undertaken the natural step towards establishing its
army. I ask the Council what is extraordinary about
that? There is nothing at all extraordinary about that.
There is nothing that is in contradiction with resolution
1244 (1999), the Ahtisaari plan, the Constitution of
Kosovo or even international law.
First and foremost, resolution 1244 (1999),
and specifically paragraph 15, refers only to the
demilitarization of the Kosovo Liberation Army — a
process that was completed in record time and without
incident in September 1999. This process was highly
appreciated, even by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General at the time, Kofi Annan. It was also
highly praised by NATO, as substantiated by reports
produced by NATO and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo during that time.
Secondly, the comprehensive proposal for the
Kosovo status settlement presented by President
Ahtisaari — who was the Special Envoy for the Future
Status Process for Kosovo — clearly underscores the
right of Kosovo to have an army in article 5.2. Moreover,
the strategic review of the security sector, undertaken in
close cooperation with NATO, very clearly emphasizes
Kosovo’s right to transform its Security Force into
armed forces.
18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

Finally, and most importantly, the decision of the
International Court of Justice — which, might I add,
was made upon Serbia’s request, specifically by former
Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić — underlines the fact
that Kosovo did not violate any international laws when
it declared its independence. It is therefore Kosovo’s
indisputable right to have an army. The establishment
of the army is the will of the people of Kosovo, with
the unanimous political will of the people’s chosen
representatives — regardless of whether some like it or
not. The State of Serbia has expressed its aggravation,
but the Serbian citizens of Kosovo have not.
Allow me, in my capacity as the President of the
Republic of Kosovo and Commander-in-Chief, to
clearly state that Kosovo’s armed forces will produce
more peace and stability. The transformation of the
mission of the Kosovo Security Force (KSF) is not a
step we have undertaken to send a message to anyone.
Kosovo’s army is not and will never be a threat to
anyone. Kosovo’s army is and will remain a professional
and multi-ethnic force. Over 10 per cent of the soldiers
are from non-majority communities; they include
Serbians, Montenegrins, Croats, Turks, Bosniaks,
Romas, Egyptians, Ashkali and so on. This is a force
that will protect every citizen of Kosovo throughout
Kosovo territory— every child and every youngster,
regardless of the language that they speak at home.
Until 1999, my people, owing to their tragic
past, have always been afraid of military uniforms,
precisely because they have historically been foreign
and a symbol of repression. However, Kosovo’s soldiers
will be soldiers of peace and Kosovo’s army will be
a contributor to stability in the region. In that regard,
Kosovo has the highest number of returnees, and that
in record time. More than 1 million citizens of Kosovo,
expelled violently by the State apparatus of Slobodan
Milošević, have returned to the homes and property
that were totally destroyed in the summer of 1999. In
that context, I am deeply disturbed that some Kosovar
Serbs, citizens of Kosovo and members of the KSF,
were forced to resign due to immense systemic pressure
imposed upon them by elements of the Serbian State.
I was moved by the stories of some soldiers from
the Serbian community about the intimidation imposed
upon them by the Serbian State. Their families were
attacked and their homes hit with grenades, and many
of them held for hours on end by Serbian police as they
sought to travel to Serbia. This is the terrible truth. I
feel awful for them, because I know that the majority of

S/PV. 8427

them handed in their uniforms with tears in their eyes
and broken hearts. Nevertheless, I want to guarantee to
everyone that we will never back down from our even
stronger commitment to including all communities in
Kosovo’s army. This is an army that will serve all of
Kosovo’s citizens, without exception. The only threats
to our region are irrational calls for war and conflict
coming from our northern neighbour.
In addition, allow me to assure the Council that
Kosovo will respect every existing international
agreement, including the letter sent to the Secretary
General of NATO regarding cooperation with the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). We will continue to cooperate
very closely with NATO. All our efforts will be
coordinated with NATO. The establishment of Kosovo’s
army should not be perceived as an attempt to duplicate
the NATO Mission in Kosovo. On the contrary, the
decision of the Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo
to establish the army is a direct function of capacitybuilding that will make our country better able to
contribute to local security and beyond. Our aim is
to shift the paradigm from a country that has been a
consumer of security to one that becomes a contributor
to peace and stability. However, this will in no way
interfere with NATO’s current mission in Kosovo.
Kosovo’s armed forces will, in fact, complement this
mission. Even today in Kosovo, 20 years later, KFOR is
treated as a saviour mission. The citizens of my country
respect NATO members as heroes; they still hand them
out flowers and they will be grateful to them forever.
I am proud to be the President of the most proNATO and pro-European Union country in the world.
Despite the difficulties and injustices to which we are
subject, especially in the visa liberalization process,
we as a country stand unshaken in our orientation. We
do not have and do not seek any another alternative.
The future of Kosovo and our region is within the
Euro-Atlantic structures. This inevitably leads us to
the essence of today’s debate. The problem that our
northern neighbour has today is not Kosovo’s army but
rather the existence of Kosovo itself as an independent
and sovereign State. These circumstances make the
dialogue between our two countries crucial.
Without a dialogue or a final agreement, we will
become countries that produce endless and unnecessary
drama for domestic electoral consumption, to the
detriment of the future of our nations. I implore the
Council to take a look at the abhorrent campaign
that Serbia led against Kosovo’s bid for INTERPOL

18-442977/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

membership. I should like to know who stands to benefit
from Kosovo’s lack of membership in that organization.
It is organized crime and terrorism that benefit here.
Should I demean this forum now by using the
language and methods employed by Serbia against
Kosovo? I shall not. To be frank, I feel bad about their
behaviour. It is only natural that such behaviour would
lead the Government of Kosovo to take measures with
respect to Serbian products that come into Kosovo.
However, Kosovo did not provoke the situation. That
reaction is the consequence of aggressive action on the
part of Serbia, and I want to believe that this state of
affairs will be overcome in the near future. Pristina and
Brussels are communicating intensively about the issue.
We in Kosovo remain committed to peace and
dialogue with Serbia nevertheless. To that end, a few
days ago the Parliament of Kosovo approved a resolution
on dialogue and the structure of the negotiating team,
which includes a governing coalition and representatives
of opposition parties and civil society. As long as we do
not have a final agreement that can be implemented,
situations of this kind will continue to be repeated.
Neither I nor the people of Kosovo support the conflict.
Never in our history have we instigated any conflicts,
in fact. We have always been the victims and we have
always fought for survival.
Peace does not mean having no disagreements,
but this cycle of violence is unjustifiable and must
come to an end. In democratic societies, the use of
force is a monologue, not a dialogue. It is therefore my
generation’s duty to leave behind it a region without
conflicts and in sustainable peace, a functional Balkans
in which Kosovo and Serbia, as two independent
nations, aspire to a European future. I know all too
well that for leaders, building peace is much more
challenging — more dangerous, even — than going to
war, but we have an obligation to maintain peace for our
children and the generations to come. We owe them a
future without conflict. Kosovo is ready. We are ready
for dialogue. We are ready to take tough decisions,
but decisions from which both Kosovo and Serbia will
emerge as winners. However, we are also aware that
if we do not seize this historic moment, all the parties
involved will suffer the consequences.
Two decades ago, on a mundane day much like this
one, I was in uniform, fighting the regime of Slobodan
Milošević. I am very proud of my past and that of my
fellow fighters. Today, as President of the independent
8/20

17/12/2018

State of Kosovo, I am aware that I have another big
challenge before me, which is the battle for our future,
for peace, the battle to end the century-old conflict
between our two peoples. I know that it will not be
at all easy. I know that it will require compromises
and that agreements of this kind are not very popular.
However, they are necessary. I firmly believe that an
agreement like this has the power to transform our
entire region and can shift the priorities of our people.
It would mean that no one could win votes founded on
hate and populism or be able to stoke people’s fears.
A comprehensive agreement would open the door to
new leadership, whose primary aim would be reform
and development. I truly believe in a future where
Kosovo and Serbia will sit as equals at the table of the
European family. I believe in a future where Kosovo
and Serbia’s soldiers will serve alongside one another
in peacekeeping missions around the world. I believe in
that future because I have seen the unimaginable unfold
before my eyes.
I am inspired every day by Kosovan athletes who
teach us that a comeback is possible after defeat and that
our flag can be flown even in countries that have not yet
recognized our country. I am inspired by the journalists
who criticize me daily but who also make me a better
President every day. I am inspired by the citizens of
Kosovo who, despite all the pain, suffering and loss
that they have endured, never gave up on the values and
principles that still stand — liberty, equality, justice
and dignity. I believe in a European future for Kosovo
and our region, a future without intrigue, conflict or
hatred. It is up to us to bring about that future, in the
coming weeks and months, through a peaceful, final,
legally binding agreement between Kosovo and Serbia,
without borders along ethnic lines or exchanges of
peoples, but rather through their reciprocal recognition
of each other as independent and sovereign countries
with multi-ethnic societies.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Thaçi
for his statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to thank our colleagues
from Côte d’Ivoire for their principled position and for
convening an urgent meeting of the Security Council at
the request of Serbia and Russia in connection with the
gross violation of resolution 1244 (1999), as a result of
18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

the Pristina Assembly’s adoption of a package of laws
on the transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into
fully fledged armed forces.
We are grateful to the Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his briefing and assessments. We also
listened carefully to Mr. Hashim Thaçi’s statement.
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
the President of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Alexander
Vučić, and we share his serious concerns about the
situation in Kosovo and the illegitimacy surrounding
the decision to establish the so-called Kosovo armed
forces. We are referring not only to the illegitimacy
relating to the decision itself, but also with regard to
the assessments of it, such as we have already heard
in the references to the statement of the European
Union (EU) eight, and which I think we will hear about
more than once at this meeting, from those for whom
international law no longer exists. They are now acting
on the basis of a so-called rules-based order into which
they fit any illegitimate decisions, adapting them to suit
political expediency. Today we will hear painstaking
explanations of why resolution 1244 (1999) has nothing
to do with the so-called sovereign decision by the
Parliament of a so-called sovereign State.
As the years have gone by, we have often warned
that rather than being resolved, the problems in
Kosovo, alas, are accumulating. We have constantly
pointed out that the situation in the region is extremely
unstable and could spin out of control at any moment.
We have demanded intensive international monitoring
based on the Security Council’s direction. Our calls
have been ignored. They have regularly covered up
for Pristina, and as a result, the situation has taken an
explosive turn. Pristina’s provocative, five-year refusal
to fulfil a key agreement with Belgrade on the creation
of a community of Serbian municipalities of Kosovo
has been compounded by other gross violations. The
decision to transform the Kosovo Security Force into the
Kosovo armed forces is a blatant violation of resolution
1244 (1999), which, as the Secretary-General has again
underscored, remains the fundamental international
legal basis for the Kosovo peace settlement. The
resolution includes a totally clear requirement that all
Kosovo Albanian armed groups must be demilitarized.
The only presence on Kosovo’s territory that it authorizes
is that of exclusively multinational contingents under
international control.
No progress is being made in Kosovo on creating
conditions conducive to a political settlement. The

S/PV. 8427

EU mediation mission is getting no practical results.
Unlawful incidents and violent raids by the Kosovo
police special forces on the Serbian population in the
north have become more frequent. Ensuring reliable
protection for Orthodox buildings in Kosovo is a
major problem, and the takeover of Serbian Orthodox
Church property by Kosovars continues. The region
is still an attractive area for recruiting radicals, and
terrorists from Syria and Iraq have been fleeing there.
Refugees and internally displaced persons are still
returning to the region at unsatisfactorily low levels. A
genuine humanitarian crisis threatened when Pristina
introduced punishing customs duties on goods from
central Serbia. Against that backdrop, the emergence
of the Kosovo Armed Forces represents a threat to
peace and security in the region through a relapse into
armed conflict.
Resolution 1244 (1999) is being flouted knowingly
and with the support of leading Western countries
as well as through their direct connivance, including
through the Kosovo Force (KFOR), whose international
security presence in the region is based on that same
resolution. We have been compelled to conclude that
the Kosovo Force takes an exceedingly selective
approach to implementing its mandate. Only a few
days ago, on the pretext of ensuring security in the
Serb-populated northern regions of Kosovo, KFOR
conducted large-scale exercises there using dozens of
armoured vehicles. What it looked like was another
episode of the intimidation of Kosovo Serbs, while
there have been no such exercises in Albanian areas
even in cases of overt provocations and violence, such
as on 7 and 8 September, when Albanian radicals
blocked roads with barriers in order to prevent Serbia’s
President Vučić from visiting Serbs in a village in the
area. KFOR failed to respond adequately to that clear
violation of freedom of movement, not to mention the
fact that it involved a high-level official.
Under KFOR there has been a long-standing policy
of providing systematic training for Albanian personnel
in the Kosovo Security Force that exceeds KFOR’s
remit. We are not talking about dealing with problems
in the areas of rescue or civil defence but about training
and instruction of a purely military nature. This goes
on at Camp Bondsteel, among other places, which was
originally established for peacebuilding purposes as
part of the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Its operations are totally untransparent. We insist
that KFOR present the Council with a comprehensive

18-442979/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

and complete report on how Camp Bondsteel is being
used, as well as on the personnel deployed there and its
material and technical resources.
The European Union’s position is extremely
disappointing, in that on the one hand, it claims that it
is an objective mediator, and on the other, it pretends
to ignore the unlawful creation of a Kosovan army.
The EU’s response to Pristina’s latest decision can only
be called toothless. Its irresponsible, two-faced policy
has crossed a dangerous line. The emergence of a socalled Kosovo army is an existential danger to Serbs.
And we can see why. Suffice it to say that the ranks
of the Kosovo Security Force include more than a few
former militants from the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity during the conflict, whose victims were
Serbs, minorities and dissenting Albanians. Those who
committed crimes that included kidnapping people
and removing their organs in order to sell them on
the black market are still avoiding accountability. It is
increasingly difficult to take seriously the promises we
keep hearing year after year that the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers for prosecuting the KLA’s crimes will
supposedly ensure the triumph of justice.
What is particularly worrying is the possibility
that armed Kosovo-Albanian units could invade
Serb-populated areas in the north in order to enforce
Pristina’s control over the entire territory of Kosovo.
Such a scenario could lead to bloodshed and become
a real disaster that could send the Balkans back into
a period of turmoil and kill the efforts to stabilize the
region that the international community has made in
recent decades. Unfortunately, we have no confidence
in the international security presence’s ability and
preparedness to prevent such a blitzkrieg.
We have taken note of the continuing highly
responsible and restrained response on the part of
the Serbian leadership in urging Kosovo Serbs to
remain calm and not react to provocations, as well
as its efforts to reduce tensions solely by diplomatic
means. However, we also believe it is essential to take
extremely seriously the Serbian leadership’s message
that if the Kosovo-Albanian security forces invade the
north or attempt pogroms against Serbs in other parts
of Kosovo, Belgrade will protect them. In our view,
the international security presence bears the chief
responsibility for providing that protection.
10/20

17/12/2018

In addition, in accordance with paragraph 9 (b) of
resolution 1244 (1999), the Kosovo Force is obliged to
take immediate and thorough measures to demilitarize
and disband any armed Kosovo-Albanian units. As
for the decision on creating the so-called Kosovo
Armed Forces in violation of the resolution, it should
be immediately rescinded. We hope that within the
framework of its mandate, the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) will continue to play an active
role in ensuring the conditions for a peaceful and
normal life for all of Kosovo’s residents, protecting and
promoting human rights and facilitating the political
process. We also hope that the European Union will use
its capabilities, including its presence in Kosovo and
the mechanisms of its Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Pristina, to prevent the situation
from deteriorating further, and will help to enable
the revocation of the Kosovo-Albanian authorities’
provocative decisions on trade tariffs and armed forces.
In conclusion, we should point to the
counterproductive attempts by Pristina’s patrons to
conceal the deteriorating situation in Kosovo from the
international community and create obstacles to the
regular consideration of the Kosovo problem in the
Security Council. And that kind of policy is one of the
reasons for the current crisis situation there, because
it gives the Kosovo authorities a feeling that anything
is permitted and no one is accountable. The Council
must continue to be focused on the situation in Kosovo.
The quarterly cycle for the Secretary-General’s reports
on UNMIK’s activity should be strictly observed.
We cannot exclude the possibility that if the adverse
trends escalate it could be necessary to convene new
emergency meetings of the Security Council. God
forbid that should be the case, needless to say.
We would like to draw the Secretariat’s attention to
the importance of carefully monitoring the developing
situation and reporting on it to the Security Council.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would first
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing and welcome President Vučić
of the Republic of Serbia and President Thaçi of the
Republic of Kosovo to the Council. I will focus on three
points — first, the sovereignty of Kosovo; secondly,
the background to the current tensions; and thirdly, the
need for a resumption of the European Union (EU)facilitated dialogue.
18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

On my first point, I want to emphasize that
the Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports the
independence and sovereignty of the Republic of
Kosovo. As a sovereign State, Kosovo has the right to
create its own institutions. That said, we believe that
the transformation of the Kosovo Security Force should
be a transparent and inclusive process, in line with
Kosovo’s Constitution. The Netherlands encourages
Kosovo to work on the transformation in consultation
with NATO and other relevant international actors. The
inclusivity of the process is important to ensuring that
the 10-year transition has the support of all in Kosovo
and especially its non-majority communities. More
broadly, Kosovo’s path towards further normalization
should be an orderly process in which the Council’s
resolutions and decisions should be respected and fully
implemented by all players on the ground.
That brings me to my second point, the background
to the current tensions. The decision by the Kosovo
authorities to start the transformation of the Kosovo
Security Force comes at a sensitive moment. We have
recently seen both sides take a series of steps that
have not been conducive to a climate furthering the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
Almost two decades after the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999), Belgrade and Pristina have made significant
progress in reaching agreement on important issues.
Yet they still have to agree on many aspects of their
future relationship. Understandably, the process is not
easy and has its ups and downs. It is also the reason why
we still have to spend time in the Council discussing
the situation in Kosovo, even if it no longer constitutes
an imminent or grave threat to international peace and
security. We call on both countries to act responsibly
and to work to calm the situation.
That brings me to my third point. It is essential
that both sides resume the EU-facilitated dialogue as
soon as possible, without preconditions, and implement
the agreements made in the past. They should realize
that the status quo is not a long-term solution. Security
depends on good-neighbourly relations. Everyone in
the region stands to gain from political normalization,
more economic integration and fewer trade barriers.
It is key for Kosovo to improve the daily lives of
all its citizens. The implementation of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union,
as well as of the European reform agenda, is crucial
to achieving that lofty goal. Both parties should avoid
unilateral actions that go against the spirit of dialogue

S/PV. 8427

and undermine mutual trust. We therefore regret the
fact that some members of the Council insisted on
having a public debate today rather than an interactive
dialogue.
In conclusion, we ask Serbia and Kosovo to
demonstrate their political will and commitment to
normalization by continuing to work in the framework
of the EU-facilitated dialogue.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his very informative
presentation, and I especially want to welcome President
Vučić and President Thaçi to our meeting.
This meeting comes in the wake of recent decisions
by Kosovo’s Parliament on the evolution of the Kosovo
Security Force over the next 10 years. In the light of the
issues that Mr. Lacroix has just outlined for us, France
has taken note of those decisions but, as the SecretaryGeneral has done, wishes to express its concern about
the possibility that the situation could deteriorate.
We deplore the fact that since the beginning of the
year, and particularly in the past few weeks, several
incidents and unilateral decisions have affected the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. I am referring
specifically to the Kosovo Government’s decision to
impose a 100 per cent tax on products from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which, like the European
Union, we call on the Kosovo authorities to rescind.
More generally, and like the Secretary-General, we ask
both sides to exercise the greatest possible restraint and
urge them to do all they can to resolve their disputes
through dialogue in order to limit the risk of escalation.
Two principles must guide our views on this
subject — respect for Kosovo’s sovereignty, which is
the basis for the decision to initiate the transition of
the Kosovo Security Force, and strict respect for the
remit of the Kosovo Force (KFOR), as established by
resolution 1244 (1999). While it seems legitimate to us
that Kosovo, which we recognize as a State, should be
able to acquire an armed force, this is not a good time
to enact such laws, because it is likely to damage the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina at a moment
when it is more necessary than ever. We also deplore
the fact that the laws were not enacted in concert
with NATO and did not go through the constitutional
process. Finally, we hope that the Kosovo Security
Force’s deployment to the north of the country follows
the current arrangements, which stipulate that such

18-4429711/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

deployment can take place only with the prior agreement
of KFOR.
The implications for the stability of the region of a
comprehensive and definitive settlement of the dispute
between Serbia and Kosovo are huge. The goal of
advancing towards a comprehensive and legally binding
agreement normalizing their relations, endorsed by
both sides at the highest level, must remain an absolute
priority. It is therefore crucial to sustain and promote
efforts to that end and ensure a sustainable environment
that fosters progress in that direction. In that regard, we
encourage the leaders of both countries to resume the
demanding path of dialogue as soon as possible and to
demonstrate the essential spirit of responsibility and
political will. Each party must refrain from any action,
statement or measure likely to exacerbate tensions and
undermine the spirit of normalization.
Beyond the urgent need for regional stabilization and
reconciliation for current generations, everyone must
look decisively to the future with a view to overcoming
the difficulties of today. High Representative Federica
Mogherini, whose mediation efforts France supports,
reminded both parties of that on 8 November. Our
authorities at the highest level fully support the efforts
to make progress in the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. Only by fully normalizing their relations will
they be able to realize their European prospects, and
that is the shared compass that should guide and unite
them. That is where their future lies, and it is a shared
future.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the UnderSecretary-General for his briefing. I also listened very
carefully to what President Vučić and President Thaçi
said today.
We believe that Kosovo’s development of its
own armed forces is within its sovereign right as
a self-governing independent State, and we urge
Kosovo to do it — and on this I agree with the French
representative — in close consultation with NATO
and the wider international community. I note from
Kosovo’s announcement that this development is to
take place over the course of 10 years.
Since resolution 1244 (1999) was adopted, Kosovo
has become an independent, self-governing State
recognized by more than 100 members of the United
Nations, and its decision to extend the mandate of
the Kosovo Security Force should be viewed in that
context. The United Kingdom’s interpretation of
12/20

17/12/2018

resolution 1244 (1999) is that it does not — I repeat, it
does not — contain anything that precludes the future
transition of the mandate of the Kosovo Security Force.
In fact, I reread it at lunch time. I then went on to
read the document that followed it, the constitutional
framework and the United Nations Ahtisaari plan,
the so-called Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo
Status Settlement. I can assure the Council than
nothing in any of those three documents precludes
the transformation of the Kosovo Security Force. The
constitutional framework set up a Kosovo Protection
Force. The Constitution builds on that proposal and this
recent decision builds on the Constitution. I just wanted
to establish that. That said, we continue to urge Kosovo
to act responsibly, transparently and in consultation with
NATO allies, and to uphold its existing commitments to
arrangements with the Kosovo Force. What President
Thaçi said about his assurances today in that respect
is welcome, but needless to say we expect to see it put
into action.
I have noted the claim that the transition of the
Kosovo Security Force represents a threat to the KosovoSerb community. That claim is not borne out by Kosovo’s
genuine efforts to make the Force a multi-ethnic force,
as NATO allies have requested, and we regret that those
efforts have been undermined by external pressure.
We encourage the Kosovo Government to continue its
outreach to the Kovoso-Serb community in order to
allay anxieties. It has been a long time since the Council
visited Kosovo, but I was on one of the earlier trips,
during which we visited the Kosovo-Serb community
in the north, where we heard from many people — but
not all of them — who supported the account given by
President Vučić and the Russian Ambassador today.
Nor do we share Belgrade’s perception that the Kosovo
Security Force’s expansion in size and mandate over
the next decade risks jeopardizing regional stability.
We look to Belgrade to respond in a measured way,
including in public statements.
In the light of that, the United Kingdom considers
the assertions by senior politicians and officials about
the possible use of force by Serbia unhelpful, and
we reject the idea that even the notion of such use of
force might be floated. I think it is irresponsible that
one member of the Council has repeated them today. I
agree with that member that there is a risk of a return to
turmoil, but it is not caused by that decision. It is caused
by those outside Kosovo who would seek to exploit it
for their own ends. However, I take encouragement
18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

S/PV. 8427

from hearing about Russian support for NATO today,
which I think may be a first in this Chamber.

President Thaçi to the Council. We thank them for their
remarks and for joining us here today.

As other speakers have noted, the fundamental
reason that we are here and that those problems persist
is because of the lack of normalization. At every step,
settlements and progress have been blocked. The United
Nations, the European Union (EU), the United States
and Russia have tried and, unfortunately, at every stage
of trying to settle the issue, there has been a blockage,
which I am sorry to say has come from Belgrade. The
only way forward is through normalization, and we look
to both Kosovo and Serbia to make progress in that way.
We note with optimism the resolution that the Assembly
of Kosovo adopted on 15 December establishing a crossparty negotiating team. I join my French colleague and
others in urging both sides to return to negotiations
through the EU-facilitated dialogue. Progress on the
dialogue is vital to stability, security and prosperity in
the two countries in the region. The final agreement
itself must also contribute to local, regional and global
stability. The two sides have to keep in mind that any
proposals they put forward through the negotiations
must enhance the safety and security of all — I repeat,
all — their citizens.

The United States reaffirms its support for a
gradual, transparent transition to a professional,
multi-ethic NATO interoperable force that serves and
reflects all of Kosovo’s communities. The legislation
passed by Kosovo’s Assembly last week is fully in line
with resolution 1244 (1999). It is Kosovo’s sovereign
right to establish and maintain an armed force.
Resolution 1244 (1999) authorized the establishment
of an international security presence in Kosovo and
charged it with demilitarizing the Kosovo Liberation
Army and other armed Kosovo-Albanian groups.
Those provisions do not apply to the Kosovo Security
Force. The Force is neither the Kosovo Liberation
Army nor an armed Kosovo-Albanian group. It is
a separate, multi-ethnic force that was established
following Kosovo’s 2008 independence, and which the
International Court of Justice clearly ruled in 2010 does
not violate international law or resolution 1244 (1999).

Obviously, I do not find it surprising, since I took
part in it, that a statement was delivered today on behalf
of the EU-8, the five EU members of the Security
Council — France, Netherlands, Poland, Sweden and
the United Kingdom — along with Italy, Belgium and
Germany. But the reason it is not surprising is because
it is our region. We still care very deeply about what
happens in the Western Balkans. While EU countries
and the EU itself have put a great deal of effort
into helping stability and security there, it is their
future — the future of Kosovo and Serbia. As other
speakers have done today, I urge them to take all the
steps necessary to normalize their relations through the
EU-facilitated dialogue. I call on all their leaders, who
have been elected to represent their people’s interests,
to enable that to happen. Both countries must now focus
on a sustainable normalization agreement through the
dialogue, an agreement that enhances security, enjoys
popular domestic support and benefits both countries.
We stand ready, as we have always done, to support
such an agreement.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
for his briefing today and welcome President Vučić and

The vote on Kosovo on 14 December brings
no immediate change to the structure, mission or
operations of the Force. Rather, it was a first step,
representing the beginning of the practical, ongoing
work of building a multi-ethnic force, in accordance
with the Government of Kosovo’s 10-year transition
plan. We call on the Government of Kosovo to continue
its close coordination with NATO allies and partners
in engaging in outreach to its minority communities
now and throughout the years-long process ahead. We
expect the Government of Kosovo to adhere reliably to
all existing arrangements and commitments regarding
troop movements and the operation of forces in Kosovo,
particularly its 2013 commitment to the NATO Secretary
General that any operations in northern Kosovo require
consultation with the Commander of the Kosovo Force.
Ultimately, however, Kosovo’s security is best served
by normalizing relations with Serbia. Dialogue should
be both countries’ overarching priority, and we urge
both to remove any barriers and not to take provocative
actions that prevent a return to the negotiating table and
reaching a comprehensive normalization agreement.
We encourage both Kosovo and Serbia to take
immediate steps to lower tensions and create the
conditions for rapid progress on the normalization
dialogue. We urge them to recognize the value of fully
committing to normalization, which will bring great
benefits to the people, the economies and the peace
and security of both countries. Mutual recognition and

18-4429713/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

normalized relations between Serbia and Kosovo are
the future, and all sides will benefit from recognizing
and embracing that reality.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
welcomes His Excellency President Aleksandar Vučić
and Mr. Hashim Thaçi to the Chamber and thanks
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for providing us with
an overview of recent developments.
We would like to remind the Council that one month
ago in this very Chamber (see S/PV.8399), we expressed
our concern about the possible transformation of the
Kosovo Security Force into armed forces. Now we are
hearing about the recent decision to adopt three laws
initiating such a transition. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s position on the matter and his call to all
the parties concerned to exercise restraint and refrain
from actions that could lead to further setbacks in
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. That reflects the current state of affairs in
the region, which requires our continued attention as a
matter of relevance in the agenda. Our priorities in that
direction should be the continued promotion of dialogue
between the parties, as well as confidence-building
measures in the political-military, socioeconomic and
human dimensions, in compliance with resolution 1244
(1999) and subsequent documents.
Kazakhstan also supports the calls of the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Mogherini, addressed
to Pristina to remove taxes on products imported
from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as they go
against the spirit of regional cooperation and hinders
the dialogue process. Such a dialogue should be carried
out under the auspices of the European Union, with
the involvement of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other relevant regional and
subregional organizations, to maintain comprehensive
and sustainable security and development in Kosovo.
In that vein, we consider it important that the parties
adhere to the agreements previously reached through
the mediation of international organizations. We believe
in the importance of ensuring peace and security in
the region. An international security presence will
contribute to the establishment of a whole-communities
safe environment, and we agree with the SecretaryGeneral on that. We stand for action within the existing
international negotiating mechanisms.
14/20

17/12/2018

Once again, we express our regret that the region
decided to go ahead with the formation of an army. To
that end, it is highly important to underline that any
unilateral steps outside of the existing international
negotiating mechanisms could raise tensions, constitute
a serious threat to peace and jeopardize overall stability
in the region. Kazakhstan urges all interested parties
to continue implementing their commitments in a good
spirit of mutual respect, understanding and compromise
for the sake of long-lasting peace and stability in that
part of the world.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to welcome the presence of the
President of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, who is in
attendance and has spoken at this meeting. I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing. I also carefully
listened to the statement by Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
China has been closely following the Kosovo issue
and has noted the complex dynamics at play in Kosovo’s
current security situation. Resolution 1244 (1999) is an
important legal basis for settling the Kosovo issue. It is
China’s consistent position that the parties reaching a
mutually acceptable solution through dialogue within
the framework of the relevant Council resolutions is the
best approach to a solution to the Kosovo issue. The
parties concerned should refrain from any rhetoric or
action that could complicate or escalate the situation
and should create enabling conditions for a lasting
solution to the Kosovo issue.
China respects Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, understands Serbia’s legitimate concerns
about the Kosovo issue and commends Serbia’s efforts
to find a political solution to the matter. China hopes
that the parties concerned will continue their pragmatic,
constructive dialogue, remain firmly committed to a
political solution, implement the agreements reached,
gradually enhance mutual trust, meet each other
halfway and continue to build consensus with an eye to
a lasting solution that is acceptable to all parties.
Tolerance,
reconciliation
and
harmonious
coexistence among all ethnic groups in Kosovo are in
line with the fundamental interests and development
needs of all the populations. We hope all the parties
concerned will put the well-being of the people first,
protect the legitimate rights and interests of all ethnic
groups, promote their economic and social development
18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

and jointly safeguard peace, stability and prosperity in
the Balkans.
The Security Council should remain seized of the
Kosovo issue and encourage the parties concerned to
engage in genuine dialogue in good faith so we can
continue to play a constructive role in the search for a
proper solution to the Kosovo issue.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his briefing to the Security Council. I
would like to recognize and express my appreciation
for the presence of Presidents Thaçi and Vučić, who are
in the Chamber today.
As we see it, the main threats to stability in the
Western Balkans are the pending issues related to the
status of Kosovo. They are holding back the European
Union (EU) integration process, which in turn is
the main driver of stability in the region, both for
Serbia and for Kosovo. The focus of the international
community must be on insisting that the parties reach
a comprehensive and legally binding agreement that
contributes to regional stability. The international
community should also focus on offering support to
that process.
With regard to the recent legislation passed by
the Kosovo Assembly on the Kosovo Security Force,
in principle that is a matter for the sovereign State of
Kosovo. At the same time, we — as do others — strongly
encourage Pristina to ensure that the transformation
of its security force over the next 10 years takes place
through a transparent and inclusive process, in line with
the Constitution and in close coordination with NATO
and its partners. It is important that all communities
be associated with that exercise, so as to ensure that
the transition eventually receives overall support in
Kosovo.
Over the past weeks and months, the steps taken
by both sides have not contributed to good-neighbourly
relations and a climate conducive to the normalization
of relations. It is important that all sides refrain from
actions and statements that might increase tensions. We
call on both parties to adhere to regional agreements,
including free trade agreements.
We have recently seen a renewed commitment from
both Belgrade and Pristina to engage in the normalization
dialogue facilitated by the European Union. The
dialogue must continue without preconditions. It is

S/PV. 8427

the only path to a sustainable political and inclusive
solution for the region. In that regard, we welcome the
recent resolution of the Kosovo Parliament establishing
a cross-party team for the dialogue, with the aim of
creating a unified platform. We underline the need for
the full and effective participation of women in the
dialogue, as well as consultations with civil society,
including women’s organizations.
The future of both Serbia and Kosovo lies within
the European Union. Our message to the two Presidents
present here is that both Pristina and Belgrade need
to implement commitments and pursue the dialogue
process with constructive engagement and dedication.
Now is the time to show courageous and visionary
leadership. If they put the choice of confrontation
or cooperation to their people, I am sure that the
people will support the latter, as they understand that
cooperation is what is needed to bring about peace and
prosperity in the region.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our thanks for the convening of
this meeting and for the briefing by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix. We would also like to welcome the presence of
the President of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, and the
President of Kosovo, Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
Peru supports the peacebuilding process in Kosovo,
the normalization of relations between Pristina and
Belgrade and stability in the Balkan subregion. To that
end, we consider it paramount that all parties remain
committed to the fulfilment and implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels agreements,
and that the Council remain united and attentive in the
exercise of its role as guarantor.
Last month, when the Council was considering
the legislative initiative concerning the transformation
of the Kosovo Security Force into a regular army
(see S/PV.8399), we expressed the need for careful
evaluation. We underline the need to take into account
the presence and role of the Kosovo Force, as well as the
impact of the measure on the political dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade. In the same vein, we agree with
the Secretary-General that the three laws adopted by
the Kosovar Parliament are not in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels agreements,
which, as we recall, provided for the establishment of
an international security force led by NATO and of the
Kosovo Police Force, respectively. Peru calls on all

18-4429715/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

parties to exercise restraint with a view to promoting
détente and constructive dialogue, in accordance with
applicable international law and the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, President
of the Republic of Serbia, for his presence at the
Security Council today. I also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Hashim Thaçi, President of the Republic of Kosovo.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his briefing. I will now make the following
statement with regard to the issue at hand.
We recognize that the transition of the Kosovo
Security Force is in principle a matter for Kosovo
to decide. However, we stress that it is of the utmost
importance that the future armed forces of Kosovo be
formed through an inclusive and gradual process, while
respecting the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
Then and only then can they serve the security interests
of all communities.
In our assessment, recent developments do not in
and of themselves constitute a threat to international
peace. We trust that all political actors in the region
will act responsibly and refrain from any statements or
actions that may lead to escalation. We welcome the
restraint shown thus far.
We also reiterate our conviction that lasting stability
in the region can be achieved only through continued
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina under the
auspices of the European Union, which should lead
to a legally binding agreement on the comprehensive
normalization of relations.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his briefing on the
latest developments in Kosovo. I also welcome the
presence of the President of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, at today’s meeting, and thank
him for his remarks. I also thank Mr. Hashim Thaçi for
his statement.
Our position on the issue of Kosovo has always
been consistent and clear. We would like to reaffirm
our support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia and for the peaceful and amicable resolution
of all outstanding issues between Belgrade and
Pristina, in accordance with the Brussels Agreement.
We expressed our views on this issue at the briefing we
had last month (see S/PV.8399).
16/20

17/12/2018

With regard to the latest developments, we take
note of the statement issued by the Secretary-General
expressing concern about the adoption by the Assembly
of Kosovo of three draft laws aimed at strengthening
the role and capacity of the Kosovo Security Force
(SG/SM/19408). As the Secretary-General rightly
underscored, resolution 1244 (1999) provides the sole
legal framework for the international security presence,
the Kosovo Force, which was entrusted with the
responsibility to ensure a safe and secure environment
in Kosovo. Therefore, any action taken that is contrary
to what is stipulated in resolution 1244 (1999) would
not help but to undermine efforts aimed at finding a
solution to the Kosovo issue through dialogue. That is
why we echo the call made by the Secretary-General
to the parties to exercise restraint and refrain from
actions that could raise tensions and cause further
setbacks in the European Union-facilitated dialogue for
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina.
Ethiopia fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
has been undertaking in discharging its mandates in
line with resolution 1244 (1999). We also recognize
the significant role of the European Union on matters
concerning Kosovo.
In conclusion, the security and stability of Kosovo
and the region will ultimately be ensured when there is
political will and resolve on the part of both sides. In
that respect, we once again encourage both parties to
remain committed to dialogue and negotiation with the
view to finding a mutually acceptable solution.
Mr. Edjang Nnaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express our
delegation’s welcome to His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar
Vučić, President of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi,
who honour the Security Council with their presence
at this important briefing on Kosovo. We also thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his detailed briefing on
recent developments.
As we have made clear in all of our statements
in this Chamber, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
always advocates recourse to dialogue, consultation
and negotiation to settle disputes and conflicts. In line
with that position, the delegation of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea regrets the problems that have arisen
between Kosovo and Serbia, and we call on the parties
18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

to remain calm and refrain from making statements
or doing anything that might lead to an escalation and
undermine stability and security, not only locally but in
the Balkans in general.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Serbia, and we are grateful for its
continued efforts aimed at finding a political, inclusive
and peaceful solution to the question of Kosovo. We
also encourage Pristina to refrain from actions that
could stifle regional cooperation, increase tensions
and damage the trust generated between the different
communities, thereby jeopardizing the entire effort of
the international community to find a peaceful solution
to the crisis in Kosovo.
We also encourage the parties to intensify their
efforts aimed at improving regional cooperation,
safeguarding good relations of trust among communities
and respecting the implementation of agreements
reached and the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Furthermore, we urge the countries that
support the parties to the conflict to do everything
possible to ensure that Belgrade and Pristina return to
the negotiating table as the only way to find a lasting
solution to the dispute between them.
Finally, we appreciate the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
and the support it provides to Kosovo’s communities,
as well as regional and international actors and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
with a view to fulfilling the mandate of resolution 1244
(1999).
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing. We also thank
the President of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, for his
remarks, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi for his statement.
Bolivia calls for the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), including respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic
of Serbia. The resolution remains in full force, for
which supervision by the international community
is necessary. That resolution provides the only legal
framework for the international security presence,
which in this case is fulfilled by the Kosovo Force,
responsible for ensuring a safe environment in the
province. Any obstacle preventing the Kosovo Force

S/PV. 8427

from fulfilling its responsibilities would be inconsistent
with the resolution I have just mentioned.
In that context, the adoption of three draft laws by
the Assembly of Kosovo aimed at strengthening the role
and the capacity of the Kosovo Security Force is cause
for alarm. We reiterate that any attempt to transform
the Kosovo Security Force into an armed force would
run counter to resolution 1244 (1999) and international
law. We call on the Kosovo authorities to refrain from
that action.
We urge all interested parties to act with restraint
and to refrain from undertaking such actions, which
could increase tensions and lead to a new setback in
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union for
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. Furthermore, we also view with concern
the increase in import tariffs by Kosovo against
Serbia, which can be seen as another provocation that
undermines that dialogue.
We believe that it is important that the parties comply
with the commitments made in that context. Along
those lines, we take note of the efforts of the European
Union and the mediation of its High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy in order to make
progress in implementing the existing agreements.
Finally, we urge the parties to work towards a
peaceful solution through dialogue through a firm
commitment, based on confidence-building measures,
to using good offices to ease tensions and peaceful
means to seek consensus-based solutions, in line with
the obligation to negotiate, as stipulated by international
law. Such means should make it possible to preserve
peace, while promoting political dialogue and respect
for human rights, taking into account the well-being of
the region and its population.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, President of the
Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, President of the Republic of Kosovo, at today’s
meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his valuable briefing.
The State of Kuwait acknowledges the sensitivity
of the measure taken by the Assembly of Kosovo. We
reaffirm that every State has the full, sovereign and
inherent right to establish its national institutions in

18-4429717/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

line with its national Constitution and legislation. We
recognize that the decisions recently taken by the Kosovo
Parliament could be a source of concern to the friendly
Republic of Serbia, given the recent developments in
the relationship between the two States.
We hope that such developments do not undermine
the political process under the auspices of the European
Union. We believe that the decision of the Republic of
Kosovo does not contravene resolution 1244 (1999). We
thank the President of Kosovo for the reassurances that
he provided in the Chamber earlier, in which he stated
that the measure does not constitute any threat to the
minorities in Kosovo or the neighbouring States.
We call on both sides to exercise self-restraint and
to take all necessary measures to calm the situation
and to decrease tension. We urge them to continue to
deal with issues of concern through dialogue and to
demonstrate the necessary political will in order to
ensure the full normalization of relations between the
two sides.
Kuwait affirms that the high-level European
Union-facilitated dialogue in Brussels between
Belgrade and Pristina remains the most appropriate
framework for settling all outstanding issues between
the two sides. It is the appropriate means for reaching
lasting, just and consensual solutions.
We would like to reiterate our full support to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo. We highly value the vital role
that the United Nations has played in helping Kosovo
to build its institutions and to implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
1244 (1999). We call on both sides to fully implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We also
welcome the statement by the Secretary-General in
that regard.
In conclusion, it is important that the international
community continues to make efforts in order to urge
Pristina and Belgrade to overcome their differences and
reach consensual, fair and sustainable solutions that are
acceptable to both sides and lead to peace, security and
stability in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
18/20

17/12/2018

My delegation welcomes the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, President of the
Republic of Serbia, at this briefing on the recent
developments in the situation in Kosovo. We also
welcome the presence of President Hashim Thaçi. We
also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing.
The vote on 14 December on three draft laws
aimed at transforming the Kosovo Security Force
into a national army has provoked a response from
the international community. However, that initiative,
which falls within the sovereign right of Kosovo, could
have implications for the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
Kosovo Force. In fact, the implementation of those laws
could be incompatible with the provisions of resolution
1244 (1999), which is the only legal framework for the
presence of those international forces in Kosovo.
That decision takes place in the context of a
stalemate in the negotiations led by Mrs. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, with a view to
normalizing relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
My country therefore calls on all parties to
exercise restraint and to avoid unilateral acts that could
exacerbate the already visible tensions in the region.
We urge them to swiftly return to the negotiating
table in order to ease the tensions resulting from the
recent initiatives and to create conditions conducive to
resolving all disputed issues between the two parties.
In the light of its experience, Côte d’Ivoire is convinced
that the pursuit of peace through dialogue is the
only viable way to restore lasting stability and goodneighbourly relations in the Balkans.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls on all stakeholders
to engage in the European Union-facilitated negotiations
in good faith and without conditions in order to give
peace a chance.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Vučić, President of the Republic of Serbia, has
asked for the floor to make a further statement
Mr. Vučić (Serbia): Once again, I am very thankful
to all participants and profoundly grateful to all those
who wanted at least to listen to us. I think that it
was very obvious that no one could refer to a single
provision, article or paragraph from which Pristina
18-44297

17/12/2018

Kosovo

derives its right to form its armed forces. Some people
said that that was not banned by resolution 1244 (1999)
but no one cited a single regulation, rule or article from
which Pristina derived its right to create its own army.
There is a very simple reason for that, since that article
or regulation does not exist. At the same time, I am very
grateful to the many people who, regardless of their
political attitude towards the Kosovo issue, wanted to
be objective and to analyse the reality.
I want to refer to just a few arguments used by
Pristina and some of the Ambassadors in the Chamber.
The representative of Pristina said that terrible ethnic
cleansing was committed by the Serb forces. Here are
the facts.
There used to be 1.4 million Albanians in the
southern Serbian province. Today there are 1.7 million
Albanian people in Kosovo, where there used to be
220,000 Serbs. There are still between 105,000 and
106,000 Serbs living in Kosovo. Those are the numbers.
Those are the facts. Who committed ethnic cleansing?
Is there anyone who can deny those numbers? I am not
saying that we have always been absolutely right in
everything. Not at all. I have to say, however, that that
kind of biased approach is not only killing the truth, but
it is also killing real chances for reaching a compromise
between the two sides.
At the same time, I heard something that I could not
understand. At least the two representatives of Pristina
and — I believe — the United Kingdom referred to
the Ahtisaari plan. What is that plan about? When was
that plan adopted, by whom, in which organization, by
which factions and by which parties? When they do not
have sufficient arguments, as they do not have enough
facts on their side, they then refer to something that does
not exist. It has never been put in force. Are we or are
we not speaking the truth? There are no real provisions,
articles, arrangements or agreements to which they
can refer. Someone here mentioned the use of force. It
was the Ambassador of the United Kingdom. I never
mentioned that, and we did not use any kind of force,
unlike the other side. It used force against the chief
negotiator — beating him up and trying to humiliate
him — merely because he was speaking loudly about
the Kosovo problem. He carried out his notifications
in accordance with all our arrangements with Pristina.
It seems to me that it is much easier for some
countries to blame Serbia for everything. It does not
matter whether or not we did something. We did not

S/PV. 8427

impose taxes against them. We did not create any kind
of army in the north or within the Serb community. That
does not exist. We did not do anything, but we have
to be blamed because someone has to justify his own
wrong politics. And speaking about INTERPOL, the
representative of Pristina said here that only organized
crime benefited from INTERPOL’s wrong decision.
No, I want Pristina to do much better with regard to
organized crime issues, but today that is the worst place
in Europe with regard to such an important issue.
Concerning the support of the Serb community
and the so-called Kosovo armed forces, they were
coming in tears complaining that we in Serbia were
exerting great pressure on them. All 10 mayors — all
of them — from all 10 Serb-inhabited municipalities in
Kosovo referred to Mr. Thaçi’s statement and said that
he was not telling the truth and that they are absolutely
against the formation of the Kosovo armed forces. They
see the formation of the Kosovo armed forces as a grave
threat to their survival. Who knows that better than
they do?
Once again, I am profoundly grateful to all
those people who have shown their support for the
territorial integrity of Serbia and resolution 1244
(1999). At the same time, I am also thankful to those
people who — although some of them recognized
the independence of Kosovo — wanted to see things
in a very objective way. They have my promise that
Serbia will do its best to keep the peace and maintain
tranquillity and stability. As everyone knows, the
Serbian people are a very proud and dignified people,
and we just want to avoid all forms of humiliation
targeting us, which we would not allow anyone else
in the world to suffer. It does not matter how big they
are or how small we are. We will resume and carry on
our dialogue as soon as they rescind their irresponsible
decision involving those tariffs.
I am not very optimistic. I am telling the Council
that my concerns and worries are even greater today
than they were yesterday. I believe that we have acted
and reacted so far in a very serious and responsible
way, and we will continue in the same manner.
Hopefully, one day, we will be able to reach a possible
arrangement with Pristina, but recently everything
that they have done has been extremely irresponsible,
taking us backwards five, six or seven years. We need
the Council’s full support and for the United Nations to
play a larger role. We will strive to that end more than

18-4429719/20

S/PV.8427

Kosovo

ever by asking of the Council to support all processes
that will lead us to a possible arrangement.
I thank everyone once again for listening to us,
and, hopefully, nothing worse than what has happened
over recent weeks will happen in the future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; English
interpretation provided by delegation): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to address the Security Council
once again, and I thank everyone for their support
and understanding.
We cannot deny the past. We know who the victim
was, and we know who the aggressor was. There will
be no rewriting of history. The war took place in the
twentieth century, and we must accept that reality
without theatricality and look forward towards the
future. As unfounded accounts of how events unfolded
were provided, let me state several facts before
the Council.
Whether one likes it or not, the State of Serbia
killed 13,500 Albanian civilians in the Kosovo conflict.
Not one person has been accused. Serbia’s State
apparatus — its paramilitary police troops — also
raped approximately 20,000 Albanian women, with no
one accused let alone convicted. One million Albanians
were forcibly expelled from Kosovo, where 40 per cent
of the infrastructure was destroyed by Serbian State
forces. President Milošević was accused but never
convicted. There were 400 massacres of Albanians,
but not a single person has been indicted or convicted.
One hundred and sixty people were killed in the
village of Izbica alone — men, women, children and
the elderly. Two hundred and fifty civilians were killed

20/20

17/12/2018

in Krusha — again, men, women, children and the
elderly — and 64 remain missing, with no one accused
or convicted. Three hundred and sixty people — men,
women, children and the elderly — were killed in the
village of Meja, with no investigations, indictments or
convictions. In the village of Studime, 116 were killed;
again, with no one accused or convicted. The same
happened in Račak, Rezala, Gornje Obrinje and all
other massacre sites.
To those who talk about justice we say that fighters in
Kosovo were subject to justice in a number of instances,
first with the United Nations Interim Administration
in Kosovo in parallel with the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, and then with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. Twenty years
on, Kosovo wants to show the greatest level of State
responsibility by believing in truth and justice. In
partnership with the international community and the
European Union, Kosovo has established Specialist
Chambers and will cooperate with authorities in
a transparent, responsible and credible manner in
the process.
Let me also emphasize that, regardless of the fact
that we are the victims, today in Kosovo there are more
Albanians than Serbs being convicted of war crimes,
while in Serbia not a single Serb has been convicted
in any of the 400 massacres and instances of ethnic
cleansing committed against Albanians in Kosovo.
Moreover, Serbia’s Office of the Prosecutor for War
Crimes is no longer operating. I believe in the right and
just war we conducted, just as I do not question that
some fighters might have deviated from the struggle
for freedom.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

18-44297
