UNITED NATIONS

/

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS

917

FIFTEENTH YEAR
th ME~TING: 10 D~('''EMBER 1960
erne SEANCE: 10 DECEMBRE 1960

QUINZIEME ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/917) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda
Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/4381):
Urgent measures in connexion with the latest events in the Congo:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/4571 and Add.l);
Statement dated 6 December 1960 by the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics concerning the situation in
the Congo (S/4573) .....
c •

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

1
1

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/917)
1
Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1
Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par le Secretaire general
au President du Conseil de securite (S/4381):
Mesures urgentes a prendre eu egard aux derniers evenements survenus au Congo:
Note du Secretaire general (S/4571 et Add.1):
Declaration du Gouvernement de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, en date du 6 decembre 1960, concernant la
situation au Congo (S/4573) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
( 63 p...):
SjPV.917

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figz:;-€s. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

* **
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent de
lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signijie
qu'il s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

NINE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Saturday, 10 December 1960, at 3 p.m.

NEUF CENT DIX-SEPTIEME S£ANCE
Tenue a New York, le samedi 10 decembre 1960, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. V. A. ZORIN
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President: M. V. A. ZORINE (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France, Italy,
Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des Etats suivants: Argentine, Ceylan, Chine, Equateur, Etats-tJ:Jis d'Amerique,
France, Italie, Pologne, Royaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Tunisie, Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/917)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(8/4381):
Urgent measures in connexion with the latest
events in the Congo:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/4571 and
Add.I);
Statement dated 6 December 1960 by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
conclerning the situation in the Congo (S/4573).

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/917)
1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par le
Secretaire general au President du Conseil de securit6
(S/438I):
Mesures urgentes it. prendre eu egard aux derniers
evenements survenus au Congo:
Note du Secretaire general (S/4571 et Add.I);

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

Declaration du Gouvernement de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques, en date du
6 decembre 1960, concernant la situation au
Congo (S/4573).

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

Letter dated 13 Jmy 1960 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/4381)
Urgent measures in connexion with the latest events in
the Congo:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/4571 and Add.l);
Statement dated 6 December 1960 by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
concerning the situation in the Congo (S/4573)

Letire, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par le Secretaire general au President du Conseil de securite (S/4381)
Mesures urgentes a prendre eu egard aux derniers evenements survenus au Congo:
Note du Secretaire general (S/4571 et Add.l);
Declaration du Gouvernement de l'Union des RepubIiques socialistes sovietiques, en date du 6 decembre
1960, concernant la situation au Congo (S/4573)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated/rom Russian) : In accordance with previous decisions of the Security Council
I now invite the representatives of Mali, Guinea, the
Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville), Indonesia, Cameroun, Yugoslavia, India, the United Arab Republic and
Morocco to take a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation 0/ the President, Mr. Mamadou Aw
(Mali), Mr. Toure IsmaiH (Guinea), Mr. Mario Cardoso
(Congo, Leopoldville), Mr. Sukardjo Wirjopranoto (Indonesia), Mr. Joseph Owono (Cameroun), Mr. Milo
Pavicevic (Yugoslavia), Mr. Krishna Menon (India),
Mr. Mahmoud Fawzi (United Arab Republic), and
Mr. M'hammed Boucetta (Morocco), took places at
the Security Council table.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe): Conformement
aux decisions precedentes du Conseil de securite, j'invite
Ies representants du Mali, de la Guinee, du Congo
(Leopoldville), de l'Indonesie, du Cameroun, de la
Yougoslavie, de l'Inde, de la Republique arabe unie et
du Maroc a prendre place it. la table du Conseil.
Sur ['invitation du President, M. Mamadou Aw (Mali),
M. Toure Ismael (Guinee), M. Mario Cardoso (Congo
[Leopoldville]) , M. Sukardjo Wirjopranoto (Indonesie),
M. Joseph Owono (Cameroun), M. Milo Pavicevic
(Yougoslavie), M. Khrishna Menon (Inde) , M. Mahmoud Fawzi (Republique arabe unie) et M. M'hammed
Boucetta (Maroc) prennent place a la table du Conseil.
1

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian) The
Council will now begin consideration of the item on
the agenda. I call on the first speaker, Mr. Tsiang.

2. Le PRESIDENT [traduit du russe]: Le Conseil va
maintenant examiner le point qui figure a son ordre du
jour. Je donne la parole au premier orateur inscrit Sur
ma liste, M. Tsiang.

3. Mr. TSIANG (China): As Mr. Tsiang I have no
reason and in fact no right to speak before the Security
Council. It is only as the representative of China, therefore, that I now take the floor.

3. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de l'anglais]: Je n'ai
aucune raison et du reste aucun droit de prendre la
parole a titre personnel devant le Conseil de securite.
C'est donc en ma qualite de representant de la Chine
que je m'adresse a vous en ce moment.

4. The present series of meetings on the Congo is devoted
mainly to the latest events, of which I assume the most
important is the arrest of Mr. Lumumba. Although that
is the main reason for these meetings, most speakers,
beginning with the Secretary-General, have found it
necessary to review past events, for it is only with a
certain amount of review of the past that we can see
the present in its proper perspective.

4. La serie de reunions que nous tenons actuellement
sur le Congo est consacree essentiellement aux evenements les plus recents, dont le plus important est, je
pense, l'arrestation de M. Lumumba. Bien que ce soit
la la raison principale de ces reunions, la plupart des
orateurs, a commencer par le Secretaire general, ont
estime necessaire de passer en revue un certain nombre
d'evenements anterieurs - tant il est vrai que c'est
seulement en prenant quelque recul que 1'0n peut voir
le present sous son vrai jour.

5. The Security Council was requested by the representative of the Congo to intervene. The complaint of
the Republic of the Congo was that Belgium had intervened in the Congo with its militaiJ' forces. In the early
meetings of this Council I gained the general jmpression
that, at that moment, most people considered the problem of the Congo to be the problem of Belgian military
intervention. If the Belgian forces should withdraw, we
were told that the problem of the Congo would be solved.

5. Le representant du Congo a demande au Conseil
de securite d'intervenir. La plainte de la Republique
du Congo visait une intervention des forces armees
beIges au Congo. Au cours des premieres reunions du
Conseil, j'ai eu l'impression que, dans l'esprit de la
plupart des gens, le probleme du Congo se resumait a
la question de l'intervention militaire beIge. On nous a
affirme que, sj les troupes beIges se retiraient, le probleme du Congo serait resolu.

6. It was on that premise that the representative of
Tunisia introduced a draft resolution, adopted by the
Security Council [8/4387], which authorized the United
Nations to render military assistance to the Republic
of the Congo, to help the Republic to restore peace and
order in that country, so that in time the security forces
of the Republic of the Congo; with adequate technical
assistance, could be responsible for maintaining order on
their own account.

6. C'est sur cette hypothese qU'etait fonde le projet
de resolution du representant de la Tunisie adopte par
le Conseil [8/4387] qui donnait pour mission a I'Organisation des Nations Unies de fournir une assistance
militaire a la Republique du Congo afin de lui permettre
de retablir la paix et 1'0rdre, et de faire en sorte que ses
forces de securite soient bientot, grace a une assistance
technique adequate, en mesure de maintenir l'ordre par
leurs propres moyens.

7. At that moment the Government of Belgium told
the Security Council that Belgium was ready to withdraw as soon as the United Nations could take over
the responsibility, and the first phase of the United
Nations operations in the Congo was carried out on
that basis; as the United Nations Force entered the
Congo, Belgian forces withdrew. So far as that particular phase is concerned, we must consider it a substantial success. Nobody in that period criticized the SecretaryGeneral. Praise for the Secretary-General was almost
universal. My delegation joined the others in voicing
our appreciation and admiration for the work of the
Secretary-General.

7. Le Gouvernement beIge a declare alors au Conseil
de securite qu'il etait pret a retirer ses troupes aussitot
que l'ONU pourrait prendre la situation en main. C'est
sur cette base que se deroula la premiere phase de l'operation des Nations Unies au Congo. Au moment oula
Force des Nations Unies est arrivee au Congo, les
troupes beIges se sont retirees. Nous pouvons done
considerer que cette premiere phase de l'operation des
Nations Unies au Congo a ete couronnee de succes.
A ce moment-la, personne ne critiquait le Secretaire
general. Au contraire, presque tout le monde le louait,
et ma delegation s'est jointe aux autres pour exprimer
sa satisfaction et son admiration a l'egard de son travail.

8. Looking back now, we have learned that the restoration of peace and order in the Congo cannot be achieved
as simply as we had thought. It appears that the causes
of the disturbances are multiple, and Belgian military
intervention was only one of several factors involved.
Although the United Nations Force is playing its part
in the Congo, we note, to our great regret, that the
restoration of peace and order is not as complete as
we had hoped; and that is due to the innate nature of
the problem and not to any mistaken policy or operation
on the part of the United Nations.

8. Nous nous rendons compte maintenant que le
retablissement de l'ordre public au Congo n'est pas
aussi facile que nous l'avions cru. 11 apparait que les
causes de desordres sont nombreuses et que l'intervention militaire beIge n'etait qu'un des multiples facteurs
en cause. Bien que la Force des Nations Unies fasse
son devoir au Congo, nous constatons avec regret que
l'ordre n'a pas ete retabli aussi completement que nous
avions pu l'esperer; cela est dil a la nature meme du probleme et non a la politique ou a l'action des Nations
Unies.
2

9. We had a second phase, whlch we might call the
Katanga phase, that began in AUgl st. There was a threat
that the Republic of the Congo might be broken up
and civil war might break out. Fortunately, large-scale
civil war has so far been prevented; and more fortunately
still, at least the framework of Congolese unity has
been maintained.. That is no mean achievement. Civil
war is the worst of all wars. I understand why the Republic of the Congo values the maintenance of its territorial integrity '1nd unity; we have at least succeeded in
maintaining the framework of that unity. In this achievement the United Nations, under the able guidance of
the Secretary-General, made a substantial contribution.
Therefore, we should acknowledge that the second phase
of the United Nations operation in the Congo should
be considered substantially a success.

9. Une deuxieme phase, que 1'0n pourrait appeler la
phase du Katanga, a debute en aofil. La Republique
du Congo etait menacee de dislocation et il y avait un
danger de guerre civile. Heureusement, on a pu empecher
jusqu'ici que la guerre civile ne prenne trop d'extension
et heureusement aussi on a pu preserver tout au moins
l'ossature de l'unite congolaise. Ce n'est pas un maigre
resultat, car la guerre civile est la pire de toutes les guerres.
Je comprends fort Dien que la Republique du Congo
denne a preserver son unite et son integrite territoriale;
nous avons au moins reussi a maintenir le cadre de cette
unite, en grande partie grace a la precieuse contrib~tion
de I'Organisation des Nations Unies agissant sous la
conduite efficace du Secretaire general. Par consequent,
nous sommes bien obliges de reconnaitre que la deuxieme
phase de l'operation des Nations Unies au Congo a ete
un succes.

10. However, once more we have to face the fact that
separatism in the Congo is found not only in Katanga
but also in some other provinces, and it is found even
among the various regions of a single province. The
causes for such separate tendencies are multiple, and it
is not possible for the United Nations, by some miracle,
to eradicate these tendencies. However, as peace and
order are restored, and economic development proceeds,
trends towards unity will get the upper hand over the
forces of division.

10. n faut admettre toutefois que l'on rencontre
encore au Congo aes mouvemtnts separatistes dans
d'autres provinces que le Katanga et meme dans les
diverses regions d'une meme province. Les causes de ces
tendances separatistes sont multiples, et, a moins d 'un
miracle, les Natil)ns Unies seraient bien incapables de
les extirper. Toutefois, 1'0rdre public est retabli, et, a
mesure que progressera le developpement economique,
les tendances a l'unite l'emporteLont sur les forces de
division.

11. Now we come to the third phase of the problem
of the Congo. We might well call this phase the Lumumba
phase. Basically the present phase of the problem of
the Congo is a problem of political opposition. Within
what limits is opposition legitimate? Within what limits
is a government obliged to tolerate and respect opposition? This problem is most complicated and there are
no accepted standards. Countries vary greatly in dealing
with political opposition. Certain countries have practised
a liberal tradition, those countries not only tolerate
political opposition but respect it. The constitutions of
those countries provide a definite rule for official opposition, and the leader of the opposition is paid by the
government for his services, as leader of the opposition.
That is the extreme type of tolerance and respect for
opposition.

11. Nous abordons maintenant la troisieme phase de
l'afi"aire du Congo que l'on pourrait appeler la phase
Lumumba; cette phase est au fond un probleme d'opposition politique. Quelles sont les limites Iegitimes d 'une
opposition politique? Jusqu'a quel point un gouvernement a-t-il l'obligation de tolerer et de respecter les
droits de 1'0pposition? Ce probleme est extremement
difficile a resoudre et il n'existe pas de regles generalement admises en la matiere. La conduite des divers
Etats a regard de l'opposition est tres variable. Certains
suivent une tradition liberale, et non seulement tolerent,
mais encore respectent les droits de l'opposition politique; les constitutions de ces pays contiennent des dispositions speciales reglant l'activite d'une opposition
officielle, dont le chef est paye par le gouvernement en
place. C'est la le cas extreme de tolerance et de respect
des droits de l'opposition.

12. On the other hand, in more recent decades, we
have another practice in quite a number of countries,
the totalitarian practice, where opposition is not tolerated at all. Leaders of opposition are either liquidated
or purged with or without trial.

12. A l'inverse, nous avons, depuis quelques decennies,
la methode totalitaire qui est appliquee dans un certain
nombre de pays, et qui consiste a ne tolerer aucune
opposition. Les chefs de l'opposition sont ou bien liquides ou hien epures, avec ou sans proces.

13. If the United Nations is to deal with a problem
of this kind I am afraid that it will find a multitude of
opinions. In any case, whatever our preferences in this
matter may be - whether we are inclined towards the
liberal tradition or towards the totalitarian tradition it seems to me that we must acknowledge two things.
The first is that the practice of President Kasa-Vubu in
the Congo is neither that of the liberal tradition nor of
the totalitarian tradition. He seems to have followed a
middle road between the two extremes. The second is and this I should like to emphasize - that, no matter how
we feel towards the various practices' for dealing with
political opposition in a country, the United Nations
could not and should not interfere. Such interference

13. Si I'ONU doit s'occuper d'une question de ce
genre, je crains qu'elle ne se trouve en presence d'une
multitude d'opinions divergentes. De toute fa~on,
quelles que soient nos preferences en la matiere - que
nous nous sentions attires par la tradition liberale ou
par la tradition totalitaire - il semble que nous devions
au moins reconnaitre deux choses: premierement, que
le president Kasa-Vubu ne suit au Congo ni la tradition
liberale, ni la tradition totalitaire; il semble avoir choisi
un moyen terme entre ces deux extremes. Deuxiemement,
et je desire insister sur ce point, qu'abstractioll faite de
nos preferences en ce qui concerne les diverses· fa~ons
de traiter l'opposition dans un pays, l'OND ne peut
pas et ne doit pas intervenir. Une telle intervention

would be against the Charter: in fact, it would be against
international law as it exists today.

serait contraire a la Charte, et du reste aussi au droit
international tel qu'il existe aujourd'hui.

14. I am glad that on these points the representative
of Argentina, at the 914th meeting a few days ago, and
at .the last meeting the representative of Ecuador, have
made the juridical situation so clear and so convincing.
I do not feel it necessary to cover the same ground
again. I associate myself with their observations in that
part of their statements. In a problem of this kind,
concerning relations between a government and its
opposition, not only is the United Nations juridically
obliged to refrain from interference but it is politically
wiser; since any such interference by the United Nations
would open up prospects of great danger for all countries.

14. Je suis heureux que la situation juridique a cet
egard ait ete tiree au clair d'une fa~on convaincante a
la 914e seance par le representant de l'Argentine et, a
la derniere seance encor?, par le representant de I'Equateur. Je ne pense pas qu'il soit necessaire de revenir
la-dessus et je me contente done de declarer que je
m'associe pleinement a lleurs observations concernant ce
point particulier. Dans une question comme celle des
relations d'un gouvernement avec son opposition, non
seulement l'ONU est tenue juridiquement de renoncer
a toute ingerence, mais la sagesse politique le lui commande, car cette ingerence de rONU ne pourrait qu'ouvrir des perspectives tres dangereuses pour tous les pays.

15. In these circumstances, the United Nations can only
try to uphold the observance of human rights. We call
the attention of the Government of the Congo and of
all politic'll groups in that country to human rights,
because that is the kind of appeal the United Nations
wodd address to Member States. It is not because the
Congo has any particular obligation in the realm of
human rights that we maintain that appeal. It is because
the Congo, together with all the other Member States,
must observe, or try to observe, the code of human
rights.

15. Dans ces conditions, tout ce que l'ONU peut
faire est de tenter de sauvegarder le respect des droits
de l'homme. Nous attirons l'attention du Gouvernement
du Congo et de tous les groupements et partis politiques
de ce pays sur les droits de la personne humaine, parce
que c'est la le genre d'appel que l'ONU peut adresser
a tous les Etats Membres. Et ce n'est pas parce que le
Congo a des obligations particulieres dans le domaine
des droits de l'homme que nous lan~ons cet appel,
mais bien parce que, au meme titre que tous les autres
Etats Membres, il a le devoir de respecter, ou tout au
moins d'essayer de faire respecter, le code des droit:;
de l'homme.

16. For this reason my delegation believes that, in
dealing with the third phase of the Congo crisis, our
action should be limited to the upholding of human
rights. Some members ,think that such action is almost
no action. They would have us go much farther than
that. They wish us to reS'~Dre Mr. Lumumba to power.
They have even gone so far as to say that the United
Nations Force should disband the security forces of the
Republic of the Congo. My delegation finds such suggestions grossly unacceptable. If we should try to disband
the forces of the Congo we would be committing aggression against the Congo. The United Nations can do
nothing of that kind.

16. C'est pourquoi ma delegation est d'avis qu'en ce qui
concerne la troisieme phase de la crise congolaise, nous
devrions nous borner pour l'instant a assurer le respect
des droits de l'homme au Congo. Certains memhres
du Conseil pensent que cela equivaut pratiquement it
ne rien faire. Ils voudraient nous entrainer beaucoup
plus loin. Ils voudraient que nous restituions le pouvoir
aM. Lumumba. Ils vont meme jusqu'a proposer que la
Force des Nations Unies licencie les forces de securite
de la Republique du Congo. Ma delegation considere
ces propositions comme absolument inacceptables;
licencier les forces de securite au Congo equivaudrait it
commettre une agression contre le Congo. L'ONU n'a
pas le droit d'agir de la sorte.

17. As we were able in past phases, without solving
the problem permanently, to turn events in the direction
of a permanent solution, it seems that now, if we could
encourage good sense and mutual accommodation, we
might also help the Congo to follow a way of development through which government aud opposition can
work as complementary forces in a democratic country.

17. De meme que lors des phases precerlentes nous
avons reussi, sans toutefois resoudre le probH:me d'une
fa~on permanente, a orienter les evenements dans le
sens d'une solution durable, de meme, en faisant appel
a la raison et a l'esprit de conciliation, nous pouvons
maintenant aider le Congo a suivre une evolution dans
laquelle le gouvernement et l'opposition peuvent fonctionner en tant que forces complementaires dans un pays
democratique.

18. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): In the early hours
of the morning of 14 July 1960 the Security Council
considered [873rd meeting] an appeal submitted to it by
the lawful Government of the new Republic of the Congo,
[8/4382j, for military assistance to enable it to maintain
law and order within its territory and to ensure the
territorial integrity and the independence of the whole
territory of the Congo. We all remember how readily
the Security C.ouncil responded to that request when
it adopted unanimously the draft resolution submitted
by the representative of Tunisia which committed the

18.. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylan) [traduit de l'anglais]:
Dans les premiere heures de la matinee du 14 juillet 1960,
le Conseil de securite a examine [8736 seance] une requete
qui lui avait ete adressee par le gOllvernement legitime
de la nouvelle Republique du Congo [8/4382], en vue
d'obtenir une aide militaire qui lui permettrait d'assurer
le maintien de l'ordre public sur son territoire et de
preserver l'integrite territoriale, l'independance et l'unite
du Congo. Nous nous souvenons tous de la promptitude avec laquelle le Conseil de securite a repondu it cet
appel en adoptant a l'unanimite un projet de resolu4

tion, presente par le representant de la Tunisie, qui
donnait mandat au Conseil de fournir I'aide demandee.
Le paragraphe 2 du dispositif de cette resolution [8/4387]
est redige comme suit:
« Decide d'autoriser le Secretaire general a prendre,
en consultation avec le Gouvernement de la Republique du Congo, les mesures necessaires en vue de
fournir a ce gouvernement l'assistance militaire dont
il a besoin, et ce jusqu'au moment ou les forces nationales de securite, grace aux efforts du Gouvernement
congolais et a l'assistance technique de I'Organisation
des Nations Unies, seront a meme, de 1'0pinion de
ce gouvernement, de remplir entierement leurs taches. »

Council to giving the assistance which had been requested.
The resolution, [8/4387] in operative paragraph 2 states:
" Decides to authorize the Secretary-General to take
the necessary steps, in consultation with the Government of the Republic of the Congo, to provide the
Government with such military assistance as may be
necessary uutil, through the efforts of the Congolese
Government with the technical assistance of the United
Nations, the national security forces may be able, in
the opinion of the Government, to meet fully their
tasks. "

19. It ·is a matter for satisfaction that very speedily
the Security Council resolution was translated into action,
as a result undoubtedly of the dynamic activity undertaken by the Secretary-General, who was charged with
this responsibility. Very soon the United Nations Force
began to assemble in the Republic of the Congo and
was built up to the satisfactory size of a military force
which amounted to about 20,000 fully armed personnel.
Unfortunately, that good beginning did not go on. When
the Security Council considered the matter again, it
felt that it could confirm the resolution of 14 July and, on
22 July and 9 August repeated its request to the SecretaryGeneral to continue the action that had been authorized
[8/4405 and 8/4426]. But in spite of these decisions of
the Council, the situation in the Congo did not improve.

19. n y a lieu de se feliciter que la resolution du Conseil
se soit tres rapidement traduite par des actes, et cela
sans aucun doute grace a l'action dynamique du Secn~­
taire general a qui avait ete confiee la responsabilite de
son application. Les forces des Nations Unies furent
tres vite rassembIees dans la Republique du Congo et
ne tarderent pas a atteindre le chiffre respectable de
20.000 hommes completement equipes. Malheureusement, tout n'a pas marche aussi bien par la suite. Lorsque
le Conseil de securite se saisit a nouveau de la question
il s'est estime en mesure de confirmer sa resolution du
14 juillet et, le 22 juillet et le 9 aout, il pria a nouveau
le Secretaire general de poursuivre l'action qu'il avait
autoris~e [8/4405 et 8/4421)]. Mais, en depit de ces
decisions du Conseil, la situ~Ltion dans ce pays ne s'ameliora pas.

20. There were many factors which contributed to the
deterioration which set in in the Congo, both because of
internal political dissensions and of external activities,
intended to influence certain secessionist movements, in
order to embarrass the established Government of the
country, and to create difficulty in continuing the Government in the form in which it was established, under the
then existing Loi fondamentale. These were the causes
which led to the deterioration of the good position in
which the Government of the Congo first began to
operate, within a week of its declaration of independence.
It is one of the most regrettable chapters in the political
evolution of any country that this young State, which
had just emerged into independence, should within a
week of undertaking its responsibilities, within a week
of setting up its own Government without difficulties of
any kind, have had to face these enormous problems.

20. De nombreux facteurs ont contribue a aggraver la
situation au Congo; tout d'abord les dissensions et les
conflits politiques internes, puis certaines activites dirigees de l'exterieur et visant a influencer les mouvements
secessionnistes; ceux-ci cherchaient a gener le gouvernement etabli et a lui susciter des difficultes dans l'exercice de ses fonctions sous la forme qui lui avait ete donnee
par la loi fondamentale en vigueur. Telles furent les
causes, qui, une semaine a peine apres la proclamation
de l'independance, firent perdre au Gouvernement du
Congo la situation pourtant avantageuse dans laquelle il
se trouvait au moment de son entree en fonctions. C'est
une des pages les plus regrettables et les plus penibles de
I'histoire de tous les pays que celle ou s'inscrit le drame
de ce jeune Etat qui a du faire face a des problemes
enormes, une semaine a peine apres avoir accede a l'independance et pris en main ses respofisabilites, une semaine
a peine apres avoir mis en place son gouvernement sans
aucune difficulte.

21. The difficulty of adopting a resolution in the Security
Council in the fast deteriorating situation subsequent
to August of this year, made it necessary to transfer
the consideration of the matter to the General Assembly,
and the holding of an emergency special session, which,
on 17. Septemb.er, considered a draft resolution and
adopted it on 20 September without any objection, by
a very substantial majority [1474 (E8-IV)]. There was
no opposition to that resolution. I should like to quote
paragraph 2 of that resolution in order to support the
position which I am now advancing. It reads as follows:

21. La situation se deteriorant rapidement, et etant
donne la difficulte qui s'est manifestee a partir du mois
d'aout d'obtenir l'accord des membres du Conseil
sur un texte de resolution, il fallut renvoyer l'examen
de ce probleme a l'Assemblee generale. Au cours de la
session extraordinaire d'urgence qui s'ouvrit le 17 septembre 1960, l'Assemblee examina un projet de resolution et, le 20 septembre, l'adopta sans modification a
une large majorite [1474 (ES-IV)]. Cette resolution n'a
rencontre aucune opposition. QI!'il me soit permis, a
l'appui de la these que j'adopte, d'en citer le paragraphe 2:
« Prie le Secretaire general de continuer de mener
une action vigou '1se conformement aux termes des
resolutions susmentionnees [il s'agit des resolutions

" Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
vigorous action in accordance with the terms of the
aforesaid resolutions " - that is, the Security Council

5

resolutions - " and to assist the Central Government
of the Congo in the restoration and maintenance of
law and order throughout the territory of the Republic
of the Congo and to safeguard its unity, territorial
integrity and political independence in the interests
of international peace and security ".

du Conseil de securite] et d'aider le Gouvernement
central du Congo a retablir et a maintenir I'ordre
public dans tout le territoire de la Republique du
Congo et de sauvegarder son unite, son integrite territoriale et son independance politique dans l'interet de
la paix et de la securite i!1ternationales ».

22. These four resolutions are perfectly clear - the
three adopted unanimously by the Security Council and
the one adopted without opposition by the Assembly.
All recognized that the Secretary-General should continue to take vigorous action to assist in the restoration
and maintenance of law and order and in safeguarding
the unity, territorial integrity and political indep<mdence
of the country in the interests of international peace
and security.

22. Chacune de ces quatre resolutions - les trois adoptees a l'unanimite par le Conseil de securite et celle qui
a ete adoptee sans opposition par I'AssembIee generale indique clairement que le Secretaire general doit continuer de mener une action vigoureuse afin de contribuer
au retablissement et au maintien de l'ordre public et de
sauvegarder 1'unite, l'integrite territoriale et l'independance politique du pays dans l'interet de la paix et de
la securite internationales.

23. I have laboured this point thus far only to emphasize
that the maintenance of law and order in the Republic
of the Congo is a special responsibility of the Security
Council and of the United Nations. It was a special
responsibility entrusted to the Secretary-General in the
utilization of the armed forces placed at his disposal.
That was the mandate, and we have to remember it in
the situation we are considering today.

23. J'ai insiste quelque peu sur cette question afin
d'attirer l'attention sur le fait que le Conseil de securite
et l'ONU ont la respnnsabilite principale du maintien
de l'ordre public dans la Republique du Congo. Cette
responsabilite a ete confiee au Secretaire general qui
l'exerce au moyen des troupes mises a sa disposition. Tel
est le mandat qui lui a ete confie, et il importe d'en tenir
com.pte lorsque nous examinons la situation telle qU'elle
se presente aujourd'hui.

24. In the same connexion we have also to appreciate
one other factor, which is, that the action of the Security
Council was taken on the first occasion and was continued
on subsequent occasions, on the basis of a request submitted to the United Nations by the Central Government
of the Republic of the Congo. It was a request signed
by the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister
who, according to the law prevailing at that time, with
the Parliament which was then in existence, constituted
the Central Government of the Republic of the Congo.
Thus, the Security Council had before it a request by
the lawful representatives of an established Government,
calling upon the United Nations to come to its assistance with military forces and to help it to take certain
action within its territory.

24. A ce propos, nous devons tenir compte egalement
du fait que c'est a la suite d'une demande presentee a
l'ONU par le Gouvernement central de la Republique
du Congo que le Conseil de securite a entrepris son action
et a decide plusieurs fois de la poursuivre. La requete
en question etait signee de la main du President de la
Republique et du Premier Ministre qui, d'apres le droit
en vigueur a ce moment-la, constituait, avec le Parlement non encore aboli, le Gouvernement central de la
Republique du Congo. Ainsi done, le Conseil de securite
etait saisi d'une requete emanant des representants legitimes d'un gouvernement etabli, qui sollicitaient de
l'ONU une aide militaire destinee a leur permettre de
prendre certaines mesures sur leur territoire.

25. This point has to be remembered well because it
has been argued that the presence of the United Nations
Force in the Congo might be against the Charter as
seeking to interfere in the internal affairs of the country.
It is true that notice was taken of tbis possibility at the
time and the Security Council resolutions specifically
requested that neither the United Nations Force nor
the Secretary-General should interfere in the internal
affairs of the country. It has been attempted, however,
to expand that statement to prevent the SecretaryGeneral or the United Nations Force from taking any
action to carry out the primary task with which they
were entrusted at the request of the Government, namely,
the maintenance of law and order and the security and
integrity of the State.

25. Nous ne devons pas perdre cela de vue, car on a
pretendu que la presence de la Force des Nations Unies
au Congo etait incompatible avec la Charte, sous pretexte que le but de cette presence etait d'intervenir dans
les affaires interieures du Congo. n est exact qu'a
l'epoque il a ete tenu compte de cette eventualite, de
sorte que les resolutions du Conseil de securite priaient
expressement le Secretaire general et la Force des Nations
Unies de ne pas intervenir dans les affaires politiques
interieures du Congo. On a cherch6 cependant a etendl'e
la portee de cette disposition en vue d'empecher le
Secretaire general et la Force des Nations Unies de
mener l'action necessaire pour remplir la tache principale qui leur avait ete confiee a la demande du Gouvernement, a savoir le maintien de l'ordre public ainsi que
de la securite et de l'integrite de l'Etat.

26. Now we have this very unedifying, demoralizing and
incomprehensible spectacle in the Congo. The United
Nations in command of a substantial armed force of
nearly 20,000, occupying various parts of the territory, having replaced Belgian troops in certain areas, having taken
charge of the areas to maintain law and order, and yet
doing very little to prevent the disorder that is rampant

26. Nous assistons en ce moment au Congo a un spectacle aussi incomprehensible et peu edifiant que demoralisant. L'Organisation des Nations Unies a le commandement d'une force armee importante de quelque 20.000
hommes; cette force occupe plusieurs parties du territoire, elle a remplace les troupes beIges dans certaines
regions, a pris sur elle d'assurer le maintien de l'ordre
6

throughout the country. The essential purpose for which dans ces regions, et pourtant elle ne fait presque rien
United Nations troops were sent to the Congo was, pour empecher les troubles qui se manifestent aux quatre
as I said before, to maintain law and order. 'Ve now have coins du pays. Je l'ai deja dit, c'est avant tout pour y
a situation where, through a peculiar interpretation of maintenir l'ordre que les troupes des Nations Unies
the mandate given by the Security Council, these troops ont ete envoyees au Congo. Or, nous nous trouvons
are standing idly by, while looting, robbery, rape, maintenant devant une situation ou, par suite d'une
arson and even murder are taking place. People ar,e interpretation assez singum~re du mandat donne par le
arrested and are imprisoned, while United Nations troop,~ Conseil, ces memes troupes assistent passivement aux
are there, presumably engaged in the tas;~ of maintaining- pillages, aux vols, aux viols, aux incendies, voire meme
law and order.
aux meurtres qui s'accomplissellt sous leurs yeux. On
arrete, on emprisonne, et tout cela en presence des troupes
des Nations Unies que l'on croyait occupees a maintenir
l'ordre.
27. How can that situation be justified? This is the
difficulty in which my Government finds itself in facing
the situation that has arisen in the Republic of the Congo.
We have given, like many other States, the fullest support
to this great enterprise; the greatest single effort of the
United Nations, as the Secretary-General has called it.
We must see that the purpose for which these forces
were sent is carried out; if it is not, it is unedifying to
the United Nations as a body, it discredits the United
Nations.

27. Comment justifier une telle situation? Voila la
question embarrassante que se pose mon gouvernement
face a la situation actuelle dans la Republique du Congo.
Comme beaucoup d'autres Btats, nous avans donne
tout notre appui a cette entreprise de grande envergure - le plus grand effort jamais fait par l'Organisation des Nations Unies, comme l'a appelee le Secretaire
general - et nous devons veiller a ce que les forces
armees accomplissent la mission pour laquelle nous les
avons envoyees au Congo; si cette mission n'est pas
accomplie, cela jettera un discredit sur 1'0rganisation
tout entiere.

28. If this Council has to introduce a resolution urging
the observance of fundamental human rights in the
Congo, and if these rights are not observed under the
very eye of United Nations troops, then there must
be something wrong and that is the real cause of the
trouble in the Congo at the present time. I am not excluding other reasons; there are undoubtedly many and I
have already referred to some, but we do not want to
take up the time of the Council to refer to all the ot~er
causes which exist. We want to concentrate our attention
on one cause, and this, in our opinion, is that the United
Nations Force has applied the mandate in too restricted
a manner in a fast changing situation, which required
a completely new approach and readjustment, in order
to justify the presence of the United Nations Force in
the Congo. I shall deal later with some of the remarks
made by the Secretary-General in his statement on
7 December [913th meeting], very legitimate observations
which he made on this situation.

28. Si le COllseil est appele a se prononcer sur une resolution demandant que soient respectes les droits fondamentaux de la personne humaine au Congo et si ces
droits sont violes sous les yeux memes des troupes des
Nations Unies, quelque chose ne va pas et c'est
cela la veritable" cause des troubles qui sevissent actuellement au Congo. Je ne pretends pas que ce soit la senIe
cause; sans doute y en a-t-il d'a1.1tres, et j'en ai du reste
mentionne quelques-unes, mais je ne veux pas abuser
de la patience du Conseil en les enumerant toutes id.
I1 nous suffit de fixer notre attention sur rune de ces
causes, qui, a notre avis, est que la Force des Nations
Unies a applique le mandat qui lui a ete confie dans un
sens trop restrictif et d'une maniere qui ne cadrait pas
avec les besoins d'une situation en constante evolution;
cette situation demandait a etre examinee sous un angle
tout a fait different et il fallait procecler aux ajustements
necessaires pour justifier la presence de la Force des
Nations Unies au Congo. Je parlerai plus tard des
remarques tres pertinentes qu'a faites le Secretaire general au sujet de cette situation dans sa declaration du
7 decembre [913e seance].

29. The question is, was it correct to adopt that interpretation? If it was correct, then, of course, we have
no right to complain; but we have certainly the right
to change the situation. This is an important point, to
which I wish to draw the attention of the Council. We
have no right to complain, if the Secretary-General is
correct in his interpretatIon, that the Security Council
resolutions gave him a certain mandate, which precluded
him from taking action for the maintenance of law and
order in the Congo, which did not envisage the involvement in matters of internal politics or dealing with
internal policies. If that was correct, my contention is
that it is the duty of the Security Council, or the United
Nations, to change that position completely so that we
get away from the position, where we appear like the
rabbit, who is transfixed before the gaze of the boa
constrictor and cannot move; he is inactive, powerless,

29. La question qui se pose est de savoir si cette interpretation etait la bonne. Si oui, alors, nous n'avons plus
aucune raison de nous plaindre, nous avons toujours
le droit de modifier l'etat de choses actuel. J'attire
l'attention du Conseil sur ce point qui me parait tres
important. Nous n'avons aucune raison de protester
si le Secretaire general a raison de penser que les resolutions du Conseil de securite lui ont confie un certain
mandat qui ne lui permet pas de prendre des mesures
pour le maintien de l' ordre au Congo, 10rsque celles-ci
entrainent une immixtion dans les affaires relevant de
la politique interieure. Si cette interpretation est correcte,
je pretends qu'il est du devoir du Conseil de securite
ou de l'ONU de .::hanger completement d'attitude afin
que nous puissions enfin sortir de la position ou nous
nous trouvons, aussi inactifs, impuissants, paralyses
que le lapin fige sur place par le regard percant d'un boa
7

mesmerized, almost atrophied. What is the good of the
United Nations Force if we get into that position? If that
is the position, then we will invite the Security Council
to consider that it must be changed and the Council
must give a new mandate to the Secretary-General, for
the utilization of the forces in the Congo, to carry out
the purpose for which they were sent. Now, this assumes
the interpretation is right, that when the Security Council's resolution said the Secretary-General was not to
interfere in the internal affairs, it meant that it precluded
him from dealing with the situation.

constrictor. A quoi peut donc servir la Force des Nations
Unies si elle ne reussit qu'a. nous placer dans une telle
situation? Si cette interpretation du mandat du Conseil
est la bonne, nous devons demander au Conseil de securite de donner au Secretairegeneral de nouvelles directives tenant compte de la necessite d'utiliser les forces
que nous avons envoyees au Congo aux fins prescrites.
Cela dans l'hypothese ou serait justifiee l'interpretation
seIon laquelle les resolutions du Conseil de securite, en
interdisant au Secretaire general de s'immiscer dans les
affaires interieures du Congo le mettraient dans 1'impossibilite de redresser la situation.

30. I might observe parenthetically that the United
Nations Command seems to have changed its policy
now, which we appreciate very greatly, because the latest
news and the information sent in the last report from the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Congo [8/4590] is that, in view of the serious situation
in Stanleyville, the United Nations has taken action to
protect the people whose lives have been threatened.
That is maintaining law and order, and we, in our
delegation, contend that was the correct action for the
United Nations troops to take. But would not that be
construed as interference with the internal administration of the country? There is a government today,
whatever it may be, there is a President who carries on
the government of the country, the government goes on.
There are officials in charge who are responsible for the
maintenance of law and order. But here, this would
amount, or could be argued technically to amount to,
an interference with law and order. But it has been done,
and correctly done. What would have been the use of
20,000 troops of the United Nations Force if they stood
by in their barracks, well armed, quite capable of doing
their task, if the large number of people who were
threatened were allowed to be arrested, molested, and
ultimately killed by those in control of the provincial
Government?

30. Je tiens a. signaler, entre parentheses, que le Cornmandement des Nations Unies semble avoir modifie sa
ligne de conduite, ce que nous apprecions beaucoup.
Les dernieres nouvelles, de meme que les informations
contenues dans le dernier rapport du representant special du Secretaire general au Congo [8/4590], indiquent
en effet qu'en raison du caractere serieux de la situation
a. Stanleyville, l'ONU a pris des mesures pour proteger
la vie des habitants menaces. Fort bien, voila. ce que
j'appelle maintenir l'ordre public, et notre delegation
trouve que les troupes des Nations Unies ont tres bien
agi dans la circonstance. Mais ne va-t-on pas objecter
qu'elles se sont ingerees dans les affaires interieures du
pays? n y a un gouvernement au Congo a. present,
quoi qu'on en pense. Il y a un president a la tete de ce
gouvernement et ce dernier fonctionne normalement. n
y a des fonctionnaires et ce sont eux qui sont responsables
du maintien de l'ordre. Techniquement parlant, il etait
donc possible d'interpreter ces mesures comme une
ingerence dans les affaires interieures du pays. Mais ce
qui a et6 fait, en l'occurrence, a ete bien fait. De queUe
utilite serait la Force des Nations Unies, si ses 20.000
hommes, bien equipes, parfaitement capables de remplir
leurs taches, etaient demeures enfermes dans leurs baraquements tandis qu'on laissait arreter, molester et finalement assassiner tant de personnes menacees par des
individus qui ont la haute main sur le gouvernement
provincial?

31. Our contention is that this action was also required
of the United Nations Force in other situations, if only
for the purpose of maintaining law and order. If it was
not taken, because it was considered to be outside the
mandate which the Sectetary-General received under the
resolutions of the Security Council, then I think that
interpretation is wrong. But if the interpretation is right,
or if we have any reasonable doubt with regard to it,
I would advise the Council to consider the alteration
of those instructions in a new resolution, so that the
Secretary-General could be given the right to depart
from that position completely and to use the forces, not
to take part in the political affairs of the country, nor
to bolster one politician in his attempt to seize political
control of another, or even over another area, but to keep
order. I know the Secretary-General has faced the situation that one politician has tried to get him to use United
Nations forces to support attempts to harm the political
activities of a rival. We are not thinking of situations
of that kind; but of situations comparable to the one
in Stanleyville, where action has now been taken, and
we say should have been taken, so that confidence in
the United Nations is not lost.

31. Nous soutenons precisement que c'est ce geme
d'interventions destinees a maintenir l'ordre public que
l'on attendait de la Force des Nations Unies dans d'autres
situations. Si eUes n'ont pas eu lieu en raison de l'interpretation donnee par le Secretaire general du mandat a
lui confie par les resolutions du Conseil de securite,
cela prouve a mon avis que cette interpretation est
fausse. Mais si elle est juste, ou si nous avons encore
quelques doutes a son sujet, je pense qu'il serait bon que
le Conseil envisage la modification des instructions
qu'il a donnees au Secretaire general. CeG modifications pourraient faire l'objet d'une nouvelle resolution
donnant a ce dernier le droit d'abandonner l'attitude
adoptee jusqu'ici et d'utiliser les forces des Nations
Unies non pour s'immiscer dans les affaires politiques
du pays, ni pour aider tel homme politique a evincer
un rival ou meme a prendre le pouvoir dans telle ou telle
region, mais pour maintenir l'ordre public. Ace propos,
je sais fort bien que le Secretaire general s'est trouve
dans la situation a laquelle je viens de faire allusion.
Je sais qu'un homme politique a tente de se servir du
Secretaire general et des forces des Nations Unies pour
faire obstacle a la politique de son rival. Mais ce n'est
pas de situations de ce genre que nous voulons parler.
8

Nous songeons plutot it une situation du genre de celle
qui regne aujourd'hui it Stanleyville; nous pensons que
les mesures qui ont ete prises dans ce cas auraient dfi
egalement etre prises ailleurs, et que c'est seulement
de cette maniere que l'on pouvait maintenir la confiance
dans 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.
32. I referred a little while ago to the statement made
by the Secretary-General on 7 December, in which he
said:
"From the legal standpoint, therefore, the only
conclusion open to the Secretary-General was to apply
the mandate of the Force with full regard to the provisions of the Council resolutions. . .. As events have
sho'\Vll, this task has been a delicate and complex
one, and not always attainable. Ambassador Dayal's
reports have vividly revealed the difficulties in concrete
situations. Thus, the Force has exercised its military
power to protect political leaders of various factions
from outright violence, even though such acts of
protection have given rise to vigorous objection from
the opposing side as being interference in political
events. On the other hand, it has been considered
beyond the scope of the mandate for the United
Nations to interpose its Force against the national
Congolese army acting under the authority of a Chief
of State whose representatives now have been accepted
by the General Assembly. " [913th meeting, para. 30.]

32. Je faisais allusion tout it l'heure a la declaration
faite le 7 decembre par le Secretaire general. Voici ce
qu'il a dit:
« Du point de vue juridique, en consequence, la
seule conclusion qui s'offrait au Secretaire general
etait de mettre en reuvre le mandat de la Force en
tenant integralement compte des dispositions des resolutions du Conseil. ... Comme les evenements l'ont
montre, cette tache etait delicate, complexe et pas
toujours realisable. Les rapports de M. Dayal ont mis
en lumiere de fa!(on frappante les difficultes rencontrees dans des situations concretes. La Force a donc
use de sa puissance militaire pour proteger les chefs
politiques de diverses factions de violences directes,
meme lorsque ces mesures de protection ont souleve
de vives objections de la partie adverse, qui y voyait
une ingerence dans les evenements politiques. D'autre
part, on a considere qu'il ne rentrait pas dans le cadre
du mandat de 1'ONU d'opposer la Force des Nations
Unies it 1'armee nationale congolaise agissant sous
l'autorite d'un chef d'Etat dont les representants ont
ete acceptes par l'Assemblee generale. » [913 e seance,
par. 30.]

The Secretary-General went on to say:
"What I have said here about the mandate given to me
and through me to the United Nations Force in the
Congo is all too often forgotten or perhaps wilfully
neglected or distorted. We could simply not do or
have done the things which you have seen presented
as our clear obligation. Criticism would have been
justified if we had done what is now requested, by
going beyond the clear mandate of the Security Council. But instead we are attacked for having remained
within its limits. Why were the critics not, at an earlier
stage, interested in widening the mandate, as their
comments now indicate, including a disarming of the
Armee nationale congolaise? Are they really willing
to do so now, irrespective of what further changes
may come about in the Congo? " [Ibid., para 33.]

Le Secretaire general a poursuivi:
« Ce que j'ai dit au sujet du mandat qui m'a 6t6
donne et, par mon entremise, qui a et6 donne it la
Force des Nations Unies au Congo, n'est que trop
souvent oublie ou peut-etre deliberement neglige ou
deforme. n nous etait tout simplement impossible de
faire ou d'avoir fait les choses que l'on vous presente
comme etant pour nous une claire obligation. Les critiques auraient ete justifiees si nous avions fait ce
qu'on nous demande maintenant de faire en allant
au-dela du mandat clairement donne par le Conseil
de securite. Bien au contraire, nous sommes attaques
pour etre restes dans le cadre de ce manda.t. Pourquoi,
a un stade anterieur, ceux qui nous critiquent ne se
sont-ils pas montres. desireux d'elargir le mandat,
comme leurs observations l'indiquent maintenant, de
maniere qu'il comprenne le desarmement de l'armee
nationale congolaise? Sont-ils veritablement disposes
a faire cela maintenant, quels que soient les changements qui puissent intervenir ulterieurement au
Congo?» [Ibid., par. 33.]

33. And then the Secretary-General once again referred
to the question of the mandate given to him. He asked
this very important question of the Council: "Has the
Council, have you, gentlemen, ever given the SecretaryGeneral or the Force the means - I mean now the
legal means - by which we could carry out the wider
mandate which you believe has been given to the Force? "
[915th meeting, para 157.]

33. Par la suite, le Secretaire general est encore revenu
sur la question du mandat qui lui a. ete confie. I1 a pose
au Conseilla question tres importante que voici: « Est-ce
que le Conseil, est-ce que vous, Messieurs, avez donne
au Secretaire general ou a la Force les moyens - j'entends
par la les moyens legaux - permettant de mettre en
reuvre le mandat plus large qui, pensez-vous, aurait dfi
etre donne a la Force? » [915 e seance, par. 157.]

34. That is a fair question for the. Secretary-General
to ask us, and let us give him a fair and precise answer.
Let us, in view of the very grave conditions now prevailing in the Congo, give to the Secretary-General and

34. La question du Secretaire general me parait pertinente. Donnons-lui une reponse franche et precise.. En
consideration des conditions tfes graves qui regnent en
ce moment au Congo, donnons au Secretaire general et
9

to the United Nations Command a wider mandate, a
mandate which will not be hemmed in and circumscribed,
nor open to other interpretations. We owe it to him,
we owe it to the United Nations Command and to all
ranks of the United Nations Force. If the interpretation
which has been put on the mandate by the SecretaryGeneral is upheld, then we owe it to him and to the
General Assembly, to give to the Secretary-General a
firm, clear and unequivocal mandate, to enable him
to carry out the principal tasks for which the United
Nations was invited to the Congo on 14 July last by
President Kasa-Vubu and Mr. Patrice Lumumba.

au Commandement de la Force des Nations Unies au
Congo un mandat plus vaste, qui ne soit pas circonscrit
dans des limites etroites ni sujet P. des interpretations
plus larges. Nous lui devons cela, nous le devons aussi
au Commandement de la Force des Nations Unies et it
tous les soldats places sous ses ordres. Si l'interpretation que le Secretaire general a donnee du mandat initial est conftrmee, alors nous lui devons, et nous devons
ai'Assemblee generale, de donner au Secretaire general
un nouveau mlUldat redige avec c1arte, precision et nettete, grace auquel it sera en mesure de remplir les principales taches qui lui ont ete confiees le 14 juillet dernier
lorsque le president Kasa-Vubu et M. Patrice Lumumba
ont invite I'ONU a intervenir au Congo.

35. I am not unaware of the difficulties of widening
the mandate, in view of the earlier practices of United
Nations operations in the territories of its Member
States. It is certainly a delicate matter. It is our most
sincere belief th~~t the ever-worsening situation in the
Republic of the Congo has created not only for that
territory, but for the world at large, an unprecedented
crisis. Solutions to such situations cannot be found by
recourse to existing precedents, for precedents are created
by ever new and varying circumstances. It would be
hopeless to search in the archives of this Organization
for a precedent to cover an operation which, in its very
inception, development, magnitude and complexity has
become the first of its kind in the history of the United
Nations.

35. Je me rends bien compte des difficultes qu'implique
I'elargissement du mandat du Conseil de securite. Les
exemples precedents d'operations des Nations Unies
dans les territoires de certains Etats Membres nous ont
prouve a l'evidence qu'it s'agit la d'une affaire delicate.
Toutefois, nous sommes convaincus que la situation (iui
ne cesse de s'aggraver dans la Republique du Cong'J a
provoque une tension dont les ef1'ets se font sentir non
seulement dans ce territoire, mais dans le monde entier.
On ne peut se baser sur des precedents pour regler de
telles situations car les precedents sont toujours le produit de circonstances inattendues et variables. Il serait
vain de chercher dans les archives de 1'Organisation un
precedent applicable a une situation qui, de par ses origines, son evolution, son importance et sa complexite,
est unique en son genre dans les lUmales de I'ONU.

36. We ourselves, therefore, are not afraid to face the
reality of the situation and to advocate what may appear
to some, revolutionary remedies. The Secretary-General
himself voiced some doubts as to whether the Council
could give a wider mandate without the risk of acting
against the Charter. We do not see the grounds for
any such fears. We do not think in this case there would
be any action which could be interpreted as against
the Charter, for this is a case where the Head of a State
approached the United Nations and requested the
Organization to render certain assistance of a specified
kind. Even if there were no law and order in
a Member State of the United Nations, even if there
were violence and consequently the greatest danger to
world peace, it would be improper and wrong for the
United Nations to go to a sovereign country and to
interfere in its internal affairs, except under the
provisions of the Charter and the terms of the Security
Council's decisions.

36. Pour notre part, donc, nous ne craignons pas de
regarder les choses en face et de proposer des solutions
realistes, meme si eUes peuvent paraitre revolutionnaires
a certains. Le Secretaire general s'est lui-meme demande
si le Conseil de securite pouvait lui donner un mandat
elargi sans risquer d'enfreindre les principes de la Charte.
Nous ne partageons pas ses craintes. Nous ne pensons
pas qu'en I'occurrence l'action du Conseil puisse etre
consideree comme contraire aux dispositions de la
Charte puisque, dans le cas qui nous occupe, c'est le
chef de l'Etat qui s'est adresse it 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies au nom de cet Etat et lui a demande une
assistance bien definie. Meme si l'ordre public etait dellnitivement compromis et remplace par la violence dans
un pays Membre de l'Organisation, meme si, de ce fait,
la paix du monde etait mise en danger, l'ONU n'aurait
aucun droit de se rendre dans un pays souverain et
d'intervenir dans les affaires interieures de ce pays, si
ce n'est en conformite avec les dispositions de la Charte
et en execution des decisions du Conseil de securite.

37. In this case, where a country has invited the United
Nations to go to its territory and to take certain action,
it would not be against the Charter if it went to that
country and, in trying to do what it had been requested
to do, followed certain interpretations in the discharge
of its duties and tried to carry out the requests of that
country. We do not, therefore, see grounds for any
fears about the infringement of the Charter in this
situation. After all, why did we send the United Nations
Force to the Congo? It was not to have a good time and
then come back, it was not to play about and to have
a pleasant holiday there. We sent it to do a certain duty,
to look after the interests of the people of the Congo.
We are interested in the welfare of the people of the

37. Mais, dans le cas present, un pays a invite l'ONU
a se rendre dans son territoire et it y entreprendre une
action bien definie. Sans enfreindre les dispositions de
la Charte, l'Organisation des Nations Unies a le droit
d'aller dans un pays et meme d'interpreter dans une
certaine mesure le mandat qui lui a ete contle afin de
pouvoir remplir les taches que ce pays lui a fixees. 11
n'y a donc it notre avis aucune raison de craindre une
infraction aux termes de la Charte dans ce cas. Apres
tout pourquoi avons-nous envoye la Force des Nations
Unies au Congo? Ce n'est pas pour y passer de belles
vacances, pour s'y amuser, et puis rentrer. Nous l'avons
envoyee pour remplir une tache bien determinee, pour
veiller aux interets du peuple congolais. Nous nous
10

Congo. We want to protect their rights) and it is in
fulfilment of that desire that these people were sent to the
Congo. If we are not going to see that purpose is carried
out, if we are not going to fortify the troops with
authority to carry it out) what is the use of our taking
action at all?

soucions du bien-etre de la population congolaise et nous
desirons prob5ger ses droits; c'est dans ce but que nous
avons envoye des troupes au Congo. A quoi sert d'avoir
entrepris cette action) si nous devons maintenant
nous desinteresser de son resultat et renoncer a donner
a ces troupes Pautorite necessaire pour parvenir au but?

38. Article 39 of the Charter is clear as regards the
duties of the Security Council whenever there exists a
threat to the peace or a breach of the peace. Article 40
further elaborates the duties of the Security Council
to prevent an aggravation of a situation likely to cause
a breach of international peace and security. The United
Nations is today in the Congo, in all its aspects) because
it was invited by the legitimate and unquestioned Government, so that our action can in no way be regarded
as an intervention in matters essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of the Republic of the Congo.

38. L'Article 39 de la Charte definit clairement les
devoirs du Conseil de securite en cas d'une menace
contre la paix ou d'une rupture de la paix. L)Article 40
fait en outre une obligation ~u Conseil de securite
d)empecher I'aggravation d'vae situation constituant une
menace pour la paix et la securite internationales.
L'ONU est actuellement au Congo pour la seule raison
qu'elle y a et~ invitee par le gouvernement legitime et
inconteste de ce pays de sorte que notre action ne peut
en aucune fa~on etre consideree comme une intervention
de I'ONU dans les affaires relevant essentiellement de
la competence nationale de la Republique du Congo.

39. The United Nations went into the Republic of the
Congo in July 1960 to assist the Government of that
country to maintain law and order. Since the military
coup d'fftat organized by Colonel Mobutu in September
of this year, the record of events in the Congo, so far
as the achievement of the objectives for which the United
Nations went there, is an extremely melancholy one. We
have had the doubtful pleasure of witnessing a serious
deterioration in public order, a callous disregard by
those in authority, both at the central and the provincial
level, for the security of life and property, a complete
and unmitigated removal of parliamentary institutions,
and open mockery and disregard for fundamental human
rights. More recently, the United Nations itself has
suffered a series of incidents culminating in the loss of
life of members of the Irish and Tunisian contingents.

39. VONU est intervenue au Congo au mois de juillet 1960 pour y maintenir l'ordre public, de concert avec
le Gouvernement de ce pays. Depuis le coup d'Etat
militaire organise par le colonel Mobutu au mois de
septembre, les evenements du Congo, du moins en ce
qui concerne le realisation des objectifs vises par l'ONU)
presentent un tableau extremement sombre. Nous avons
eu le triste privilege d'assister it une deterioration grave
de l'ordre pUblic, au mepris total des autorites centrales
ou provinciales pour la vie et les biens des individlls, a
la suppression complete des institutions parlementaires)
tandis que les droits fondamentaux de la personne
humaine etaient tournes en derision. Plus recemment
encore, les Nations Unies elles-memes ont ete les victimes d'une serie d'incidents qui ont abouti it la mort
de plusieurs soldats des contingents irhmdais et tunisien.

40. During the last few days, three of the Member
States contributing to the United Nations operation have
expressed very serious dissatisfaction in the sta..~ of
affairs existing in the Republic. The question is being
asked, and we have to face this question: has the United
Nations succeeded in maintaining even a semblant;e of
tranquillity? Have we helped to bring together the leaders
of the fighting political parties? Have we assured to the
Congolese people safety of life and limb?

40. Durant ces derniers jours, trois Etats Membres
participant it l'operation des Nations Unies ont exprime
leur vif mecontentement de la situation actuelle dans la
Republique. La question est posee, et iI nous faudra y
repondre: les Nations Unies ont-eltes reussi it maintenir
au moins un semblant de caIme? Avons-nous contribue
a rapprocher les dirigeants des divers partis politiques
opposes? Avons-nous assure la securite du peuple
congolais?

41. It is my duty, on behalf of my Government, to
observe with regret that the presence ofihe United Nations,
even in so demonstrable a fashion, has not prevented
the situation in the Congo from going from bad to worse
with every passing week. That is due to the interpretation of the mandate and to the execution of that mandate,
and it is time for the Security Council - I repeat again to correct the interpretation if it is wrong and to take
further action, by a proper resolution, to give the correct
mandate to the Secretary-General. If the prestige of the
United Nations is not to suffer a serious blow, we must
act.

41. 11 est de mon devoir, au nom de mon gouvernement,
de constater avec regret que la presence de PONU n'a
pas empech6 la situation au Congo de s'aggraver de
semaine en semaine. La faute en est it l'interpretation qui
a ete donnee du mandat du Conseil de securite, et it
I'application qui en a ete faite. It est grand temps, je le
repete, que le Conseil de securite rectifiecette interpretation si elle est fausse et qu'il donne par une resolution
appropriee un mandat adequat au Secretaire general.
Si nous voulons eviter line perte grave de prestige pour
PONU, il n'est que temps d'agir.

42. It is our belilef that more damage can be done to
the moral position of our Organization by an inactivity
amounting to a combination of many things, in complete
contradiction to the purposes and principles of our
Charter, to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
and to the accepted standards of international diplomatic

Nous sommes persuades que rien ne peut faire plus
de tort it la position morale de notre organisation qu'une
inaction, qui equivaut it une combinaison d'6lements en
complete contradiction it la fois avec les principes et
les buts de notre charte, avec la Declaration universelle des
droits de l'homme, les principes universels qui regissent
42.

11

intercourse and the fundamental basis of the diplomatic
structure of the modern state.

les relations diplomatiques internationales et les fonde.
ments de la structure diplomatique de I'Etat moderne-

43. If I have used strong words, it is because we feel
very sincerely that the situation is extremely grave, and
that to allow ourselves to be outstripped by events is
to shirk our responsibilities to the Congolese people as
well as to the rest of the world.

43. Si j'ai prononce des paroles energiques, c'est
parce que nous estimons sincerement que la situation est
extremement grave, et qu'en nous laissant depasser par
les evenements nous ne ferions qu'esquiver nos responsabilites envers le peuple congolais et envers le monde
entier.

44. I now wish to make a few constructive suggestions.
There are four areas, in our view, in which firm and
resolute action by the United Nations, even at this
eleventh hour, might well put us. back on the road to
sanity. I shall briefly indicate what they are and how
the delegation of Ceylon thinks the United Nations
should carry out its responsibilities in relation to them.

44. Je vouclrais maintenant faire quelques propositions constructives. n y a selon nous quatre domaines
dans lesquels une action ferme et resolue de I 'ONU
pourrait, meme en ce dernier quart d'heure, nous
remettre sur la bonne voie. Je les exposerai brievement
et en meme temps j'indiquerai comment, de l'avis de la
delegation de Ceylan, I'ONU devrait s'acquitter de ses
responsabilites dans chacun de ces cas.

45. First, we believe that the primary task of the United
Nations in the Congo still is the immediate restoration
of law and order. To think that law and order could
be restored by adherence to a so-called theory of neutralism between the legitimate institutions of the State, on
the one hand, and disruptive forces, on the other, is a
mistaken one, the consequences of which have already
shown themselves in no uncertain terms. To talk of law
and order outside the Constitution's framework is to be
occupied with a kind of fantasy. The Constitution of
the Republic is based on two institutions: the Chief of
State and the Parliamant. The sooner we bring the parliamentary institution back into effective functioning the
better it will be for us, as well as for the Congolese
people. That is the first point on which we would ask
that action be taken.

45. En premier lieu, nous estimons que la tache pri·
mordiale de I'ONU au Congo est de retablir immediatement 1'0rdre public. Penser qu'il est possible de retablir l'ordre en adoptant une attitude de pretendue neutralite entre les institutions legitimes de I 'Etat, d'une
part, et les forces de discorde, d'autre part, est une
conception erronee dont les consequences se sont deja
manifestees tres clairement. Parler d'ordre public en
dehors du cadre de la Constitution, cela releve de la
fantaisie. La Republique est fondee sur deux institutions: le chef de l'Etat et le Parlement. Plus tot nous
remettrons en activite l'institution parlementaire, mieux
ce sera pour nous et pour le peuple congolais. C'est la
le premier point sur lequel nous voudrions que des
mesures soient prises.

46. This brings me to the second area in which the
United Nations must assert its authority in a positive
manner. We should ask the Chief of State, who invited
the assistance of the United Nations on 12 and 13 July,
to reconvene without delay both houses of Parliament,
if the mandate entrusted by the Security Council to the
Secretary-General on 14 July is to be effectively carried
out. We cannot carry out the mandate unless Parliament
is reconstituted, because we want a lawful authority
created in the Congo, with which the United Nations
can be in close contact. A resolution of the Security
Council spoke of consultation with the Central Government, the Central Government should be brought into
being, and there is no person who can do that other
than he who asked the Security Council to send
assistance.

46. Je passe maintenant au deuxieme point apropos
duquel l'ONU doit faire preuve d'autorite de faeon
positive. Si nous desirons reellement que soit execute le
mandat confie par le Conseil de securite au Secretaire
general le 14 juillet, nous devrions demander au chef
de l'Etat qui a sollicite l'aide de l'ONU les 12 et 13 juillet
de convoquer a nouveau, sans tarder, les deux Chambres
du Parlement. Nous ne pouvons pas exercer le mandat
sans que le Parlement soit retabli; nous voulons au
Congo une autorite legitime avec laquelle l'ONU puisse
etablir des relations etroites. Dans une resolution du
Conseil ,de securite it est fait allusion a des consultations
avec le Gouvernement central; il faut done creer un
gouvemement central, et seul est qualifie pour le faire
celui-la meme qui a demande l'aide du Conseil de
securite.

I

47. We, for our part, should assure the Head of State
that the United Nations will afford to all deputies complete protection in the fulfilment of their parliamentary
duties, so that the fundamental structure of democratic
government would. be protected and nursed in this
fledgling State. This, in the view of my Government,
is an immediate and necessary prerequisite for a solution
of the differences in the Congo.

47. Pour notre part, nous sommes prets a donner au
chef de I'Etat l'assurance que l'ONU offrira une protection totale a tous 1es deputes dans l'accomplissement
de leurs devoirs parlementaires, afin de menager et de
consolider les structures fondamentales du gouvernement democratique dans cet Etat chancelant. De l'avis
de mon gouvemement, c'est la une condition sine qua
non de toute solution possible aux differends du Congo.

48. Thirdly, the Security Council will recall the statements made by President Kasa-Vubu during his stay
in New York [912th meeting], that on his return to Leopoldville, he would, as Chief of State, make every effort
to bring together the political leaders of all parties to

48. En troisieme lieu, le Conseil de securite se souviendra des declarations faites par le president Kasa-Vubu
pendant son sejour a New York [912 e seance]. 11 a affirme
qu'en sa qualite de chef de I'Etat, it ferait tout son possible des son retour a Leopo1dville pour reunir les diri12

"1

explore ways and means whereby the Congolese public
could smooth out their present political differences. We,
for our part, proclaim this as a statesmanlike approach
of a leader devoted to the progress of his people.

geants politiques de toutes tendances en vue de rechercher
les moyens de regler les difIerends politiques qui sement
la discorde dans la population congolaise. Nous considerons cette attitude comme digne d'un homme d 'Etat
soucieux du progres de son peuple.

49. We regret, however, that so far President KasaVubu does not appear to have taken any steps towards
the fulfilment of his promise in New York. Indeed, we
som~times wonder at the long silences of President
Kasa-Vubu at a time when the very structure of his
country and the bases for law and order are tottering,
to the point of collapse, in his presence.

49. Nous regrettons cependant que le president KasaVubu n'ait, semble-t-il, encore rien fait pour tenir la
promesse qu'il avait faite a New York. A vrai dire,
nous nous etonnons du long silence que s'impose le
president Kasa-Vubu au moment ou la structure meme
de son pays et les bases elementair~s de l'ordre public
menacent de s'ecrouler sous ses yeux.

50. -We recommend that the United Nations use every
persuasive measure to promote a round-table conference
of political leaders of all parties in the Congo, for the
purpose of solving the very complex and constitutional
divisions that now exist among them. To this conference
we urge and submit that Mr. Patrice Lumumba be invited.
There is a good precedent for this, and perhaps it would
solve our present difficulties. There is an urgent demand
for the release of Mr. Patrice Lumumba from prison.
Apart from other arguments, such as parliameL"ry
immunity, for his release, here is the best argument
that could be advanced to release him. If a round-table
conference is convened, Mr. Lumumba could be released
to attend that conference. That is just what the Belgian
Government did when Mr. Lumumba was in prison.
They released him in order to enable him to attend
the Brussels Conference, which preceded the independence
of the Congo. We earnestly trust that this round-table
conference could be held, and that it will include all
the leaders, including Mr. Lumumba.

50. Nous recommandons a l'OND d'user de toute sa
force de persuasion pour favoriser la convocation d'une
conference de la « table ronde » reunissant tous les dirigeants politiques du Congo et au cours de laquelle ceux-ci
rechercheraient une solution aux problemes constitutionnels tres complexes qui les divisent actuellement.
Nous insistons pour que M. Lumumba soit invite a
cette conference. IT y a d'ailleurs un precedent qui peut
nous aider a sortir de l'embarras. On demande instamment la liberation de M. Lumumba: or, nous tenons
ici le meilleur argument en faveur de cette liberation sans parler de l'immunite parlementaire et d'autres
arguments encore. Si on convoque une conference de
la « table ronde», on peut liberer M. Lumumba pour
lui permettre d'y participer. C'est ce qu'a fait le Gouvernement beIge, la derniere fois que M. Lumumba etait
en prison. IT l'a libere pour qu'il puisse prendre part
a la Conference de Bruxelles precedant I'accession du
Congo a l'independance. Nous esperons vivement que
cette conference de la « table mnde » pourra avoir lieu,
et que tous les chefs poIitiques y participeront,
M. Lumumba y compris.

51. Lastly, my Government is gravely perturbed at the
trend in the Congo, recently accelerated, towards what
the Secretary-General, in his statement on 7 December,
described as the " development of private armies loyal
to individual political leaders within the Armee nationale
congolaise ". I would like to read the words of the
Secretary-General on this very important point. He said:

51. Enfin, mon gouvernement est tres inquiet de la
tendance qui se manifeste depuis un certain temps au
Congo, et qui s'est recemment aggravee, vers ce que le
Secretaire general a appele dans sa declaration du
7 decembre « la formation, a l'interieur de l'armee
nationale congolaise, d'armees privees loyales a tel ou
tel dirigeant politique ». le voudrais citer les paroles du
Secretaire general qui, au sujet de ce point tres important, a dit:

., The development of private armies loyal to individual political leaders within the Armee nationale
congolaise led in September to the emergence of
Colonel Mobutu as a military leader in the Leopoldville area. It is difficult to see how this emergence
of a more consolidated Armee nationale congolaise
in the Leopoldville and surrounding area could be
possible without some outside technical and financial
assistance. This development has led to the creation
of authorities which have no basis in the constitution
of the Congo. The Armee nationale congolaise under
Colonel Mobutu and the other authorities now holding
control in Leopoldville have on many occasions directly
and aggressively challenged the United Nations military forces, as well as the United Nations civilian
operation, restricting on many occasions the task of
the United Nations to maintain law and order, with
which it was charge~ by the resolutions of the Security
Council. " [913th meeting, para 41.]

« La formation, a l'interieur de l'armee m.tionale
congolaise, d'armees privees loyales a tel ou tel dirigeant politique a abouti, en septembre, a l'arrivee du
colonel Mobutu comme chef militaire dans la region
de Leopoldville. I1 est difficile de voir comment l'apparition d'une armce nationale congolaise plus coherente a Leopoldville et dans la region avoisinante a
pu etre possible sans une assistance technique et
financiere exterieure. Cette evolution a conduit a la
\..cation d'autorites qui n'ont aucun fondement dans
la Constitution du Congo. L'armee nationale congolaise, sous les ordres du colonel Mobutu, et les autres
autorites qui exercent maintenant le controle a Leopoldville ont, a maintes reprises, de fa~on directe et
agressive, defie les forces militaires des Nations Unies,
ainsi que l'operation civile, mettant obstacle, en de
nombreuses occasions, a ce que les Nations Unies
s'acquittent de la tache du maintien de l'ordre que leur
avaient assignee les resolutions du Conseil de securite. »
[913 e seance, par. 41.]

13

52. Why, then, were these unlawful military forces 52. Pourquoi done a-t-on permis a ces forces mill.
allowed to be formed? It is part of our duty to prevent taires irregulieres de se constituer? n etait de notre
such illegal activities. It is a violation of law and order devoir d'empecher des activites illegales de ce genre.
to allow the building of an irregular army in a country' La constitution d'une armee irreguliere dans un pays
where we know there is some attempt by the Govern- est une violation de l'ordre public; c'en est une egalement to bLUld up a regular army. This is the source of ment que de laisser se constituer une telle armee quand
the disorder and the violence which is occurring in the nous savons fort bien que le gouvernement de ce pays
Congo, and some action must be taken to suppress it. essaye de son cote de mettre sur pied une armee reguliere.
We entirely agree with this view of the Secretary-General. n ne faut pas chercher plus loin la cause du desordre et
I stated earlier that we are dismayed by the fact that de la violence qui regnent au Congo et il faut faire quelprecisely those authorities" which have no basis in the que chose pour en :finir; nous partageons entierement
Constitution of the Congo" have provoked many l'avis du Secretaire general sur ee point. J'ai dit tout a
serious incidents in the very presence of the highest l'heure que nous etions stupefaits de constater que ce
officers of the United Nations Command.
sont precisement les autorites « qui n'ont aucun fondement dans la Constitution du Congo» qui sont it. l'origine des nombreux et graves incidents qui se sont deroules en presence des officiers superieurs du Commandement des Nations Unies.
53. It is with full regard to the legal as well as the
military implications of the consequences that we state
our view that the United Nations Command must now
be directed to take all necessary measures to disarm
any private armies throughout the territory operating
under the orders of "authorities which have no basis
in the constitution of the Congo ". This is a serious
step to take. Quite candidly, we are at a loss to see
what alternative faces the United Nations in the present
condition of complete anarchy which appears to prevail
in the Congo. If one were cynical, one could fairly quote
Thomas Hobbes, in Leviathan, where he described the
state of nature as the state where " every man is enemy
to every man ... and the life of man solitary, poore,
nasty, brutish and short ".

53. C'est pleinement conscients des consequences
qu'elle implique sur les plans juridiques et militaires
que nous emettons l'opinion que le Commandement
des Nations Unies doit recevoir l'ordre de prendre a
n'importe quel moment toutes les mesures necessaires
pour desarmer les bandes armees qui operent sur tout
le territoire pour le compte d'autorites « qui n'ont aucun
fondement dans la Constitution du Congo ». C'est la
une decision d'une extremegravite. Mais, franchement,
nous ne voyons pas ce que l'ONU pourrait faire d'autre
dans la situation d'anarchie complHe qui semble regner
actuellement au Congo. Si l'on voulait etre cynique,
on pourrait citer it. ce propos les paroles de Thomas
Hobbes qui, dans Leviathan, decr:ivait ainsi l'etat de
nature: « Chacun est l'ennemi de son prochain... et
la vie de l'homme est solitaire, mis1erable, sordide, bestiale et courte.»

54. We do not believe that this world Organization
can tolerate such chaos. If it is felt in certain quarters
that the disarming of Congolese forces would be an
undesirable or dangerous precedent, we can only reply
that it would be an even worse precedent for the United
Nations to be rendered powerless, when in its very
presence a country is totterin~ to ruin and the entire
governmental structure is collapsing. I said earlier that
. if we are not prepared to face our responsibilities, it
would be in our wider interests to acknowledge the fact
and to withdraw our forces from the territory with
dignity and with courage.

54. Nous ne pensons pas que notre organisation mondiale puisse tolerer un tel chaos. Si certains milieux
pensent qu'il serait inopportun et dangereux de desarmer
les forces congolaises, nous repliquerons que ce serait
un precedent encore plus regrettable et dangereux que
de laisser l'ONU impuissante en face d'un pays qui
court it. sa ruine et dont la structure gouvernementale
tout entiere est en train de s'effondrer. Voila la raison
pour laquelle j'ai dit et je repete que, si nous ne sommes
pas disposes it. affronter nos responsabilites, il serait
dans notre interet superieur de le reconnaitre avec courage et dignite et de retirer nos troupes du territoire.

55. Needless to say, my delegation does not advocate
this course at all. It would be disastrous to the interests
of world peace, and the advancement of these newly
emerging independent States, for the United Nations to
withdraw from the responsibility which it has undertaken.
Since we are there, we have to do a job and that job
must be done notwithstanding the consequences, however
inconvenient they may be.

55. Bien entendu, ma delegation ne preconise nullement une telle action. n serait desastreux du point de
vue de la paix internationale et du progres des nouveaux
Etats qui viennent d'acceder it. l'independance que
l'ONU se soustraie aux responsabilites qu'elle a assumees. Nous sommes ici pour accomplir notre tache,
quels qu'en soient les inconvenients et les consequences.

56. These are the views of my Government. I express
them to you with considerable concern at the worsening
situation in that African country. We believe that inaction would lead to further deterioration. It is with
regret that I disagree with my colleagues who think
that there is really no necessity to introduce. a resolution.
My delegation is of the view that a resolution should
be submitted to the Council, embodying the points to

56. Telle est l'opinion de mon gouvernement. Je vous
en fais part avec tout le souci que nous cause l'aggravation de la situation dans ce pays d'Afrique. Nous
croyons fermement que notre inaction ne servirait qu'a
aggraver cette situation. Je regrette de n'etre pas d'accord
avec ceux de mes collegues qui ne jugent pas necessaire
de presenter un nouveau projet de resolution. Ma delegation est d'avis qu'il y a lieu de soumettre it. l'examen
14

which I have referred so that they will not be ignored
and by-passed..We shall state categorically our desire
to confer on the Secretary-General a mandate to make
use of the armed forces at his disposal so as to carry
out the purpose of maintaining law and order in the
territory of the Congo by all the means that appear
to him to be necessary.

du Conseil un projet de resolution mentionnant les
divers points que j'ai indiques a:fin qu'on ne puisse les
negliger ou les ignorer. Nous devrions declarer categoriquement dans cette resolution que nous donnons mandat au Secretaire general de faire usage des forces
armees placees a sa disposition de maniere a etre en
mesure de retablir l'ordre dans le territoire du Congo
par tous les moyens qu'il estimera necessaires.

57. We propose also to embody in such a resolution
references to the urgent necessity of taking whatever
measures possible to have Parliament reconvened in
that country, with guarantees of protection for it. We
would at the same time urge the release of all members
of Parliament who have been arrested and imprisoned
by both sides, so that they may be able to perform their
parliamentary duties, and we suggest that every effort
be made to maintain law and order.

57. Nous proposons en outre de faire mention dans
cette resolution de la necessite de mettre tout en reuvre
pour reunir le Parlement de ce pays sous la garantie
de notre protection. Nous insisterions egalement sur la
liberation de tous les membres du Parlement emprisonnes par les deux camps, a:fin qu'ils puissent s'acquitter
de leurs fonctions parlementaires; enfin, nous demanderions que rien ne soit neglige pour assurer le maintien
de l'ordre.

58. In concluding, I wish only to say this: whatever
we have suggested has been suggested because of our
deep desire to help the people of the Congo to maintain
the new independent Republic which they have established. Here, in the Security Council from 9 September
we have manifested, and the whole Council has manifested, our desire to assist the people of the Congo, and
we can complete that picture today if we agree to adopt
a resolution which will give to the Secretary-General the
authority that is necessary for him to function in such
a way that law and order will be restored once more
in the Congo; legal processes will be established, parliamentary institutions will be reconvened and people will
be without fear of arbitrary arrest and incarceration,
and may go about assured that their fundamental human
rights will be fully observed.

58. En conclusion, je dirai ceci: les suggestions que nous
avons faites ont ete dictees par notre desir sincere
d'aider le peuple congolais dans sa lutte pour la sauvegarde de la jeune republique independante qu'il a fondee.
Depuis le 9 septembre nous avons, tout comme les
autres membres du Conseil de securlte, manifeste ici
notre desir de venir en aide au peuple du Congo. Aujourd'hui nous pouvons apporter la preuve de notre sincerite en donnant au Secretaire general 1'autorite necessaire pour retablir 1'ordre public au Congo, pour assurer
le retour a la legalite et la rentree en activite des institutions parlementaires, bref, pour que le peuple congolais soit libere de la crainte des arrestations et des emprisonnements arbitraires et puisse vaquer a ses occupations
avec 1'assurance que ses drorts individuels fondamentaux
seront integralement respectes.

59. The PRESIDENT (translated/ram Russian): Before
calling on the next speaker on my list, the representative
of India, I give the floor to the Secretary-General who
wishes to make a short statement.

59. Le PRESIDENT [traduit du russe]: Avant de
donner la parole a l'orateur suivant inscrit sur ma liste,
qui est le representant de l'Inde, je la donnerai au Secretaire general pour une breve declaration.

60. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I think it would
be more useful if I were to revert to those comments
which I should like to make on the various statements
made here at a much later stage in the debate, but on
the other hand I believe that it might be of value if at
this stage I made a few observations aiming at straightening out what may be misunderstandings or misinterpretations of the legal situation.

60. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL [traduit de l'anglais]: Je crois preferable de remettre a plus tard les
commentaires que je voudrais faire au sujet de certaines
opinions qui ont ete exprimees ici. En revanche, il me
parait utile de faire des maintenant quelques remarques
pour dissiper les malentendus possibles en ce qui concerne
la situation juridique telle qu'elle se presente.

61. The representative of Ceylon talked about the stand
we have taken in the Stanleyville story of yesterday as
indicating a change of policy. It is not a change of policy.
It is exactly the same stand which we took regarding Mr.
Lumumba when he requested protection, regarding
Mr. Kamitatu when he requested protection, regarding Mr. Gizenga, in Stanleyville, when he did the same,
and regarding Mr. Welbeck, the Charge d'Affaires of
Ghana at Leopoldville, when he did the same. That is
to say it is, in that respect, a constant policy which we
have adopted, and if the representative of Ceylon is
satisfied with the present stand I understand that he
is satisfied with the interpretation we have given to our
duty to protect law and order in the sense of protection
of life and property.

61. Le representant de Ceylan a cru discerner un changement de politique dans l'attitude que nous avons
adoptee hier dans l'affaire de Stanleyville. n n'en est
rien. Nous avons dans ce dernier cas adopte exactement
la meme attitude qu'a 1'egard de M. Lumumba, de
M. Kamitatu, de M. Gizenga a Stanleyville et de M. Welbeck, charge d'affaires du Ghana a Leopoldville, lorsqu'ils nous ont demande protection. Nous avons donc
suivi une politique constante dans ce domaine, et, si
le representant de Ceylan se declare satisfait de notre
politique actuelle, il ne peut qu'approuver 1'interpretation que nous avons donnee de notre mission de maintenir l'ordre en protegeant la vie et les biens des personnes.

62. The point has been made that it should be the
duty of the United Nations, or of the Secretary-General

62. On a pretendu que 1'Organisation des Nations Unies,
autrement dit le Secretaire general et le Commandement
15

and the Command, under present rules to liberate
Mr. Lumumba. I have no reason at all to discuss this
matter here. That would go beyond the framework of
my present intervention. I want only to point out that,
to our knowledge, Mr. Lumumba is arrested under a
warrant of arrest which is probably signed - certainly
approved - by the Chief of State, who is also the
head of a delegation to the United Nations. That is
to say, any action by force to liberate Mr. Lumumba
would, in fact, mean overriding by force the authority
of the Chief fof State. I think we are all aware what
that means in legal terms in relation to a country.

de la Force, etait tenue, aux termes des regles actuelles,
de liberer M. Lumumba. Je n'ai pas l'intention de discuter pour le moment cette question qui depasserait le
cadre de mon intervention. Mais je voudrais quand m me
faire remarquer que M. Lumumba, autant que je sache,
a ete arrete sur un ordre signe - ou tout au moins
approuve - par le chef de l'Etat, lequel est egalement
chef d'une delegation al'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Cela veut dire que toute mesure visant a liMrer
M. Lumumba par la force aurait constitue un abus de
pouvoir a l'egard du chef de l'Etat. Je pense que vous
vous rendez compte de ce qu'un tel acte a l'egard d'un
pays souverain represente du point de vue juridique.

63. It was also said that if any act is against law and
order it is the building-up ofillegal armies. Now, the same
observations apply. The Armee nationale congolaise, as
it functions in Leopoldville under Colonel Mobutu,
is sanctioned by, and under the authority of President
Kasa-Vubu, who in fact is regarded - and regards
himself, and constitutionally is - the Commander in
Chief. It is perhaps something which should be taken
into account when it is said that it would be within
the competence of the United Nations to decide that
we should disarm these "illegal armies ". It is again
a question of an action which overrides the authority
of the Chief of State in his own country. I do not
argue; I just want to draw this to the attention of the
Council.
.

63. On a affirme en outre que la constitution d'une
armee irreguliere etait au premier chef une violation de
l'ordre public. Je repondrai que l'armee nationale congolaise, telle qu'elle existe aujourd'hui a Leopoldville
sous le commandement du colonel Mobutu, est placee
sous l'autorite du president Kasa-Vubu, qui se considere comme son chef - ce qu'il est en realite, constitutionnellement parlant. C'est sans doute une consideration dont il convient de tenir compte avant d'affirmer
que l'ONU est competente pour decider de desarmer
cette « armee irreguliere». Nous nous trouvons ici
devant le meme probleme qu'auparavant: celui de savoir
s'il faut passer outre a l'autorite du chef de l'Etat dans
son propre pays. Je ne discute pas, me contentant
d'attirer l'attention du Conseil sur ce point.

64. The representative of Ceylon mentioned Articles 39
and 40 of the Charter. They give certain rights; they
may be considered as the background for action taken,
although that is not quite clear legally. But I think that
the Council may wish to consider whether those Articles
can entitle the Council or the United Nations to action
of the kind I have just mentioned. It was also hinted
that if not, we may be entitled - or rather the Council
may be entitled - to act, as indicated, on the basis of
the fact that United Nations assistance was requested
by the Central Government of the Congo. On that
point I may just remind the Council of the fact that
the request was signed" Kasa-Vubu " and countersigned
" Lumumba "; that is to say, you are again facing a
situation where you would act against the person who
was at least one of the co-signatories of the paper on
which you base your action.

64. Le representant de Ceylan a parle des Articles 39
et 40 de la Charte. Ces articles conferent certains droits
et on peut les considerer comme formant la base des
decisions prises, bien que la situation juridique a cet
egard ne soit pas tout a fait claire. Mais je pense que ce
qui importe pour le Conseil, c'est de savoir si ces articles l'autorisent lui ou I'ONU a entreprendre une action
du genre de celle que je viens de mentionner. On a laisse
entendre egalement que, dans la negative, le fait que
l'aide de l'Organisation des Nations Unies au Congo
ait ete demandee par le Gouvernement central de ce pays
nous donnerait le droit - ou, plutot, donnerait le droit
au Conseil - d'agir dans le sens indique. A ce sujet,
je me permettrai de rappeler au Conseil que la demande
en question etait signee « Kasa-Vubu» et contresignee
« Lumumba». Autrement dit, nous nous trouvons une
fois de plus dans une situation ou il s'agit de prendre
des mesures contre une personne qui est a tout le moins
un des cosignataires du document sur lequel seraient
fondees ces mesures.

65. Finally, there are the legal observations which have
to be taken into account when you come to other
political action. By diplomatic means, by political persuasion, of course the United Nations can try to further
the meeting of both houses of Parliament and a roundtable conference. But most certainly it is an entirely
different proposition to say that we could put might
behind such an invitation and thus, in fact, be those
inviting. That would open vistas which I am sure this
Council would like to consider most seriously.

65. Enfin, pour ce qui est des autres aspects de notre
action politique, il faut tenir compte de certaines formes
juridiques avant de s'engager. Il va sans dire que I'ONU
peut, par la voie diplomatique, ou bien par la persuasion,
favoriser la convocation d'une conference de la « table
ronde » et le rappel des deux Chambres du Parlement.
Mais quant a utiliser la force pour provoquer la decision
des autorites congolaises de reunir cette conference et
de rappeler le Pariement, c'est une tout autre affaire.
Je suis sur que le Conseil demanderait a reflechir serieusement sur les. consequences qui pourraient s'ensuivre.

66. In all these various respects it is quite obvious
that the Council - and, may I add, the SecretaryGeneral- is bound by the Charter provisions. I am
sure that members of the Council wish to take that
into account.

66. Dans tous les cas, ilest clair que le Conseil - et
je pourrais ajouter, le Secretaire general - est lie par
les dispositions de la Charte et je suis certain que les
membres du Conseil ne voudront pas perdre de vue cette
consideration.

I

I

I

j

16

t

67. I apologize for these added observations. I am just
drawing attention to c\~rtain facts in the situation. My
basic reason for this intervention was to point out that
the Stanleyville action is entirely in line with the policy
we have pursued over the past few months.

67. Je m'excuse de ces remarques supplementaires.
Je voulais simplement attirer l'attention du Conseil sur
certains elements de .la situation. Le veritable motif de
mon intervention etait de souligner que les mesures
que nous avons prises a Stanleyville sont entierement
conformes a la ligne de conduite que nous avons suivie
au cours des quelques mois qui viennent de s'ecouler.

68. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): At the outset I
should like to express the appreciation of my Government for the consent that the Security Council has
given to our participation in this meeting, under the
relevant clauses of the Charter and the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council.

68. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de l'anglais]:
Pour commencer, je tiens, au nom de mon gouvernement,
a remercier le Conseil de securite de nous avoir autorise
a participer a cette reunion dans les conditions prevues
par la Charte et le reglement interieur provisoire du
Conseil.

69. We are privileged to be here, but at the same time
we are weighed down by a sense of responsibility, as it
lies, in an organizational sense, on the members of the
Council, and we have therefore to warn ourselves that
we should not be in the position of armchair critics.
That would be so in a normal case, but here my first duty,
under the instructions of my Government, is to convey
to this Council the sense of great concern and, in a
certain respect, the sense of the anger of our people
in regard to what is happening in the Congo - concern,
inasmuch as we realize, in the words of the Prime
Minister of India spoken to Parliament only a few days
ago, that the situation is "extraordinarUy complex not
only for us but for everybody and morle especially for
the Congo itself". He went on to say:

69. Nous apprecions l'honneur qui nous est fait de
sieger ici, mais en meme temps nous sommes impressionnes par les responsabilites quiincombentauxmembres
du Conseil, et c'est pourquoi nous devrions nous garder
de jouer les esprits critiques. Mais aujourd'hui i1 en Ira
tout autrement, car mon gouvernement m'a charge de
faire part au Conseil du sentiment d'inquietude, voire
de colere, qu'eprouve le peuple de l'Inde a l'egard des
evenements du Congo. Cette inquietude est due au fait
que nous nous rendons compte que la situation est,
comme disait il y a quelques jours le Premier Ministre
de l'lnde en s'adressant au Parlement, « extraordinairement complexe non seulement pour nous, mais aussi
pour tout le monde, et en particulier pour le Congo
lui-meme». Le Premier Ministre a dit ensuite:

" If the United Nations withdrew, it! would lead to
absolute chaos there and civil war of the worst type
and possible intervention by foreign l?owers. On the
other hand, the United Nations could hardly function
if it could not function effectively; that was the
dilemma. "

cc Si l'ONU se retirait, il n'en reslllterait que le
chaos le plus absolu et la guerre civile dans toute
son horreur; voire meme une intervention des puissances etrangeres. D'autre part, l'ONU est pratiquement impuissante du moment qu'elle ne peut agir avec
efficacite. Voila le dilemme. »

70. I assume that the task of the United Nations in
difficult situations of this kind is to bring forth from its
Members States the best that they can contribute so
that solutions may be found for difficult situations.
This is not the first time that the United Nations has
met with challenges of a difficult character where great
Powers have been involved, where those associated in
alliances have had to take different positions, where
those that have usually been apart, in opposite alliances,
have come together. I particularly think of the situation
in regard to the invasion of Egypt by France, the United
Kingdom and Israel three or four years ago. At that
time the United Nations was at its best, and the unity
displayed in the· cause of peace, in the cause of the withdrawal of aggression, and the response made, certainly
by the two great Powers, also were a great contribution
to the strength of the Organization.

70. J'imagine que le role de l'ONU dans des situations difficiles de ce genre est de donner l'occasion
aux Etats Membres de contribuer de leur mieux a la
solution des problemes poses par ces situations. Ce
n'est pas la premiere fois que l'ONU est aux prises avec
des situations difficiles, dans lesquelles les grandes puissances se trouvent impliquees, et ou les parties a une
meme alliance sont amenees a adopter des positions
opposees, tandis que ceU~s qui font partie d'alliances
opposees se rejoignent parfois. Je pense en particulier a
ce qui se produisit il y a quatre ans lorsque la France,
le Royaume-Uni et Israel envahirent l'Egypte. A ce
moment-la, tout allait pour le mieux a l'ONU et l'unite
de vues qui s'est manifestee, entre les deux plus grandes
puissances, en particulier pour la cause de la paix et de
la lutte contre l'agression, a beaucoup contribue a renforcer l'Organisation.

71. My country is not carrying as much of a burden
in the Congo as those with combat troops there. Our
personnel in .he Congo are, under Indian law, combatants. They are all either officers or other ranks of the
Indian armed forces, men or women, but they are in
the Congo specifically on non-combatant duty. That
does not take away from their character of combatants,
and in their daily duties they incur as much risk as
anyone else, and they know that when they go there.

71. Mon pays n'assume pas au Congo une charge aussi
lourde que les pays qui y ont envoye des troupes. D'apres
les lois de l'rnde, le personnel que nous avons envoye
au Congo est du personnel combattant. Tous, hommes
et femmes, font partie des forces armees de l'rnde avec
le grade d'officier ou d'autres grades, mais ils ont ete
envoyes au Congo pour y accomplir des taches autres
que celles de combattants. Cela ne leur enleve pas le
caractere de combattants, et dans l'accomplissement de
leurs taches quotidiennes ils courent le meme risque
que tous les autres et ils le savent.
17

72. We are also concerned about the fact - and here
I speak with great restraint, and I am sure the SecretaryGeneral will not misunderstand me - that we have
Indian nationals placed in positions of great responsibility. When the Secretary-General asked for their services,
we readily spared them, though it is not possible for us
to find personnel easily. But we made it clear that they
were international servants and no longer under the
direction of the Government of India. However that may
be, a national is a national and he cannot isolate himself
from that. They were asked because they were nationals
of a state uncommitted to other controversies, and
perhaps because of their own records ofhaving discharged
their duties with objectivity in the past. Therefore we
are very much concerned; and with regard to any reflection on these gentlemen which have nothing do to with
particular acts-criticisms of policy and attacks on policy,
we will accept - I would say that it is the position of my
Government, that any officer who holds the President's
commission, or any member of the armed forces
of India, has the protection of the Government in so
far as honour and things of that kind are concerned.
In the Congo they have to take pot luck; that is to say,
they have to function according to the vicissitudes of
events.

72. 11 est un autre fait qui nous preoccupe - et ici
je m'exprime avec une grande moderation; je suis certain
que le Secretaire general ne se mepren~a pas sur le sens
de mes paroles - c'est le fait qu'il y a des ressortissants
de l'Inde qui occupent des postes tres importants.
Quand le Secretaire general a fait appel a leurs services,
nous nous sommes separes d'eux sans hesitation, bien
qU'il ne nous soit pas facile de trouver du personnel.
Nous avons bien precise qu'ils. devaient etre consideres
comme des fonctionnaires internationaux et qu'ils n'avaient plus d'ordres arecevoir du Gouvernement del'Inde;
malgre tout, un ressortissant est un ressortissant et il
n'y peut rien. On a fait appel a leurs services parce qu'ils
venaient d'un pays qui n'est pas engage dans d'autres
controverses, et sans doute aussi parce qu'ils avaient
toujours fait preuve d'objectivite dans l'accomplissement
de leurs devoirs. Par consequent, nous avons "aussi notre
mot a dire et nous accepterons que I'on critique notre
politique, mais cela s'arrete la; quant aux reflexions que
l'on a pu faire a leur sujet et qui n'avaient rien a voir avec
leur conduite, je tiens a rappeler que mon gouvernement
est pret a defendre l'honneur de toute personne chargee
de mission par notre president ainsi que de n'importe
quel membre des forces armees. de l'Inde. Au Congo,
ils doivent accepter leur sort, quel qu'il soit; je veux
dire que leur role depend des possibilites du moment.

73. Therefore, we are participating in this debate for
three reasons. First, like all those present here, we are
paxt of the world and a Member State of the United
Nations. Second, we are involved through the dispatch
of personnel which, the Secretary-General well knows,
in view of our difficulties in our own land, could ill be
spared at the present time. Thirdly, we are concerned
- and this is a matter which I shall develop laterwe regard this Congo situation not as something that
should be shuttlecocked between domestic jurisdiction and
foreign jurisdiction. It is a question of peace and security,
and I do not say this in a dogmatic manner. I have
very high authority on this matter, largely in the SecretaryGeneral's own statements to us from the beginning of
the incident. What is involved here ultimately - I believe,
from the beginning - is aggression by a foreign Power
on an independent territory, when that Power was supposed to have· withdrawn. One part of the SecretaryGeneral's report says it had withdrawn, and another part
says it is there, but anyway let us assume for the purpose
of argument that it is there. So it begins with aggression,
or a threat which is a violation of the Charter, and
then a situation where peace and security is threatened.

73. Nous participons a cette discussion pour trois raisons: premierement, parce que nous sommes Membres
de i'Organisation des Nations Unies comme tous ceux
qui sont ·ici presents; deuxiemement, parce que nous
avons envoye au Congo un personnel dont nous ne pouvons guere nous passer en ce moment en raison de nos
propres difficultes - le Secretaire general le sait fort
bien; troisiemement, nous ne voulons pas que l'on
considere la situation au Congo comme pouvant etre
ramenee a un simple probleme de competence entre la
juridiction interne et la juridiction internationale je reviendrai sur cette question dans quelques instants.
C'est une question de paix et de securite; je ne dis pas
cela de fa<;on dogmatique, mais c'est une realite que je
tiens de source siire, et en tout premier lieu des declarations que nous a faites le Secretaire general au debut
de cet incident. Ce dont il s'agit ici en definitive - et
a mon avis il ne s'est jamais agi d'autre chose - est,
d'une part, l'agression commise par une puissance
etrangere contre 1llD. territoire independant alors qu'elle
etait censee s'etre retiree de ce territoire. Dans une partie
du rapport du Secretaire general, il est dit que cette
puissance s'est retiree, dans une autre, i1 est dit qu'elle
est encore la, mais, pour les besoins de la cause, supposons qu'elle est encore la. Done, tout commence par
une agression, ou par une menace, qui est une violation
de la Charte; ensuite se cree une situation mena<;ant
la paix et la securite.

74. We could conduct these meetings - as unfortunately has become too often the case - by taking up
debating positions and scoring points, and at the end
finding out who has been more abusive than the other.
I do not think that is going to lead us anywhere, because
the situation, so far as my country's estimation of it
is concerned, is, in all conscience, very serious. Therefore,
I want to start off with the position that there are four
main factors which first strike one's mind: what ought
to be done in the circumstances, and how much of it

74. Nous pourrions mener la discussion - comme
c'est malheureusement trop souvent le cas - a partir de
positions contradictoires, marquer des points et design~r
a la fin celui qui a ete le plus injurieux. Je ne VOlS
pas ou cela nous menerait, car franchement la situation
est tres grave - du moins c'est ce que pense mon pays.
En consequence, je voudrais commencer par indiquer
qu'il y a quatre problemes qui nous viennent immed~a­
tement a l'esprit. Tout d'abord, que devons-nous fatre
et jusqu'ou faut-il aller etant donne les circonstances?

18

should be done; and to decide whether one course of
action or another is likely to yield results, which will
further the purposes ofthe Charter and ofpeace and security in the interests of the people of the Congo. The
two other factors are in opposition: the legal problems
of how much can legally be done and how much can be
done from the remote possibilities. So, going back to
these four points, I would say that what ought to be
done is to a certain extent, in the minds of people, quite
rightly affected by what is legal and by what is possible.
But, having said that, I would also say that the subjective view taken of the matter of what ought to be done
and what ought not to be done, depends upon political
orientations, upon the sense of right and wrong, upon
the importance of peace in Africa, upon the role that
liberated colonial peoples should play; apart from the
statements we make. So what ought to be done is very
likely conditioned by these circumstances but tends - I
do not say mischievously, but tends unconsciously - to
be covered up by legal arguments. Law is the best aid
to justice. It is also the best smoke-screen for the reverse.
It always has been so in human history.

Nous devons decider, compte tenu de tous les elements
de la situation, queUe est la ligne de conduite susceptible de donner des resultats favorisant les buts de la
Charte et la cause de la paix et de la securite dans l'interet du peuple congolais. Les deux autres problemes
sont contradictoires: il s'agit de savoir, d'une part,
ce qui peut etre entrepris du point de vue juridique, et,
d'autre part, ce que l'on peut esperer realiser en tirant
parti de toutes les possibilites. A considerer ces quatre
probUm;!.es dans leur ensemble, il me semble que la plupart des gens pensent a juste titre que ce que nous devons
faire depend dans une certaine mesure de ce qu'il est
legitime et aussi de ce qu'il est possible de faire. Mais,
cela dit, il me semble aussi que la question de savoir
ce qu'il faut faire ou ne pas faire depend pour chacun
de nous de ses opinions politiques, de sa conception du
bien et du mal, de l'importance qu'il attache au maintien de la paix en Afrique, du role que sont appeles a
jouer les peuples liberes du joug colonial, independamment de nos declarations. Sans doute, notre conception
de ce qu'il faut faire depend de tout cela, mais nous
avons tendance - je ne dis pas que nous le faisons
expres, mais nous avons inconsciemment tendance a
couvrir tout cela d'arguments juridiques. Le droit est
le meilIeur soutien de la justice. Mais il n'est pas non
plus de meilIeur paravent pour l'injustice. n en a toujours
ete ainsi dans 1'histoire humaine.

75. Therefore, I propose to take these things one by
one at a later stage. But the main position that I want
to submit on behalf of my Government is this, that
the United Nations does not work on a set of instruments which are divine revelation. These are not like
the laws of the Medes and the Persians. The Charter
of this vast Organization of nearly a hundred nations
is contained in a small compass which is probably half
the length of the constitution of our national countries
because it enunciates principles; it lays down certain
guide-lines. But the main feature of our Organization
is that it is a dynamic Organization and I therefore
want to examine the statements made at various times
on behalf of the Secretary-General or of the delegations
from this point of view, and, since time is short I should
like first of all to submit the position of international
law in regard to this.

75. Je me propose donc d'examiner ces questions une
a une un peu plus tard. Mais dans l'ensemble, la position de mon gouvernement est que l'ONU ne fonctionne
pas sur la base de lois divines comme celles, par exemple,
des Medes et des Perses. La Charte de cette vaste organisation de quelque 100 nations tient dans un tres petit
volume qui ne contient probablement que la moitie des
dispositions de nos constitutions nationales, parce
qu'elle se contente d'enoncer des principes, d'indiquer
certain.es lignes de conduite. Mais la principale caracteristique de notre organisation etant son dynamismt::, je
voudrais examiner sous ce rapport les declarations faites
a diverses reprises par le Secretaire general ou par certaines delegations; etant donne cependant que nous disposons de peu de temps, je desire indiquer tout de suite
le point de vue du droit international a l'egard de la
question qui nous occupe.

76. I believe that a doctrine which I submitted before,
on another occasion, in this Council- what is usually
called rebus sic stantibus, that is to say, changing conditions - is applicable here. We cannot be bound today
by a course of action which was valid three months ago.
This does not mean that we are like a weather-cock,
changing from one day to another, or that we are being
opportunists. Certain actions, certain interpretations,
were valid at certain points. If we read the SecretaryGeneral's report, for example, we find that the way
the thing was handled has depended on what was necessary at the time. Therefore, we should not be too much
bound by the fact that someone has said: no interference
in internal affairs - I shall deal later with how much
we have interfered and where - or in domestic jurisdiction, or the use of force or non-use of force, or of standards and double standards, and so on. We have looked
at the conditions as they change and then we take these
changed conditions.

76. Je crois que la doctrine que j'ai deja eu l'occasion
de defendre devant le ConseiI dans d'autres circonstances - celle de l'evolution des conditions - est
applicable dans le cas present. Nous ne pouvons pas
etre lies aujourd'hui par la ligne de conduite valable iI
y a trois mois. II n'en resulte pas que nous sommes des
girouettes, changee.l1t d'avis a tout instant, ni que nous
sommes des opportunistes. Certaines actions, certaines
interpretations etaient valables a certains moments.
Si nous lisons le rapport du Secretaire general, par
exemple, nous voyons bien que la fat;on dont le probleme
a ete traite dependait des necessites du moment. Par
consequent, nous n'avons pas a nous sentir tellement lies
parce que quelqu'un a dit qu'iI ne fallait pas intervenir
dans les affaires interieures d'un pays - j'examinerai plus
tard dans quel cas et jusqu'a quel point nous sommes intervenus de cette fa~on - ni empieter sur les competences
nationales, ni employer la force, ni faire ceci ou cela.
Nous avons constate que la situation a evolue et nous
en prenons acte.
19

77. If we look at the Secretary-General's statement,
we find that he says: "Even though normal economic
activities were far from satisfactory, life has continued
on a minimum basis of normalcy due to the various
forms of assistance rendered by the United Nations"
[913th meeting, para. 36]. That is to say that, up to the
beginning of September there was more or less, by the
action of the United Nations, a return to normal conditions. Then there was deterioration. The action taken at
that time has varied from day to day because law in this
case has been a matter of interpretation.

77. Nous lisons dans la declaration du Secretaire general que « meme si les activites economiques normales
ont ete loin d 'etre satisfaisantes, la vie a continue dans
des conditions plus ou moins normales grace aux diverses
formes d'assistance des Nations Umes» [913 e seance,
par. 36.] Autrement dit, grace a l'intervention de l'ONU,
les conditions, au debut de septembre, etaient redevenues a peu pres normales. C'est alors que les choses
commencerent a se gater. A partir de ce moment, l'action
de l'ONU a varie d'un jour a l'aut::'e, parce que, dans
ces circonstances, le droit devenait une simple question
d'interpretation.

78. Then comes the period from September on, and
it would not be polite to argue whether our meeting
here at the emergency special session of the General
Assembly had anything to do with the situation; it
might be the cause, it might be the result, but whatever
it is, the controversy is here and is largely reflected in
the Congo itself, and the changed conditions have come
one by one. I should like to speak about these changed
conditions.

78. Puis vint la periode qui suivit le mois de septembre,
et j'aurais mauvaise grace a supposer que la session
extraordinaire d'urgence de I'Assemblee generale rut
pour quelque chose dans la situation; elle a pu en etre
la cause ou le resultat, mais, quoi qu'il en soit, la controverse se poursuit, et il est certain qu'elle a des repercussions au Congo, OU la situation a evolue petit a petit.
Je voudrais maintenant parler un peu de cette situation
nouvelle.

79. First of all, the United Nations intervened, not at
the request of a public meeting, not because it thought
that it was a good thing to do and therefore went in;
the United Nations intervened at the request of a constituted Government which, so far as we know, was a
Government'sanctified by the laws of the territory.
Since then, the situation has changed. It is not only
common knowledge, but it appears from the SecretaryGeneral's report, that there is no organized government,
there is a state of chaos altogether; and since we were
asked to go there by a Government that was the authority
at that time, that is a big changed condition and we
must therefore see what consequences follow from it.

79. Premierement, l'ONU est intervenue, non pas a la
demande d'une assemblee publique, non pas parce
qu'elle croyait bien faire, mais a la demande d'un gouvernement normalement constitue et, pour autant qu'on
le sache, sanctionne par les lois applicables dans le pays
en question. Depuis lors, la situation a change. Tout
le monde sait, et cela ressort d'ailleurs du rapport du
Secretaire general, qu'il n'y a plus de gouverner'~ ..mt
organise, le chaos regne; or, c'etait un gouvernement
en exercice qui nous avait demande de nous rendre au
Congo. Je pense que c'est la une modification importante de la situation et nous devons en tirer les consequences.

80. Secondly, when the United Nations intervened, the
Congolese army, while it was far from being a disciplined force, was one that was considered by the United
Nations as a worthy subject of discipline. Again I do not
want to quote at length, but the report shows that this
discipline would have been possible because the army
entered into politics; and Mr. Hammarskjold quite
definitely refers to this feature of the army becoming
a political organ. In other words, the constitutional
Government, the Government that was democratic as
flll" as it went, and certainly a constitutional and legal
Government, has in fact been replaced by a de facto
Government by a coup d'etat. This is a changed condition:
the army entering into politics, which means that the
operation of law had to take that into account.

80. Deuxiemement, lorsque l'OND est intervenue,
l'armee congolaise, bien qu'elle ne rut pas ce qu'on
peut appeler disciplinee, etait consideree parelle comme
capable d'une certaine discipline. La encore, je pourrais
citer le rapport du Secretaire general, mais je me contenterai de dire qu'il montre que la discipline etait
devenue impossible a partir du moment ou l'armee se
mit a s'occu:per de politique: M. Hammarskjold indique
tres clairemcmt que cette armee etait devenue un organe
politique. Autrement dit, le gouvernement constitutionnel, legitime, le gouvernement democratique, on peut le
dire, a ete remplace par un gouvernement de facto a la
suite d'un coup d'Etat. La situation etait done changee;
l'armee prenant desormais une part active a la politique,
l'application du droit devait etre modifiee en consequence.

81. The third is that, while the United Nations went 8!. Troisiemement, l'ONU s'est rendue au Congo afin
there for the purpose, among other purposes, of main- notamment de preserver l'integrite du territoire, c'esttaining the integrity of the Congo, that is, not encourage a-dire de decourager les forces separatistes et, dans la
the forces of separatism but, to the extent possible, mesure du possible, de les rapprocher, au moyen soit
either by economic, technical or other aid, to bring d'une aide technique, soit d'une aide economique, ou
them together. This cycle also has changed. Disintegra- , de toute autre nature. La aussi, la situation a change.
tion has begun, and this disintegration is referred to by La desintegratioll a commence, cette desintegration
the Secretary-General in his last report where he says: dont nOllS parle le Secretaire general dans son dernier
rapport. Je cite:

« Cette desintegration du Gouvernement central
s'est accompagnee - et est peut-etre meme resulteede l'apparition dans l'armee nationale congolaise de
groupes loyaux a divers dirigeants politiques qui ant

" This disintegration of the Central Government was
accompanied by, and perhaps even a result of, the
emergence of units within the Armee nationale congolaise loyal to individual political leaders who began

20

cnmmence a s'opposer les uns aux autres. Cette
,"lation etait sur le point de degenerer en une guerre
civile grave qu'a permis d'eviter une rapide intervention des Nations Unies, qui ont neutralise, autant que
faire se pouvait, les factions antagonistes.» (Ibid.,

to feud with each other. This situation was on the
verge of developing into a major civil war, had it
not been for the quick intervention by the United
Nations which neutralized, to the greatest degree in
its power, the warring factions...... [Ibid., para. 39.]

par. 39.]

82. This was the position when disintegration first
reared its head. It was dealt with by the United Nations,
and somewhere else Mr. Hammarskjold refers to the
position. If it was necessary for the united Nations to
intervene in July - and all of you agreed that it was
necessary; it was one of the occasions when the Security
Council voted unanimously, then, as the SecretaryGeneral says, it is more necessary today. And we concur
in this in the terms stated by our Prime Minister which
I have read out.

82. Telle etait la situation lorsque la desintegration fit
sa premiere apparition. L'Organisation des Nations
Unies est intervenue. M. Hammarskjold nous dit par
ailleurs dans quel cas. S'il etait necessaire que 1'0rganisation intervienne en juillet - et nous sommes tous
d'accord pour reconnaitre qu'il en etait ainsi, c'est meme
une question sur laquelle le Conseil de securite s'est
prononce a l'unanimite - alors a fortiori, doit-elle
intervenir aujourd'hui comme l'a dit le Secretaire general; et nous exprimons notre accord sur ce point dans
les termes du Premier Ministre, que j'ai cites il y a quelques instants.

83. Then there are other facts that have changed; that
is to say, the United Nations intervened to obtain the
withdrawal of the Belgian forces. How far they have
been withdrawn and how far they have not I will deal
with later, but the fact of the matter is that while it was
fundamental that, with the entry of the United Nations,
outside forces should be withdrawn, now more outsiders
are intervening than the United Nations. It is not necessary today to make a chart of this because we have not
the material, and it is a great pity that the United Nations
has no Military Intelligence, although it has an army.
I do not say that its officers have no intelligence, but
it has no Military Intelligence. We have been asked to
send doctors, pilots, a supply of officers, nurses, but
no Military Intelligence officers are asked for. Some of
us, however, have our representatives there.

83. Mais il y a encore eu d'autres changements; en
eifet, 1'0NU est intervenue, entre autres choses, pour
obtenir le depart des troupes beIges. Que ces troupes
soient ou non parties, je reviendrai Ia-dessus dans un
moment, mais le fait est qu'il etait essentiel que toutes
les troupes etrangeres se retirent au moment ou la Force
des Nations Unies prenait possession du terrain; or il
semble que, sous une forme ou une autre, il y a en ce
moment plus de monde qui intervient au Congo que
n'en compte la Force des Nations Unies. n n'est pas
utile d'entrer dans les details sur ce point; d'ailleurs,
nous manquons des elements d'information necessaires, et, a cet egard, il est regrettable que 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies ne dispose d'aucun service de
renseignements militaires, bien qu'elle ait une armee.
Entendez-moi bien, je ne dis pas que ses officiers sont
ignorants, mais qu'ils ne sont pas suffisamment renseignes. On nous a demande d'envoyer des medecins, des
pilotes, toute une gamme d'officiers, des infirmieres,
mais personne n'a demande d'envoyer des officiers des
services de renseignements. Cependant, quelques-uns
d'entre nous ont leuts representants sur place.

84. So, to return to the changed conditions; there was
a situation, in which a new State asked for the assistance of the United Nations, and the United Nations
stepped in to help things to improve - and, according
to Hr. Hammarskjold's statement, the situation did
~mprove, certainly up to the beginning of Septemberbut I now think there is no way to describe it except
as virtually a state of chaos and anarchy, not only in
regard to today, but in regard to another circumstance.
There has been the institution of what is called the
" college of commissioners " wherein overgrown school
boys and students are recruited for the purpose of partisan and blood feuds. There are seeds of future anarchy
in this country, where the liberty of this great part of
Africa which, of course, belongs to Africa - and I do
not want the representative of Cameroun to think that
anyone else is laying any claims - is something that
concerns us all. One of the worst features in the situation is that the younger generation should have been
harnessed by politicians who seek to create feuds not
only among themselves, but among the rising generation. The situation is one which has got to be dealt
with from this point of view and in consideration of the
changes from time to time. Therefore, the interpretation

84. Pour en revenir a l'evolution de la situation, je crois
que 1'0n pent dire qu'il y avait au debut un jeune Etat
qui a demande l'aide de 1'0NU pour mettre les choses
en ordre etl'ONU s'est mise a la tache; d'apres M.Hammarskjold, la situation s'est eifectivement amelioree
jusqu'au commencement du mois de septembre - et
il y a maintenant un veritable chaos, un etat d'anarchie quasi totale au Congo. Pas seulement maintenant
d'ailleurs, mais egalement a une certaine epoque anterieure. On a institue un « college de commissaires»,
compose de lyceens et d'etudiants a peine sortis de
l'enfance, a qui 1'0n a confie la tache de semer la discorde et l'inimitie. 11 y a tous les germes d'une anarchie
future dans ce pays qui fait partie indubitablement de
l'Afrique -- j'insiste la-dessus parce que je ne veux pas
que le representant du Cameroun croie que je suis de
ceux qui revendiquent des droits sur le Congo - et dont
la liberte est un sujet de preoccupations pour nous tous,
tant que nous sommes. L'un des pires aspects de la situation au Congo est que la jeune generation ait ete entrainee
par les politiciens professionnels a semer la discorde non
seulement en son sein, mais encore parmi la generation
montante. La situation doit etre envisagee sous ce rapport et du point de vue d~s changements qui se pro-

21

."'._'-~

of our powers, and of our positions, has got to be
looked at.

duisent de temps en temps, En consequence, nous devons
user de beaucoup de circonspection dans l'interpretation
que nous donnons de nos pouvoirs et de nos attitudes.

85. Before I go further it is necessary for me to deal
with the other aspects of things. We have no special
position in this matter, but it 1S very difficult, as we
have informed the Secretary-General, to keep Parliament quiet, to keep public opinion satisfied, when
members of the Armed Forces are there unarmed.
I said a while back they are combatants but on noncombat duty - to do this sort of thing is one of the
most difficult things to ask of a soldier; they are trained
to fight, and if anybody attacks them, they attack in
return. But these men who have gone out, be it in the
Congo or in Gaza or anywhere else, have rendered such
a good account of themselves with self-restraint.

85. Avant de poursuivre, il faut que je traite des autres
aspects du probleme. Nous n'avons pas d'opinion particuliere sur cette affaire, mais i1 est difficile, comme nous
l'avons deja fait comprendre au Secretaire general,
d'apaiser le Parlement national et de contenter l'opinion
publique alors que des membres de notre armee se
trelivent au Congo, sans armes. Je l'ai dit tout a l'heure,
ces gens sont des combattants, bien qu'ils ne soient pas
en mission de combat, et, comme tels, ils sont entraines
a se battre; il est tres penible pour un soldat de se trouver
desarme; en general, si on l'attaque, il riposte - mais,
la, il ne peut pas le faire. Et malgre tout, ces homllles
ont accepte d'aller au Congo, COlllme ils avaient accepte
d'aller a Gaza et ailleurs, dans les memes conditions;
ils se sont bien conduits et ont fait preuve de retenue.

86. It is not my province to go into the case of other
people, but so far as our people are concerned, our
diplomatic officials and their womenfolk have not been
treated in the way - I shall put it as mildly as I can that there have been intrusions on their liberty, their
property, and their movement. We have the case of
officers of the Indian Army - and I pay tribute to them
for taking it in this way. It is easy for a soldier to chastise
and kill; it is very difficult for a soldier to take blows
and not return blows. It is, in a sense, a truly Ghandian
Army that we have sent out. One of these officers was
knocked down on the ground, sat upon and beaten, and
we are told that his spine is affected - we have no means
of finding out - and taken to the hospital, just because
he was in a car and somebody else wanted it. It is plain
highway robbery. And we talk about law and order.
It is an insult in a way that exercises the minds of our
people. We are not whining about it. In fact, when
certain sections of public opinion, as you would naturally
expect, want action of a different character, our Government has taken the view that we must take the rough
with the smooth; it is part of our duty. But still it should
be known that this is not the kind of thing that a country - or I will not say a country, because we cannot
call it the whole of a country - but those who are responsible, or irresponsible, for its management at the moment
should have meted out to those who have gone to serve
them. Another officer was beaten up, and his eardrums
are gone and he was no longer able to function in the
capacity he used to. I will not read out all these things.

86. Je n'ai pas a m'occuper des autres, mais, en ce qui
concerne nos ressortissants, je puis dire que nos representants diplomatiques et leurs collaboratrices n'ont
jamais e16 traites de maniere te1le que l'on puisse dire
qu'il y ait eu atteinte a leur liberte, it. leurs biens ou a
leur droit de se deplacer. Mais il yale cas des officiers
de l'armee indienne: je rends hOlllmage a leur patience.
n est facile a un soldat de chatier et de tuer; il lui est
tres difficile de recevoir des coups sans les rendre. C'est
en quelque sorte une veritable armee de Gandhi que nous
avons envoyee la-bas. Un de ces officiers a ete jete a
terre, on s'est assis sur lui et on l'a roue de coups a tel
point qu'il parait avoir la colonne vertebrale atteinte
- nous n'avons aucun moyen de savoir exactement ce
qu'il en est - et on l'a conduit a l'hOpita1. Pourquoi
lui a-t-on fait cela? Tout simplement parce qu'il circulait dans une voiture dont que1qu'un avait envie. Ce sont
des procedes de bandits de grand chemin! Et nous voila
en train de parler d'ordre public! Notre peuple a ressenti vivement cette injure. Mais nous n'allons pas
pleurnicher la-dessus. Au cortraire, alors que, vous
vous en doutez, certains lnilieux de l'opinion publique
reclament des mesures d'un tout autre genre, notre
gouvernement prefere s'en tenir a rendre le bien pour
le mal; cela fait partie de notre devoir. Mais, tout de
meme, je tiens a souligner que ce n'est pas ainsi qu'un
pays - ou plutot des responsables, ou des irresponsables de ce pays, car on ne peut pas accuser le pays
tout entier - devrait se conduire a l'egard de gens
qui sont la-bas dans le seul but de les aider. Un autre
officier a lui aussi ete brutalise, et celui-la a eu les deux
tympans perfores et il n'est plus en mesure de s'acquitter
de ses fonctions. Je ne donnerai pas un recit detaille
de tous ces incidents.

87. On the 28th November, troops of Mobutu seized
an ambulance van belonging to the Indian medical unit.
Even in times of war there is a sanctity about a medical
unit. I would particularly ask my colleagues here who can
exercise influence over those who may be legally or
illegally in power to see that some sort of decency
is observed in these matters. In The Times of India of
29 November 1960 one reads:

87. Le 28 novembre, les soldats de Mobutu se sont
empares d'une ambulance appartenant a un groupe
sanitaire indien. Meme en temps de guerre, on ne touche
pas aux ambulances des groupes sanitaires. Je demande
a mes collegues ici presents s'il y a quelqu'un qui puisse
exercer une influence sur ceux qui detiennent legalement ou illegalement le pouvoir afin qu'ils observent
une attitude au moins decente dans ce domaine? On
lit dans le Times of India du 29 novembre 1960:

" Troops of Colonel Joseph Mobutu yesterday seized
an ambulance van belonging to the Indian Medical

« Des soldats du colonel Joseph Mobutu se sont
empares hier d'une ambulance appartenant au groupe

22

Unithere . .. earlier, the Congolese soldiers disarmed
two Indian military policemen escorting a Nigerian
General to the airport. .. the Congolese officer forcibly
took away all the goods of the house ofthe Commander
of the Indian contingent and has now occupied the
house. "

sanitaire indien actueUement en service ici ... un peu
plus tot, des soldats congolais ont desarme deux
membres d.e la police militaire indienne qui escortaient
un general nigerienjusqu'a l'aerodrome .,. un officier
congolais a fait demenager de force la maison du
commandant du conticgent inilien et s'y est installe a
sa place. »

88. Even these Indian nationals, who have been lent
to the United Nations, like Brigadier Rikhye, for example,
had armoured cars and things taken away. Mr. Dayal
and Brigadier Rikhye often have been under threats of
attack. We have also been in the position of having considerable amounts of indignities, small as they are, heaped
upon our people in the Congo; political propaganda of
a character as if we had been an occupying force in this
place. Colonel Roy was stopped on the way to the
airport on the morning of 22 October not by civilians,
but by the Congolese troops. Colonel Harmandar Singh,
Officer Commanding Indian Contingent, and Captain
Jagjit Singh, his adjutant, were stopped on the way to
their office and deprived of the use of their cars. This is
plain highway robbery.

88. Des ressortissant indiens qui ont ete pretes a l'ONU,
tel que le general Rikhye, ont ete victimes d'actes de
pillage. On leur a derobe des voitures blindees et des
objets personnels. M. Dayal et le general Rikhye ont
souvent fait l'objet de menaces. Les lndiens qui se
trouvent au Congo ont ete accables d'injures et ont fait
l'objet d'une propagande politique teUe que l'on pourrait
croire qu'il font partie d'une armee d'occupation.
Le 22 octobre, le colonel Roy a ete arrete sur le chemin
de l'aeroport, non pas par des civils, mais par des soldats
congolais. Le colonel Harmandar Singh, commandant
du contingent indien, de meme que le capitaine Jagjit
Singh, son adjoint, se sont vu confisquer leur automobile
alors qu'ils se rendaient a leur bureau. Ce sont la des
procedes de bandits de grand chemin.

89. On 3 December, the situation became worse - an
attack on civilians by civilians. Therefore, we are now
coming to the state in which there is total anarchy. In
those circumstances, when there is such a situation,
how much we can argue the fine points of law in older
terms, is a matter for consideration. Earlier this month,
the correspondent of the Press Trust of India, our
leading news agency, was twice set upon by Congolese
civilians and beaten up. The local gendarmerie went to
his hotel during his absence and - I will leave the
rest to the imagination. It is not as though a couple of
ruffians did this, because immediately after - I cannot
say the Government - the authorities, whoever they are,
ordered his expulsion from the place; which means
that these unlawful acts received some kind of sanctification from them. I am happy to say, although I have
no official information, that I heard rumours yesterday
the Congolese authorities have withdrawn his order of
expulsion, and therefore some news will come from
there. It was probably due to the kind intervention of
friendly powers.

89. Le 3 decembre, la situation a encore empire: des
civils s'en sont pris a d'autres civils. Nous sommes en
presence d'un Etat en pleine anarchie. Dans ces conditions, on se demande comment on peut encore perdre
son temps a discuter sur des points de droit subtils. Au
debut de ce mois, le correspondant du Press Trust of
India, notre principale agence d'information, a ete it
deux reprises brutalise par des civils congolais. La gendarmerie locale s'est rendue a son hotel pendant son
absence et ... je vous laisse a deviner le reste. Ce n'est
pas la meme chose que s'il s'agissait d'une bande de
voyous car, aussitot apres, les autorites - je ne peux
pas me forcer a dire le Gouvernement - ont ordonne,'
son expulsion: ce qui signifie que ces actes illegaux etaient en quelque sorte sanctionnes par eUes. J'ai heureu..
sement le plaisir d'annoncer que, selon certaines rumeurs
- on ne m'a rien communique d'officiel a ce sujet les autorites congolaises auraient decide hier de retirer
l'ordre d'expulsion, de sorte que nous finirons par
savoir exactement ce qui s'est passe. Cette decision est
probablement due it l'intervention de puissances amies.

90. Official papers, which are covered by diplomatic
immunity, have been interfered with, not interfered with
in the way of espionage, but just by way of plunder.
These were business papers held up by some people
representing the Congolese authorities.

90. Des documents officiels, qui sont proteges par
l'immunite diplomatique, ont ete subtilises, non pas par
des espions, mais tout simplement par des pillards.
11 s'agissait de papiers d'affaires detenus par des gens
qui representent les autorites congolaises.

91. What is more, we have reason to think that the
Congolese Government - the authorities at the present
time - seemed to take the attitude that any country,
expressing an opinion in the United Nations that does
not suit them, is a hostile country. In that case, we
could not be here. We would have no ambassador in
any country if that were the criterion, that we should
not express our opinions here.

91. Ce qui est plus grave, c'est que nous avons de
bonnes raisons de croire que le Gouvernement congolais - c'est-a-dire les autorites actueUes - a pris le parti
de declarer hostile tout pays qui exprime, au sein de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, une opinion qui n'a
pas l'heur de lui plaire. Dans ces conditions, nous ne
pouvons pas rester au Congo. Nous n'aurions d'ambassadeur dans aueun pays si cela devait nous obliger a ne
pas donner notre avis iei.

92. This is the position. Therefore, these atrocities
are not told in the way of atrocity tales. I believe that
we are probably people slightly less affected than some
others.

92. TeUe est la situation. C'est pourquoi, je n'ai pas
fait it plaisir le recit de ees atroeites. Je pense du reste
que nous ne sommes pas les plus direetement affeetes
dans la situation.
23

93. Then we come to t..1l.e position in regard to the I 93. Venons-en maintenant aux raisons qui ont amene
reasons why the United Nations went there. It was l'OND au Congo. Dans la premiere resolution du Conseil,
said in the first resolution, on 14 July [S/4387], and ceHe du 14 juillet [S/4387], figurent les termes suivants
repeated several times afterwards: "Calls upon the qui ont ete repetes plusieurs fois par la suite: « Fait
Government of Belgium to withdraw their troops from appel au Gouvernement beIge pour qu'il retire ses
the territory of the Republic of the Congo ". It author- troupes du territoire de la Republique du Congo.»
ized the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps Cette resolution autorisait le Secretaire general a prendre
to that effect. Then, on 9 Augusut [S/4426] the Security toutes les mesures necessaires a cet effet. Dans sa
Council said: " Calls upon the Government of Belgium resolution du 9 aofit [S/4426], le Conseil de securite
to withdraw immediately its troops from the province disait: « Invite le Gouvernement beIge a retirer immediaof Katanga under speedy modalities. . . .».
tement ses troupes de la province du Katanga selon
de promptes modalites ».
94. In answer to the Secretary-General's requirement,
the Belgian Government replied, on 30 August 1960:
". . . the withdrawal of Belgian troops in the Congo
has been completed with the sole exception of some
members of the First Paratroop Battalion who are
in transit at Albertville. . . . " [S/4475, annex IV.]
It is one of those cases where the troops have withdrawn
and they are still there, because it says that the withdrawal of the Belgian troops from the Congo has, in
effect, been completed.

94. Repondant a la demande du Secretaire general, le
Gouvernement beIge declarait le 30 aout 1960:
... le retrait des troupes beIges du Congo est acheve
avec la seule exception de quelques elements du ler batailIon de parachutistes qui se trouvent en transit a Albertville. » [S/4475, annexe IV]
Les troupes ont ete retirees mais elles sont encore la:
on no1,lS dit pourtant que l'evacuation des troupe beIges
du Congo est achevee!

95. On the same day as this came, the Secretary-General
wrote to the permanent representative of Belgium:
" The Secretary-General has, however, just received
a report fFom his representative who arrived at Kamina
today, 30 August, at 14.30 hours local time. At that
time Belgian combat troops consisting of one 400-man
battalion of paratroopers, one 120-man company of
airfield guards and one school of aviation comprising
fifty instructors and students had not yet been
evacuated. . . .
"The Secretary-General expresses his surprise at
finding that there is a marked difference " - a very
mild statement - "between the information received
from Brussels and the facts observed on the scene. "
[Ibid., annex V.]

95. Le meme jour, le Secretaire general ecrivit au representant permanent de la Belgique:
« D'autre part, le Secretaire general vient de recevoir un rapport de ses representants qui sont arrives
a Kamina aujourd'hui 30 aofit, a 14 h 30 (heure locale).
A cette heure, des troupes de combat beIges se composant d'un bataillon de parachutistes de 400 hommes,
d'une compagnie de gardes d'aeroport de 120 hommes
et d'une ecole d'aviation de 50 instructeurs et eleves
n'avaient pas encore ete evacues ...
« Le Secretaire general exprime sa surprise de voir
ainsi une difference marquee» - on ne saurait etre
plus modere - « entre les renseignements re~us de
Bruxelles et les faits constates sur place.» [Ibid.,
annexe V.]

96. I am quite aware that ·there is a difference in time
between Brussels and the Congo, but here is not only
a question of time, but a question of difference in facts.
The Belgian Government said this was due to the
". . . overlapping period in which to transfer authority and hand over the provisions. . . . " [S/4475/Add.
2, sect. I.]

96. Je me rends parfaitement compte qu'il y a un decalage d'heures entre BruxeIles et le Congo, mais il ne
s'agit pas id d'un decalage d'heures, il s'agit d'un decalage entre les differentes versions des faits. Le Gouvernement beIge a declare que cette situation etait due a
la necessite d'une « presence commune pour la remise
des pouvoirs et pour le transfert des vivres». [S/4475/
Add.2, sect. I.]

97. Now, it has been an unfortunate experience of this
Council and of the United Nations that troops take
less time to go into somebody else's country than to
come out. We had this before. All invading troops get
there very quickly, maybe they land by parachute, and
gravity therefore pulls them, but they cannot leave in
the same way.

97. Le Conseil de securite et l'ONU n'ont que
trop souvent eu l'occasion de constater q<i'il fallait
beaucoup plus de temps pour evacuer des troupes d'un
pays etranger que pour les y amener. Ce n'est pas la
premiere fois que cela arrive. Les troupes des envahisseurs arrivent toujours tres vite a pied d' reuvre, mais,
qiJand il s'agit de repartir, c'est autre chose. Peut-etre
est-ce parce qu'elles arrivent en parachute: la pesanteur
leur vient en aide; on ne peut evidemment s'attendre
a les voir repartir de la meme fa~on!

98. Then the Belgians, after having talked about this
overlapping, on 4 September received this reply from
the Secretary-General:
"Furthermore, according to the report, there are
still 650 Belgians at the base, including those at

98. Les BeIges, qui venaient de parler de presence
commune, re~urent le 4 septembre la reponse suivante
du Secretaire general:
« En outre, d'apres le rapport, il reste encore it la
base 650 BeIges, y inclus ceux qui se trouvent aBanana.
24

Banana. The commander himself has said that all
these men are combatants, that there are no technicians among them, and that he himself is a paratroop.
On a flight over the Banana naval base two gunboats
were observed. " [Ibid., sect. II.]

Le commandant lui-meme a dit que ces hommes sont
tous des combattants, qu'il n 'y a pas parmi eux de
techniciens et qu'il est, lui-meme, un parachutiste.
En survolant la base navale de Banana. on a note
deux canonnieres. » [Ibid., sect. 11.]
.

99. Of course, this can all be called technology, the
gunboat is certainly a result of technology, but there it
is. This is four days after Mr. Hammarskjold said it
is not correct. Facts differ, it is explained away, and then
four days afterwards the position is that there are 650
Belgian troops in one place.

99. Evidemment tout ceci n'est rien d'autre que de la
technique pure. Apres tout, une canonniere n'est
rien d 'autre qu 'un produit de la technique. Et ceci se
passe quatre jours apres que M. Hammarskjold a declare
que cette attitude n'etait pas correcte. On donne des
versions differentes des faits, on s'en explique, et puis
tout a coup, quatre jours plus tard, on decouvre 650
soldats beiges dans un coin.

100. Again on the same day, the Secretary-General
said:
" According to information received by the Secretary-General, officers of Belgian nationality are at the
present time attached to Katanga forces and other
groups in armed conflict with the Central Government of the Republic of the Congo. " [S/4482/Add.3,
sect. I.]
Now, the question arises whether direct participation
in the event is less or more grave than aiding and abetting.
I believe any technical advice given, and direction of operations of a military character or of a semi-military
character is direct intervention.
" In view of the circumstances, however, the situation can be interpreted in the sense that the Belgian
Government has at least permitted persons connected
with its military services under a 'technical assistance'
programme to give help to forces fighting the Government of the Congo. " [Ibid.]

100. Le 4 septembre egalement, le Secretaire general
disait:
« Selon les renseignements rel;Us par le Secretaire
general, des officiers de nationalite beIge font actuellement partie des forces katangaises et d'autres
groupes qui sont en conflit arme avec le Gouvernement central de la Republique du Congo. » [S/4482/
Add.3, sect. I.]

Therefore, we have a Member of the United Nations,
a country whose history we look upon in many chapters
with great respect, and with great regard in other ways,
not only rendering assistance, but rendering it under the
cover of technical assistance.

On peut se demander s'il est moins grave d'agir clans
la coulisse que de prendre une part active aux evenements.
A mon avis, l'intervention directe englobe aussi bien
l'assistance technique que la direction d'operations militaires ou paramilitaires.
« Toutefois, etant donne les circonstances, on peut
interpreter la situation comme signifiant que le Gouvernement beige a tout au moins permis a des personnes liees a des services militaires au titre cl'un
programme d' « assistance technique» de fournir une
aide aux forces qui luttent contre le Gouvernement
congolais. » [Ibid.]
Par consequent, nous nous trouvons en presence d 'un
pays Membre de l'OND, dont bien des chapitres de
l'histoire meritent notre respect, et pour lequel nous
avons la plus haute consideration a bien d'autres egards,
et qui non seulement fournit une assistance militaire
- auquel cas il lui serait facile de l'admettre - mais
la fomnit sous le couvert d'assistance technique.

101. This is not the first time that the Security Council
has been given information which is contrary to the
facts. On a previous occasion, I spent two or three days
when this idea of concealing facts from the Security
Council was exposed. Mr. Hammarskjold went on to
state that "the situation is essentially different from
that in which private individuals volunteer their services
in a foreign army" [ibid.]. The usual story that these
are not troops, that they are soldiers on leave and so
on, does not apply.

101. Ce n'est pas la premiere fois que le COJnseil de
securite rel;oit des informations contraires a la verite.
Il m'est arrive de passer deux ou trois jours a demontrer
que l'on dissimulait certains faits au Conseil de ~ecurite.
M. Hammarskjold a declare ensuite que « la situation
est essentiellement differente d 'une situation dans
laquelIe des particuliers s'engagent volontairement dans
une armee etrangere » [Ibid.]. Il est donc impossible de
nous faire croire en l'occurrence a la fable habituelle
selon laquelle il ne s'agirait pas de troupes, mais de
soldats en conge, etc.

102. The Secretary-General went on to say:

102.

Le Secretaire general a poursuivi:

« Compte tenu des regles habituelles de l'autorite
militaire, on peut supposer que ce transfert (qu'il
s'agisse du « detachement» ou de la « demission »
des officiers) n'a pu se faire sans que les autorites
militaires beIges aient, sous une forme ou une autre,
donne leur consentement; il serait pour le moins
diflicile de croire que des officiers de l'armee beIge
ont rompu leurs liens avec cette armee pour s'engager
dans des forces provinciales qui se battent au Congo,

" In view of customary military regulations, it may
be assumed that this transfer... could not have occurred
without the assent in one form or another of the Belgian
military authorities; at all events, it would be hard to
believe that officers of the Belgian Army have severed
their connexion with that Army in order to enrol in provincial forces fighting in the Congo without having
obtained the approval of their military superiors and
without having thereby made certain that they could

25

rejoin the Belgian Army, if necessary with a loss in
rank or seniority... [Ibid.]

sans avoir reeu l'approbation de leurs superieurs militaires et s'etre ainsi assure la possibilite de servir it.
nouveau dans l'armee beIge, meme au prix d'une
perte de grade ou d'anciennete. » [Ibid.]

103. Here I should like to interpolate that if this deviation from the law is not looked into very closely, if
at any time there should be disarmament - perhaps I
should not put it that way - when the world becomes
a disarmed world, then this way of getting round things
is going to create a serious situation for maintaining
peace.

103. Je voudrais ajouter ici entre parentheses que, si
1'0n ne fait pas tres attention it. cette maniere de tourner
les 10is, l'on risque de rendre tres difiicile le maintien
de la paix le jour ou. le monde sera completement desarme.

104. In their reply, the Belgian Government stated:
" Under the circumstances, a small number of Belgian
experts were supplied to the Corps de Gendarmerie of
Katanga as technical assistance: " [Ibid., sect. 11.] It is
hard to see why the gendarmerie should want technical
assistance unless they cannot handle their guns? If that
is the case, they should not have them. The Belgian reply
went on: "It is hard to see in this technical assistance
a measure contrary to operative paragraph 2 of Security
Council resolution of 22 July 1960. " [Ibid.] Now the
Secretary-General is told that the facts are right, but
his interpretation is wrong.

104. Dans sa reponse, le Gouvernement beIge declarait:
« Dans ces circonstances, un petit nombre d'experts

beIges ont ete fournis au corps de gendarmerie du
Katanga, it. titre d'assistance technique. » [Ibid., sect.IL]
Je ne vois pas de quelle utilite peut etre une assistance
technique it. la gendarmerie, it. moins qu'elle ne sache pas
manier un fusil? Dans ce cas, il aurait mieux valu ne
pas le lui mettre entre les mains. Le Gouvernement beIge
poursuivait: « I1 est difiicile de voir dans cette assistance
technique une mesure contraire au paragraphe 2 du dispositif de la resolution du Conseil de securite du 22 juillet 1960. » [Ibid.] A present, on dit au Secretaire general
qu'il a raison sur les faits, mais qu'illes interprete mal.

105. On 8 September, the Secretary-General wrote to
the permanent representative of Belgium:
" Confirmed reports have been received to the effect
that a cargo of weapons, marked ' Belgian weapons '
or something similar, the weight of which is estimated
at nine tons, was unloaded at Elisabethville airport
yesterday from a DC-7 civil aircraft of the Sabena
Airlines.
" The Secretary-General wishes to draw this report
to the immediate attention of the Belgian Government in order to ascertain whether it is true that
the Belgian Government has thus sent, or authorized
the sending of, weapons from Belgium to the provincial authorities at Elisabethville. " [8/4482/Add.1.]

105. Le 8 septembre, le Secretaire general ecrivait au
representant permanent de la Belgique:
« Des rapports confinnes ont ete reeus selon lesquels on a decharge hier d'un avion civil DC-7 de la
compagnie Sabena, it. l'aeroport d'Elisabethville, une
cargaison d'armes marquees « armes beIges», ou quelque chose de semblable, dont le poids est evalue a
9 tonnes.
« Le Secretaire general desire attirer d'urgence
l'attention du Gouvernement be1ge sur ce rapport
pour savoir s'il est exact que ce gouvernement a ainsi
envoye, ou autorise l' envoi, des armes de Belgique
aux autorites provinciales a Elisabethville. » [8/4482/
Add.I.]

106. The Belgians replied that: "This was an order
made on behalf of the Public Force and placed before
30 June 1960 " - this is a customary excuse. If an·order
for medicine was placed when a patient was not so ill,
it should not be delivered when he is likely to die by
taking it - "The execution of the order was due to
the incompetence of an ill-informed official. " [8/4482/
Add.2.] I must say that it is tragic when a responsible
Government blames things on a poor official.

106. Les BeIges repondirent: « ... il s'agit, en fait,
d'une commande faite pour le compte de la Force
publique» - c'est la l'excuse habituelle - « et placee
des avant la date du 30 juin 1960. L'execution de cette
commande est due a I'inadvertance d 'un fonctionnaire
mal informe.» [8/4482/Add.2.] Si on commande un
medicament quand un malade ne va pas trop mal, il
ne doit pas etre livre au moment ou. ce malade risque
de mourir en l'absorbant. I1 est'triste de voir un gouvernement jeter la responsabilite de ses fautes sur un
pauvre fonctionnaire.

107. I would refer again to the Second Progress Report
of the Secretary-General, and I deal with all these reports
as reports of the Secretary-General, because I am sure
he takes responsibility for his representatives and the
representatives who act under his instructions. There is
a complete team spirit in this matter, and we do not
want to make any division. In his Second Progress
Report he stated:

107. Je voudrais citer a nouveau le deuxieme rapport
d'activite du Secretaire general. Je dis du Secretaire
general, parce que, jusqu'a nouvel ordre, nous ne connaissons que lui, et je presume qu'il accepte de prendre
la responsabilite de ce que font ses representants et ceux
qui agissent sur la base de ses instructions. I1 y a un
grand esprit d'equipe dans toute cette affaire, et nous ne
voulons creer aucune division. Dans son deuxieme rapport d'activite, le Secretaire general disait done:
« Au cours des dernieres semaines, on a pu constater
des indices croissants du retour de ressortissants beIges
dans de nombreux secteurs de la vie publique au Congo.

" In the last few weeks there has been increasing
evidence of the return of Belgian nationals into many
phases of public life in the Congo. While the reacti-

26

vation of economic enterprises and the participation
in bona fide humanitarian pursuits is of benefit to
the country, unfortunately there has been a substantial
incursion of those elements which appear to seek a
dominating infl.uence in the councils of administration
and to exclude or obstruct the application of United
Nations technical assistance and infl.uence. Some Belgian nationals are believed to have been actively
arming separatist Congolese forces, and, in some cases,
Belgian officers have directed and led such forces,
which, in certain areas, have been responsible for
brutal and oppressive acts of violence. Advisers of
Belgian nationality have been returning to governmental
ministries both in Leopoldville and the provinces,
partially through what seems to be an organized
recruiting campaign in Belgium. " [8/4557, para. 7.]

Si la remise en activite d'entreprises economiques et
la participation de bonne foi a des activites humanitaires ne peut que profiter au pays, il y a eu malbeureusement des incursions non negligeables d'elements
qui semblent chercher a exercer une influence dominante dans les conseils de l'administration et a empecher ou entraver la fourniture de l'assistance technique
des Nations Unies, avec l'infiuence qu'elle pourrait
avoir~ n y a lieu de croire que certains ressortissants
beIges se sont employes activement a armer des forces
separatistes congolaises et, dans certains cas, des
officiers beIges ont dirige et commande de telles
forces qui, dans certaines regions, se sont rendues
coupables d'actes de violence et d'oppression. Des
conseillers de nationalite beIge sont reapparus dans
les ministeres, tant a Leopoldville que dans les gouvernements provinciaux, en partie a la suite de ce qui
semble etre une campagne de recrutement systematique
en Belgique. » [8/4557, par. 7.]

108. We are informed that there is a recruiting office
now in Brussels. That does not tally with the idea that
the Congo has been given or obtained independence.
The report went on to say: " The motives and activities
of a significant portion of these returning officials appear
to be clearly at variance with the principles of the General
Assembly resolution and with ONUC's basic objectives. "
[Ibid.]

108. On nous informe qu'il y a maintenant un bureau
de recrutement a Bruxelles. CeIa ne concorde pas avec
l'idee que le Congo a obtenu son independance. Le rapport poursuit: « Les mobiles et les activites d'une partie
importante de ces fonctionnaires revenus semblent etre
nettement en desaccord avec les principes de la resolution de l'Assemblee generale et les objectifs fondamentaux de I'OND. » [Ibid.]

109. The reply of the Belgian Government was an
attack on the Special Representative of the United
Nations, and I hope that those who pay tribute to the
work of the Secretary-General and his representatives
will take notice of this. In its observations on Mr. Dayal's
report the Belgian Government stated:
"The Second Progress Report of the SecretaryGeneral's. Special Representative in the Congo has
greatly displeased the Belgian Government and Belgian public opinion, which have been shocked by
tendentious judgements based upon a series of purely
subjective allegations and interpretations, ambiguous
innuendoes, unfounded insinuations and arbitrary interpretations of the decisions and resolutions of the
United Nations. " [8/4585.]

109. La Belgique a replique par une attaque contre le
representant special des Nations Unies. J'espere que
ceux qui rendent hommage a l' ceuvre du Secretaire
general et de ses representants en prendront bonne note.
Dans ses observations au sujet du rapport de M. Dayal,
le Gouvernement beIge declarait:
« Le deuxieme rapport d'activite du representant
special du Secretaire general au Congo a vivement
mecontente le Gouvernement et l'opinion publique
beIges, qui ont ete heurtes par des jugements tendancieux fondes sur une suite d'allegations et d'interpretations purement subjectives, de sous-entendus equivoques, d'insinuations gratuites et d'interpretations
arbitraires des decisions et resolutions de I'Organisation des Nations Unies. » [8/4585.]

1l0. That is a polite way of saying that a man has told
a lie. It is for you to consider whether Mr. Dayal's
objection to the importation of these arms is an arbitrary interpretation of the decisions and resolutions of
the United Nations. At the meeting of the Security
Council on 8 December, Mr. Hammarskjold said:
". . . in my report of yesterday, I did not raise the
question referred to in that report" - that is,
Mr. Dayal's report - " regarding the return of Belgium, it was only because we have no confirmed
factual information of relevance to the discussion in
the Security Council to add to that report. " [914th
meeting, para. 7.]
That is to say nothing new had been reported. That
is the position.

lIO. C'est une falton polie de dire que quelqu'un a
menti. Je vous laisse le soin de juger si I'objection de
M. Dayal a l'importation de ces armes constituait une
interpretation arbitraire des decisions et des resolutions
de l'ONU. Au cours de la reunion du Conseil de securite
du 8 decembre, M. Hammarskjold a declare:
« Si, dans mon rapport d'hier, je n'ai pas souleve
la question du retour des BeIges, tra~tee dans le rapport Dayal, c'est uniquement parce que nous ne possedons pas a ce sujet d'informations relatives a des
faits certains, dont il puisse etre fait etat.» [914e
seance, par. 7.]

llI. In the Second Progress Report it is also stated:

1II. 11 est dit egalement dans le deuxieme rapport
d'activite:

" On 25 October an armed clash took place between
the Kanioka and the BaIuba in the regions of Mwene-

« Le 25 octobre, une rencontre armee a mis aux
prises les Kanioka et les Baluba dans les regions de

CeIa veut dire que rien de nouveau n'avait ete signale.
Voila ou nous en sommes.

27

Mwene-Dituet de Kabinda; les pertes ont ete lourdes
bien que le chiffre exact n'en soit pas encore etabli.
La lutte a ete temporairement arretee par la Force
des Nations Unies, mais elle reprit plus tard avec nne
violence redoublee, malgre les efforts de pacification
de l'OND » - donc on a fait un effort de pacification - « Une force estimee a 5.000 hommes et commandee par un certain capitaine Roberts » - je ne
sais pas s'iI s'agit d'un nom beIge - « un Europeen
de langue anglaise» - iI ne faut pas s'y tromper,
car les BeIges parlent tres bien l'anglais - ainsi que
par des residents non congolais de Mwene-Ditu, s'est
avancee sur Luisa le 28 octobre malgre l'opposition
de Kanioka armes. Les forces de Kalonji, commandees
par des BeIges, ont brUIe le village de Malunda et
tue ses habitants.
« ... le capitaine Roberts et trois de ses adjoints
ont ete arretes le 29 octobre alors qu'ils cherchaient,
a la tete de leurs unites, a franchir les lignes des Nations
Unies en violation des ordres de cessez-Ie-feu.»
[8/4557, par. 73 et 74.]
Si cela n'est pas un defi absolu aux Nations Unies, je
me demande ce qu'iI nous faut. M. Dayal dit ensuite:

Ditu and Kabinda, resulting in a large but still undetermined number of casualties. The clash was temporarily halted by the United Nations Force but was
later resumed '., ith greater violence, despite United
Nations effo:..l~ at pacification. " - therefore, there
had been efforts at pacification - " A force estimated
at 5,000 men and led by one Captain Roberts " - I
do not know whether or not that is a Belgian name " an English-speaking European " - that should not
mislead us, because Belgians speak very good English "and by non-Congolese residents of Mwene-Ditu
began to advance towards Luisa on 28 October against
the opposition of armed Kanioka. The Belgian-led
Kalonji forces burnt the village of Malunda and
killed its inhabitants.
" Captain Roberts and three of his assistants were
taken into custody on 29 October while attempting
to lead their units across United Nations lines in
defiance of the cease-fire orders. " [8/4557, paras 73
and 74.]
If the last is not a total defiance of the United Nations,
I would like to know what would be. Mr. Dayal goes
on to say:
"The presence in central and north Katanga of
heavily armed gendarmerie units under the command
of Belgian. officers had been for some time a source
of irritation to the Baluba tribes opposed to the present
Katangese authorities. " [Ibid., para. 75.]

« La presence, dans le Katanga central et le Katanga
septentrional, d 'unites de gendarmerie puissamment
armees, placees sous les ordres d'officiers beIges, etait
depuis quelque temps deja une cause d'irritation pour
le's tribus Baluba hostiles aux autorites katangaises
actuelles. » [Ibid., par. 75.]

112. So this is the position, and it is with this background that we received further information from the
Secretary-General. Therefore, apart from the purposes
for which the Soviet delegation called this meeting,
which to a certain extent have been modified by the
change in the agenda - it is not our business to go into
these procedural matters - we are very definitely considering an urgent situation. While we were sitting here,
the Secretary-General quite rightly informed us of a
new situation in Stanleyville. I want to make the position
of my Government entirely clear. We think: that cruelty
is cruelty, wherever it is perpetrated. We think: that any
exercise of violence which is not legally sanctioned and,
even more, not morally sanctioned, is cruelty. Therefore,
anything that happens in Leopoldville is no less important than anything that happens in Stanleyville, and
vice versa. We stand by the position that the taking
of hostages, if the report is true, for political or military
purposes is entirely contrary to the laws of civilization.
I want to draw attention to the fact that if the former
Belgian Congo is still a State, and there is a generally
accepted canon of international law that States do not
die - governments die, but States do not - then the
Congo accepts the responsibilities the Belgian Government undertook in regard to the Geneva Conventions.

112. Telle est donc la situation qui sert de toile de fond
aux informations supplementaires que nous a communiquees le Secretaire general. Par consequent, en dehors
des objectifs en vue desquels la delegation sovietique a
demande la convocation de cette seance et qui ont ete
modifies dans une certaine mesure par le changement
de l'ordre du jour - nous n'avons pas a entrer dans ces
questions de procedure - il ne fait pas de doute que nous
sommes ici pour examiner une situation urgente. Tandis
que nous siegeons ici, le Secretaire general nous a informe
d'une situation nouvelle a Stanleyville. Je desire preciser
la position de mon gouvernement. Nous pensons que la
cruaute est la cruaute, oil qu'elle soit commise. Nous
pensons que tout usage de la violence qui n'est sanctionnee
ni par la loi, ni par la morale, est de la cruaute. Par
consequent, rien de cequi se passe a Leopoldville n'est
moins important que ce qui se passe a Stanleyville, et
vice versa. Nous estimons que la prise d'otages a des
fins politiques ou militaires dont fait etat le rapport
est absolument contraire a toutes les regles de la civilisation. Je voudrais attirer l'attention sur le fait que si
l'ancien Congo beIge est toujours un Etat - iI y a une
regIe generale du droit international qui veut que les
Et;1ts ne meurent pas, les gouvernements disparaissent,
mais l'Etat demeure - alors iI a repris les responsabilites qu'avait assumees le Gouvernement beIge a l'egard
des conventions de Geneve.

113. The Geneva Conventions deal with questions of
civilians and conditions arising from civil commotion;
and the taking of hostages, the cruelties and the heaping
of indignities, done by the authorities in Leopoldville,
are total violations of international law under the Geneva
Conventions. It is a very bad thing indeed for a State

113. Les conventions de Geneve traitent de questions
relatives aux civils et aux conditions qui resultent des
troubles civils; la prise d'otages, les cruautes et toutes
les vilenies commises par les autorites de Leopoldville
constituent des violations absolues du droit international
aux termes des conventions de Geneve. n est tout de
28

which comes here for the first time, and in its first year,
to start its career in the United Nations with gross
violations of the Geneva Conventions, which are not
only international laws accepted by people by means
of ratification - they are not imposed upon anybodybut a monumental piece of humanitarian legislation.
My country played a great part in shaping this in 1946,
and the whole of it is based on humanitarian
considerations.

meme regrettable pour un Etat qui vient id pour la premiere fois de commencer sa carriere a l'ONU par des
violations flagrantes des conventions de Geneve; celles-ci
ne sont pas seulement un instrument juridique international accepte par voie de ratification dans un grand
nombre de pays - on ne les a imposees it personne mais aussi un acte iemarquable de legislation humanitaire. Mon pays a joue un grand rOle dans l'elaboration
de ces conventions en 1946, et je puis dire qu'elles sont
entierement basees sur des considerations humanitaires.

114. This takes me to another question. We were told
there were reports of the Red Cross. We are happy
about this. We are not saying that the International
Red Cross is composed of men with sympathetic minds
which are totally objective. That is impossible, since
there is unconscious non-objectivity. But, by and large,
as human nature goes, the International Red Cross has
a great reputation and we are prepared to accept it;
but we think that if the International Red Cross is useful
and valid in one place, it should be equally useful and
valid in another.

114. Ceci m'amene it une autre question. On nous a
dit que la Croix-Rouge avait etabli des rapports et nous
nous en felicitons. Nous ne pretendons pas que la CroixRouge internationale soit composee d'hommes it l'esprit
ouvert et compatissant qui soient entierement objectifs;
c'est impossible etant donne qu'il existe un manque
d'objectivite inconscient. Mais enfin, dans l'ensemble,
la Croix-Rouge internationale jouit d'une grande reputation et nous sommes prets it reconnaitd:: qu'elle est
justifiee. Nous pensons cependant que si la Croix-Rouge
internationale peut jouer un role utile it un endroit, elle
devrait egalement le faire ailleurs.

115. We were told that there were reports about violations and cruelties which were perpetrated on some of
Lumumba's former supporters. We cannot now take
the position that we are not interested in these pe;:sons
whose eyes have been gouged out. According to one
statement I have read with regard to one of these persons,
one eye is gone and the other will probably go shortly.
Anyway, there is a report from the International Red
Cross. If a report from the International Red Cross
can be called for in one case, why is there no report
on the former Prime Minister? Why is that report only
from Belgian doctors? Why should President Kasa-Vubu
object to the International Red Cross reporting on this
gentleman?

115. On nous a dit que des rapports avaient ete etablis
au sujet de violences et de cruautes perpetrees sur la
personne de plusieurs anciens partisans de Lumumba.
Nous ne pouvons pas declarer maintenant que nous
nous desinteressons du sort de ces personnes it qui
l'on a arrache les yeux. Selon une information que j'ai
lue au sujet d 'une de ces personnes, on lui aurait arrache
un reil et elle serait sur le point de perdre l'autre. Quoi
qu'il en soit, il existe un rapport de la Croix-Rouge
intetnationale. S'il a paru opportun de permettre it la
Croix-Rouge internationale d'etablir un rapport dans
un cas, pourquoi pas aussi dans le cas de l'ancien premier ministre? Pourquoi ce rapport-ci emane-t-il seulement de medecins beIges? Pourquoi le president KasaVubu s'oppose-t-il it ce que la Croix-Rouge internationale
enquete sur le sort de cette personnalite?

116. Now I am not here to reveal information which
we have, because that may have consequences. But we
do not accept, at the present moment, the statements
made either by the representative of the United Kingdom
or the representative of the United States, second-hand,
or by the gentlemen from the Congo, who said that
he was well cared for or is well. Of course, a person
being well, or otherwise, may be very important to his
relatives, but in matters of this kind it is a different
story. There was a great statesman who said: "When
one man dies it is a calamity; when a million men die
it is just statistics. " Therefore, we will take it in that
fashion.

116. Je ne suis pas ici pour reveler certains renseignements qui sont en notre possession, parce qu'il pourrait
en resulter des consequences indesirables. Mais, it ce
stade, nous ne pouvons souscrire aux declarations du
representant du Royaume-Uni, qu'a repetees le representant des Etats-Unis, ni it celles du monsieur qui
parle au nom du Congo et qui nous a dit que M. Lumumba allait hien, qu'il etait bien traite. Bien entendu,
savoir si une personne va bien ou non peut avoir une
grande importance pour sa famille, mais, dans une
affaire de ce genre, il ne s'agit pas de cela. Un grand
homme d'Etat a dit un jour: {( Quartd un homme meurt,
c'est une calamite; quand un million d'hommes meurent,
ce n'est qu'une donnee statistique.» Par consequent,
considerons les choses sous cet angle.

117. I think the same law should apply everywhere. My
Government is prepared to condemn acts of atrocities,
whether they happen in Stanleyville, or in another
part of the country, because this is a law of nations, a
custom and a convention, a moral injunction that must
be obeyed by everybody.

117. Je pense que la meme regIe doit s'appliquer partout. Mon gouvernement reprouve toutes les atrocites,
qu'elles aient ete commises it Stanleyville ou dans une
autre partie du pays; ainsi le veulent le droit des gens,
la coutume, les conventions, la morale, auxquels tout le
monde est tenu de se conformer.

118. Although it may be presented out of order, I
would like to complete our position on Stanleyville;
and I would request, with great respect, that the Secre-

118. Bien que cela tombe peut-etre mal it propos du
point de vue de la presentation, je voudrais ajouter
maintenant quelques mots sur notre attitude it l'egard

29

tary-General take note of what I am saying. It was said
that there are several thousands of Europeans who are
likely to be held as hostages, and that they have heard
stories of previous atrocities and the atrocities that are
likely to be perpetrated - such as the taking of their
personal property, violations of persons, and all sorts
of things that may be done. This is a very harassing
situation, a situation that must cause us grave concern.
But at the same time we would like to say that we
congratulate the United Nations authorities for using
the necessary amount of force - force does not always
mean killing - to prevent these cruelties from happening.

des evenements de Stanleyville, et je prierai respectueusement le Secretaire general de bien vouloir prendre note
de ce que je vais dire. On a dit que plusieurs milliers
d'Europeens allaient vraisemblablement etre pris comme
otages; ils ont entendu parler des atrocites qui ont ete
commises et des mesures vexatoires dont ils feraient
probablement l'objet, telles que le vol, les mauvais
traitements, et bien d'autres choses encore. C'est la
une situation tres grave et qui nous donne de graves
inquietudes. Mais, d'un autre cote, nous tenons it feliciter les autorites des Nations Unies d'avoir eu recours
it la force - force ne veut pas toujours dire tuer dans toute la mesure necessaire pour eviter ces atrocites.

119. Our country does not advocate war or military
activities. However, if anybody attacks us, we shall do
whatever is necessary.

119. Notre pays n'est pas partisan de la guerre ou des
actions militaires. Toutefois, si on nous attaque, nous
ferons tout ce qui est necessaire en pareil cas.

120. Therefore, in regard to Stanleyville, we welcome
this action. But this is not a Council for waging war
or reprisals, or anything of that character. The SecretaryGeneral has just explained to us the action that is to
be taken. I am also glad to have his explanation of what
was done in Stanleyville.

120. C'est pourquoi, en ce qui concerne Stanleyville,
nous nous declarons satisfaits des mesures qui ont ete
prises. Mais le role du Conseil n'est pas de faire la guerre
ou d'exercer des represailles. Le Secretaire general vient
de nous exposer les mesures qu'il compte prendre. Je le
remercie de nous avoir egalement explique ce qui a ete
fait it Stanleyville.

121. But there are certain other circumstances to which
the Secretary-General will take note of this. First of all,
there is a report in the newspapers - and quite frankly
I do not believe everything I see in the newspapers;
life would be very difficult if one did - that Colonel
Mobutu - I believe he is entitled to that title - is going
to lead 300-odd paratroopers into this place.

121. Mais il y a d'autres evenements sur lesquels je
desire attirer l'attention du Conseil, et je prie le Secretaire general de prendre note de ceci. Tout d'abord,
les journaux ont publie une information - je vous
avoue que je ne crois pas tout ce que je lis dans les journaux, cela rendrait la vie impossible - selon laquelle
le colonel Mobutu - je suppose qu'on peut lui accorder
ce titre - va se rendre dans cette region it la tete de
quelque 300 parachutistes.

122. Now two considerations arise - and this is a very
serious matter. First of all, where do these paratroopers
come from? If they are purely Congolese paratroopers,
then what are the reasons for the Belgian technicians being
there? Where do the parachutes come from? Where do
the aeroplanes come from? They can only come from
outside the Congo, because the Congolese Government
is not in any position to manufacture these things. I
know of Governments that are more technically advanced,
and a paratroop battalion is not an easy business. Where
do they come from? It is quite possible that the men
who will be pushed out of the plane will be Congolese.
I would not deny that. In colonial armies the so-called
brave men were pushed out in the line of battle. Where
do these paratroopers come from? If they had been
supplied by the Belgians or by outside Powers, we are
entitled to know about it.

122. Deux questions se posent it ce sujet, et il s'agit
d'une affaire tres serieuse. En premier lieu, d'ou viennent
ces parachutistes? S'il s'agit de parachutistes exclusivement congolais, alors que font les techniciens beIges
parmi eux? D'ou viennent les parachutes? d'ou viennent
les avions? lIs ne peuvent venir que de l'exterieur, car
le Gouvernement congolais n'est pas du tout en mesure
de les fabriquer. II y a des gouvernements qui disposent
de moyens techniques beaucoup plus importants, et pour
qui la mise sur pied d'un bataillon de parachutistes
n'est pas une petite affaire. Donc d'ou viennent-ils?
II est fort possible que les hommes qu'on poussera dans
le vide soient des Congolais. Loin de moi de le nier.
Dans les armees coloniales, ceux qu'on appelait les
braves etaient bien pousses en premiere ligne. Mais
d'ou viennent ces parachutistes? S'ils ont ete fournis par
la Belgique ou par d'autres puissances etrangeres, nous
sommes en droit de le savoir.

123. But that is the least of it. The most important
thing is this. Let us assume, for the moment, that those
paratroopers are going there in order to defend law and
order, to protect those who are likely to be harassed.
The position then arises that the Congolese paratroopers
and the United Nations troops have the same objective.
Now if the objective is the same, it is likely to lead to
an alliance. Will the United Nations find itself mixed
up with Colonel Mobutu's troops, and will join in a
war against the opposition of Colonel Mobutu? This is
a very serious position.

123. Mais ce n'est pas cela le plus important. Ce qui
compte, c'est ceci: supposons un instant que ces parachutistes se rendent it Stanleyville pour y maintenir
l'ordre, pour y proteger ceux qui sont en danger. Dans
ce cas, les parachutistes congolais et les troupes des
Nations Unies auraient la meme intention. Si leur
objectif est le meme, il en resultera probablement une
alliance. Les troupes des Nations Unies vont-elles se
trouver melees it celles du colonel Mobutu, vont-elles
faire it leurs cotes la guerre aux adversaires du colonel
Mobutu? C'est 14 une situation tres grave.

I want to draw the attention of the Council, and I hope

30

124. If the United Nations is going there, then no other
protective hand is necessary. If the United Nations
feels that its protective hand is not sufficient, or if the
Congolese paratroopers feel it is their duty to go there,
then they must join the United Nations Force and accept
orders from the United Nations Command. There cannot
be two independent lines of action in regard to the same
problem. If that takes place it will lead to serious
political complications and it will compromise the
position of the United Nations.

124. Si les troupes des Nations Unies se rendent dans
cette region, aucune autre protection n'est necessaire.
Si les Nations Unies ont l'impression que leur protection
n'est pas suffisante, ou si les parachutistes congolais
ont 1'impression qu'il est de leur devoir de se rendre
la-bas, alors il faut qu'ils se joignent aux forces des
Nations Unies. On ne saurait tolerer qu'il y ait deux
operations paralleles pour regler le meme probleme.
S'il en etait ainsi, cela menerait a de graves complications politiques et compromettrait la position de l'ONU.

125. I may be entirely wasting breath on this matter
because, after all, it is only a report. The SecretaryGeneral has not given us this information. It has to be
inquired into.

125. n se peut que je m'egare completement car, apres
tout, je ne me fonde, dans cette affaire, que sur une
nouvelle de presse. Le Secretaire general ne nous a rien
dit a ce sujet. n faudra examiner la question de plus pres.

126. I now come to another circumstance, which is
even more serious. In this connexion, I am not relying
on press reports. I speak on behalf of my Government.
We believe that the Belgians have concentrated troops
in the Trust Territory of Ruanda-Urundi. This is a
gross violation of the Charter and of the agreements
into which the Belgians have entered. The amount of
troops in Ruanda-Urundi is more than is required for
a Trust Territory. In order for a Trust Territory to be
used for these purposes, the Security Council must
sanction it. I believe that comes under Article 82 of the
Charter. You all recall the legal argument going on
about the use of a Trust Territory for experimental purposes. I am not going into this.

126. J'en viens maintenant it un autre fait, encore plus
grave et qui n'est pas fonde sur des informations de
presse. Je parle au nom de mon gouvernement. Nous
croyons savoir que les BeIges ont concentre des troupes
dans le Territoire sous tutelle du Ruanda-Urundi. C'est
la une violation flagrante des termes de la Charte et des
accords de tutelle conclus avec la Belgique. Il y a au
Ruanda-Urundi plus de troupes qu'il n'est necessaire
dans un territoire sous tutelle. Pour qu'un de ces territoires sous tutelle puisse etre utilise de la sorte, il faut
d'abord que le Conseil de securite donne son accord.
Cela releve, je crois, de l'Article 82 de la Charte. Tout
le monde se souvient de la discussion juridique qui a
eu lieu it propos de l'utilisation d'un territoire sous
tutelle it des fins experimentales. Je ne reviendrai pas
lit-dessus.

127. This Trust Territory is the sacred trust of the
United Nations, and the Belgians are only in the position there of an Administering Authority. The General
Assembly will shortly consider the transfer of power in
Ruanda-Urundi. We are quite concerned about a Congo
situation developing or being repeated there. My country
takes a most serious view of the position with regard
to trying to convert Ruanda-Urundi into a base of
operations, either by this method, or by giving them
what is known as a " bogus independence ".

127. L'ONU a un devoir sacre it 1'egard de ce territoire sous tutelle, et les BeIges ne sont que 1'autorite
chargee de l'administration. L'Assemblee generale examinera prochainement la question du transfert des pouvoirs du Ruanda-Urundi. Mon pays condamne severement l'attitude qui consiste it essayer de convertir le
Ruanda-Urundi en une base operationnelle, soit par le
moyen que je viens d'indiquer, soit en lui accordant
une pretendue « independance ».

128. The United Nations carries a serious responsibility if Trust Territories are to be justified as jumping-off
grounds for the invasion of other places, especially in
regard to Stanleyville. At the same time I hope that
the members of this Council and the Heads of Government will exert their influence on all parties to refrain
from acts of cruelty, because the Secretary-General has
said that he wishes to have the backing of world leaders.
I have no doubt that the United States, the United
Kingdom, the countries of the West; the Soviet Union
on the other hand, and people like us who have no allies
in the world - thank God - will exert their influence
in order to prevent the violations of the Charter, so as
not to increase the difficulties in the Congo.

128. L'ONU encourrait une lourde responsabilite si
elle devait autoriser l'emploi des territoires sous tutelle
comme points d'appui pour l'invasion des territoires
avoisinants; et ceci est particulierement vrai it 1'egard
de StanleyviIIe. Etant donne que le Secretaire general a
demande l'appui des hautes personnalites du monde
entier, j'espere que de leur cote les membres du Conseil
et les chefs de gouvernement exerceront leur influence
sur toutes les parties en cause afin qu'eiles s'abstiennent
de commettre des actes de cruaute. Je suis certain que
les Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni, les pays occidentaux,
d'une part, 1'Union sovietique, d'autre part, et les pays
comme le notre qui - Dieu soit loue - n'ont pas
d'allies dans le monde exerceront leur influence sur les
parties en cause afin qu'elles s'abstiennent de violer les
termes de la Charte, ce qui ne pourrait qu'accroitre
les difficultes du Congo.

129. In spite of what was said by the representative of
Cameroun yesterday [916th meeting], we have a great
deal of kinship with the liberated' countries of Africa.
We were a colony only a few years ago. There are some
people who ask: " What are colonies? "I can understand

129. En depit de ce qu'a dit hier le representant du
Cameroun [916e seance], nous avons beaucoup de choses
en commun avec les pays recemment liberes d'Afrique.
n y a quelques annees a peine, nous etions encore une
colonie. Des gens demandent: « QU'est-ce que cela veut
31

their asking that question; they were never colonial subjects. We know what a colony is.

dire, une colonie?» Je comprends qu'ils posent cette
question, car ils n'ontjamais vecu sous le regime colonial.
Mais nous, nous savons ce que c'est.

130. We want to tell you that an empire does not change
its spots. Empires have been dissolved in the past. There
may be situations, as in the case of the British Empire,
where it has broken with the concept of imperialism.
Perhaps the journey is a little slower than we would
wish, but there is no question of disguising it in a different way. It will not be tolerated by their own people;
it will not be tolerated by the people over whom they
rule. I say this without any reservation whatsoever. But
past empires have governed by the policy of division.
Having left Africa, they are trying to divide it, not
only physically, but by setting up one lot of African
people against another.

130. Un empire est toujours un empire. On a vu des
empires s'ecrouler. Parfois, comme c'est le cas de l'Empire
britannique, ils rompent avec les conceptions de l'imperialisme. Peut-etre l'evolution est-elle plus lente que nous
le souhaiterions, mais elle est irreversible. Les peuples
memes de ces empires n'admettraient pas qu'on revienne
la.-dessus, et les peuples qu'ils gouvernent ne le tolereraient pas davantage. Je dis cela sans aucune reserve.
La politique des empires etait de diviser pour regner.
Ayant quitte l'Afrique ils s'efforcent a. present de la
diviser, non seulement geographiquement, mais encore
en dressant les peuples africains les uns contre les autres.

131. An empire always takes this step. Even in the
United Nations, where the Asian and African countries
were very united on most questions, every attempt is
now made to prevent their unity from developing. It
is quite true that empires live by the policy of divide
and rule, but the later version of the policy of divide
and rule is divide and leave. That is what happened to
our country and that is what happened to Korea. There
are other places where partitions occur and that is what
happened in China and so on. Therefore, it is either
divide and leave or divide and rule.

131. Meme au sein de l'ONU, oil les pays africains
et asiatiques manifestaient une grande unite de vues sur
la plupart des questions, tout est a. present mis en reuvre
pour empecher leur unite de se renforcer; c'est la. la
politique des empires. n est exact de dire que la politique
des empires a toujours ete de « diviser pour regner»;
mais, dans sa version actuelle, cette politique est devenue:
« diviser et partir». C'est ce qui s'est passe dans notre
pays, et aussi en Coree. C'est encore ce qui s'est passe
en Chine et dans bien d'autres pays victimes de la politique du partage. Par consequent, c'est soit la politique
de « diviser et partir », soit la politique de « diviser
pour regner ».

132. Secondly, they set up populations one against the
other. I do not say that anybody who supports an empire
is necessarily an evil person or an immoral person
- they condition their minds to the belief that they
are doing good. I think the worst evil is done by people
who do evil and think they are doing good. That is the
position in regard to some of these matters.

132. En second lieu, ils dressent les populations les
unes contre les autres. Je ne dis pas cependant que toute
personne qui defend la politique d'un empire soit necessairement mauvaise ou immorale, les gens s'habituent a.
croire que ce qu'ils font est bien. Ce sont les gens qui
croient bien faire qui font le plus de mal. Voila. ce que
j'avais a. dire sur ces quelques sujets.

133. Now we come to the question of the legal aspects
of this situation. We start from the premise, first of all,
that the Secretary-General- I mean the institution;
I am making no personal references - will have to
re-think this problem. It is in fact a problem of continual
re-thinking, but, unfortunately, events go so fast that
one cannot keep pace. We must re-think this problem
and look at it in a simplified way.

133. Venons-en maintenant aux aspects juridiques de
la situation. Nous partons tout d'abord de l'hypothese
que le Secretaire general - je veux dire le Secretaire
general en tant qu'institution, car je ne m'adresse a. personne en particulier - devra reetudier ce probleme.
C'est du reste un probleme qui demande a. etre constamment reexamine, mais, malheureusement, les evenements
vont si vite qu'on n'arrive plus ales suivre. Nous devons
reconsiderer ce probleme avec beaucoup de simplicite.

134. If the function of the United Nations is to maintain law and order, how can we maintain law and order
through the agency of lawless pecple? Therefore, it
is not a question of interpreting the fundamental law
in the Congo - I do not know whether anybody can;
it is very badly drafted. My Government would not
come here and say that the function of the Security
Council is to interpret legal questions; that is not permitted by the Charter. But if we are going to maintain
law and order it is necessary that it be accepted on the
other side.

134. Si le role de l'ONU est de maintenir l'ordre,
comment peut-elle le faire par 1'intermediaire de gens
sans foi ni loi? 11 ne s'agit pas d'interpreter le Loi fondamentale du Congo - d'ailleurs je me demande si quelqu'un en serait capable; elle est si mal redigee! Mon
gouvernement ne dit pas que le rOle du Conseil de securite. soit de donner son avis sur des questions juridiques;
la Charte ne lui en donne pas le droit. Mais il est evident
que, si nous voulons maintenir l'ordre, nous devons
obtenir le consentement de l'autre partie.

135. Here we have a situation in which my Government wants especially to disassociate itself from any
personal fights. The only legal authorities in the Congo
are the President of the Republic, the Parliament, the
officials of Parliament and those who are appointed

135. Dans une situation de ce genre, mon gouvernement tient particulierement a. rester a. I'ecart des rivalites
de personnes. Les seules autorites legitimes du Congo
sont le President de la Republique, le Parlement, les
membres de ce parlement et les fonctionnaires designes
32

according to the constitution. Here I would like the
representative of the United Kingdom to take note of
our position, and it has been communicated to him.
We recognize Mr. Kasa-Vubu as the head ofthe Republic
of the Congo, but the recognition of his status does
not mean that we accept his interpretations of his
functions.

par la Constitution. Je voudrais attirer l'attention du
representant du Royaume-Uni sur notre position a cet
egard; nous lui en avons d'ailleurs deja fait part. Nous
reconnaissons a M. Kasa-Vubu la qualite de president
de la Republique du Congo, mais cela ne veut pas dire
que nous approuvons l'idee qu'ii se fait de ses fonctions.

136. There is no country in the world, no group of
political thinkers, which knows more about the difference
between status and functi:- '1 sanctified by one of your
statesmen some years ago. Equality of status does not
mean equality of function, he said, in talking about
the Dominions in those days. Similarly, just because
we recognize Kasa-Vubu as the Head of State and pay
him all the courtesies that are due him, it does not
mean that we recognize the usurpation of authority.
It does not mean the substitution of himself as an authority in defiance of Parliament. We say that Parliament
is the legal authority. I am quite certain that the Security
Council would not have voted unanimously for entry
into the Congo if at that time there was one-man rule,
one man's principles and one man's interest at stake.

136.. n n'y a pas de pays au monde qui connaisse
mieux que le Royaume-Uni ou que ses theoriciens de
la science politique la difference qui existe entre statut
et fonction. C'est un homme d'Etat de ce pays qui a
dit, en parlant des dominions: « Egalite de statut ne
signifie pas egalite de fonctions. » De meme, le seul fait
que nous reconnaissions Kasa-Vubu en tant que chef
d'Etat et que nous ayons pour lui tous les egards auxquels
cette qualite lui donne droit ne signifie pas que nous
approuvions ses abus de pouvoir et que nous lui donnions
raison de tenir tete au Parlement. Au contraire, nous
considerons le Parlement comme la seule autorite legitime. Je suis persuade que le Conseil de securite n'aurait
pas vote a l'unanimite l'intervention de l'ONU dans un
pays gouverne par un seul homme selon les principes
bien a lui et dans son seul interet.

137. What is the position today? Parliament does not
exist. According to some people it is absorbed, according
to some people it has been suspended, and according
to some people it does not exist. The Loi fondamentale
of the Republic of the Congo does not permit the suspension of Parliament for more than one month. Therefore, the suspension is illegal. No doubt these lessons
were learned from Belgium, because the sleight-of-hand
is again the same, just the same as with these troops
that were withdrawn, which I talked about previously.

137. Quelle est la situation aujourd'hui? Le Parlement
n'existe plus. Certains disent qu'il a ete dissous; pour
d'autres, il a ete suspendu, et, pour d'autres encore, il
n'existe plus. La loi fondamf;titale de la Republique du
Congo ne prevoit pas de suspr.nsion du Parlement pour
une duree superieure a un mois. Par consequent, la
suspension actuelle est illegale. n ne fait pas de doute
que la Belgique a ete l'inspiratri::e de ce tour de passepasse: cela s'est passe exactement de la meme maniere
qu'avec les troupes dont j'ai parle plus haut.

138. It is necessary, for example, to legalize certaip.
documents, with the signatures of ministers, and in order
to legalize these documents you get a minister to sign,
who himself is not legal. A Prime Minister is appointed
illegally because he has never been approved by Parliament. The removal of the Prime Minister has never
been approved by Parliament. Therefore he is a de facto
Prime Minister because he ~~ a minister of Kasa-Vubu.
There is a palace government. I recognize it for what
it is worth; but authorization by an illegal personality
would not make an instrument legal. That is a simple
truth.

138. Lorsqu'il est necessaire, par exemple, d'obtenir
la signature d'un ministre pour legaliser un document,
on donne le document a signer a un ministre qui n'a
aucun droit a ce titre. Un premier ministre a ete nomme
sans l'approbation du Parlement, ce qui est illegal.
Le Parlement n'a jamais prononce la destitution du veritable premier roinistre. Celui qu'on a nomme est donc
un premier ministre de facto: c'est un ministre de KasaVubu. C'est un gouvernement de palais. Je le reconnais
comme tel, mais un document ne devient pas legal du
fait de son approbation par une personnalite illegale.
C'est une verite elementaire.

139. Then we are told by Mr. Kasa-Vubu, in talking
about the constitution in a text attached to a letter dated
16 November - and I would like the United States
delegation to give attention to this:

139. En parlant de la Constitution, M. Kasa-Vubu,
dans le texte annexe a une lettre en date du 16 novembre, nous dit ce qui suit - je demande a la delegation
des Etats-Unis d'ecouter attentivement:

" The institutions given to the Congo by the Loi
fondamentale are not in keeping with the sociological
and political realities of the country. For that reason,
the local authorities of the Republic of the Congo
wish these institutions to be modified, with due regard
for the unity and territorial integrity of the Congo,
and taking into account the defects of the Loi fondamentale and the experience of the months which have
passed since tpe promulgation of independence. " 1

« Les structures donnees au Congo par la Loi fondamentale ne repondent pas aux realites sociologiques et politiques de ce pays. Pour cette raison, les
autorites locales de la Republique du Congo desirent
que ces structures soient adaptees dans le respect
de l'unite et de l'integrite territoriale du Congo, compte
tenu des imperfections de la Loi fondamentale et de
l'experience des m.ois qui se sont ecoules depuis la
promulgation de l'independance 1. »

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 85, document A/4577, annex, para. 1.

1 Documents officiels de l'assemblee generale, quinzieme session,
Annexes, point 85 de l'ordre du jour, document A/4577, annexe,
par. 1.

1

33

But there is no reference here that these changes should
take place in a legal manner. What he says is this: This
constitution is " ... not in keeping with the sociological
and political realities... ", " so I am going to change it. "
"The problem is an institutional one, which can
only be solved by the Congolese authorities, guided
by the wishes of the people. "1
That is entirely correct - if he knew who the Congolese
authorities were and how the wishes of the people were
to be ascertained.
" One of the allegations which must be refuted is
that of a high-handed closure of Parliament. The
chief physical difficulty preventing the assembly of
Parliament is that the state 'of disorder, fomented
by the supporters of Mr. Lumumba, deters members
from the provinces from returning to Leopoldville. " 2
Our view is that, whether the disorder was created by
Lumumba supporters or Mobutu supporters, whatever
government is in the country is responsible for it. If
they are not responsible then the writ does not run.

Mais il n'est fait aucune allusion ici au fait que ces
structures devraient etre adaptees selon des procedes
legaux. Ce que dit M. Kasa-Vubu est ceci: « ... ces
structures ne repondent pas aux realites sociologiques
et politiques », par consequent « je vais les adapter ».
« Il s'agit d'un probleme institutionnel qui ne pourra
etre regIe que par les autorites congolaises en s'inspirant des vreux de la population 1. »
Cela est peut-etre vrai, mais il ne sait pas quelles sont
les autorites congolaises, ni comment il faut s'y prendre
pour connaitre les vreux de la population.
« Parmi les allegations qui meritent d'etre refutees
figure celle qui a .trait a la « fermeture brutale» du
Parlement. Dne premiere difficulte materielle fait
obstacle actuellement a sa convocation: le desordre
entretenu par les partisans de M. Lumumba dissuade
les parlementaires provinciaux de rejoindre Leopoldville 2. »
A notre avis, que le desordre soit dft aux partisans de
Lumumba ou a ceux de Mobutu, c'est le gouvernement
du pays qui doit en etre tenu pour responsable. S'il
n'est pas responsable, c'est qu'il n'est pas capable de
faire respecter les lois.

140. One of the fundamental conditions of the Charter
is that any State which is a member should be able to
carry out the .obligations that it undertakes as a Government. If the writ does not run, then it is a toy government; it does not work. This difficulty will only be solved
by so adapting the constitution as to give more effective
guarentees to see that the rights of the Provinces are
respected.

140. Dne des conditions fondamentales de l'application de la Charte est que tout Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies soit en mesure de remplir les
obligations qu'il accepte en tant que gouvernement.
S'il n'est pas capable de faire respecter ses lois, c'est
qu'il n'est qu'un gouvernement fantoche, qui ne fonctionne pas. La difficulte ne peut etre aplanie qu'en adaptant la Constitution de maniere a y inclure des garanties
concernant les droits des provinces.

141. I am sure Sir Patrick Dean would not mind my
saying this; it is often said in the country where I have
lived for a long time: the difference between gentlemen and
players in cricket is that the gentlemen play according
to the rules except when the game goes against them,
and then they change the rules. The players - poor
devils - have to play according to the rules. They are
paid for it, so it is not a question of changing the rules
when the game goes against them.

141. Je pense que sir Patrick Dean ne m'en voudra
pas de repeter ce que j'ai souvent entendu dire dans son
pays, ou j'ai vecu assez longtemps; la difference entre
un « gentleman» et un joueur professionnel de cricket
est que le gentleman joue selon les regles jusqu'au
moment ou il commence a perdre; a ce moment-la, il
change les regles. Le pauvre diable de joueur professionnel, lui, doit suivre les regles jusqu'au bout. Il a ete
paye pour cela, il n'est done pas question pour lui de
changer les regles quand le jeu tourne a son desavantage.
Il en prend son parti.

142. Mr Kasa-Vubu goes on to say:
" Parliament is certainly competent to control the
executive power and, if need be, deny it confidence.
It is not within its power, however, to restore to the
Government on the demand of the Prime Minister,
a prerogative of which it has been stripped. And even
if it had that power it could only be subject to authorization by the majority required when a new Government appears before both houses of Parliament. "3

142.

143. I will not read all of this; it is here in the text;
the long and the short of it is: the President contends
that the former Prime Minister has not had a vote of
confidence or, in any event, the vote in Parliament has

143. Je ne vais pas lire ce document en entier; il n'y a
qu'a se reporter au texte. Tout cela se resume a ceci:
le President pretend que I'ancien premier ministre n'a

Nous lisons encore dans la lettre de M. Kasa-Vubu:
« Le Parlement est en effet competent pour controler le pouvoir executif et lui refuser, le cas ech6ant,
la confiance. Il ne dispose pas du pouvoir de rendre
au gouvernement les prerogatives qui lui ont ete enlevees par la revendication du Premier Ministre. Quand
bien meme il en disposerait, ce ne pourrait etre que
dans les conditions de vote exigees lors de la presentation d'un nouveau gouvernement devant les chambres 3. »

1 Documents officie/s de l'avsemblee genera/e, quillzieme session,
Annexes, point 85 de l'ordre du jour, document A/4577, annexe,
par. 1.
2 Ibid., par. 13.
3 Ibid., par. 14.

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 85 document A/4577, annex, para. 1.
2 Ibid., para. 13.
3 Ibid., para. 14.
1

34

been against him, and he says the vote is 60 to 19; and
in order to make the total, it must be 69. This is not
any new mathematics. I will tell you what it is. It is
60 to 19; Mr. Lumumba gets 60 votes and against him
are 19 votes in the lower house. In the Senate I think it is
40 to 2. The contention is that 60 does not make a twothirds majority. But then you look at the constitution
and it says two-thirds of those present; and the total
number that was present was 79, and out of it 60 people
voted, so it was not only two-thirds, but it was an overwhelming two-thirds majority in favour this way. Therefore, whatever has been done in this way is illegal and
it is not a question of the Security Council sitting in
judgement on this. But the facts of the matter are set
out here. "This constitution does not suit me. It is not
in keeping with sociological and political realities. "
That is a very fine term for a dictator to use. Therefore,
while it is quite true that the origin of Mr. Kasa-Vubu
is the constitution, the ladder he has climbed has been
kicked away.

pas obtenu un vote de confiance du Parlement, ou en
tout cas que le vote du Parlement ne lui etait pas favorable, et il nous donne le decompte des voix: 60 pour,
19 contre, alors qu'il fallait 69 voix. C'est un calcul fort
simple, mais vous allez voir. Le vote est done: 60 voix
en sa faveur contre 19 a l'opposition. Au Senat, je crois
qu'il a obtenu 40 voix contre 2. L'argument de M. KasaVubu est que 60 voix ne constituent pas une majorite
des deux tiers. Mais, quand on examine la Constitution,
on decouvre qu'il y est question de la majorite des deux
tiers des membres presents. Or, it y avait 79 membres
presents, sur lesquels 60 ont vote pour M. Lumumba,
de sorte que celui-ci n'a pas seulement obtenu une
majorite des deux tiers, mais une majorite ecrasante.
Par consequent, tout ce qui a ete fait par la suite est
illegal et il n'est pas necessaire que le Conseil de securite
s'interroge sur cette question: la Constitution est parfaitement c1aire. J...a verite est toute simple: « Cette
constitution ne me convient pas, elle ne repond pas aux
realites sociologiques et politiques du pays.» Ce sont
des paroles dignes d'un dictateur. S'il est bien vrai que
M. Kasa-Vubu a ete nomme conformement a la Constitution, il n'en reste pas moins qu'il s'est servi de celle-ci
comme d'une echelle pour acceder au faite du pouvoir.
Dne fois arrive au pouvoir, il a repousse l'echelle d'un
coup de pied.

144. Therefore, it is a moot question whether, when
the constitution is altered in any way, the constitutionality remains. But my Government recognizes him as
the Head of State and continues to give him all the
respect that is due to the Head of a State because of the
respect of the Congolese people and in the embodiment
of their sovereignty. But to say, for that reason, that
everything unconstitutional is illegal, is a different matter.

144. On peut done se demander s'il existe encore une
autorite constitutionnelle une fois qu'on a modifie la
Constitution. Neanmoins mon gouvernement reconnait
M. Kasa-Vubu en tant que chef d'Etat et continue de
lui temoignt:r tout le respect dl1 a un chef d'Etat, par
egard pour le peuple du Congo dont it symbolise la
souverainete. Mais de la a dire que tout ce qui est anticonstitutionnel est legal, il y a une marge.

145. Then we have the situation today where the
former Prime Minister, the former Speaker of Parliament, the former President of the Senate - all these
people are in prison. Some of them have changed sides;
and not alone in the Congo do people change sides in
politics. That is one of the usual vicissitudes of fortune
in this matter, and I think that when you come to a
very highly sophisticated country like the United Kingdom, they say " crossing the floor ". But this is a little
more than that. In a thousand years everybody else
will be like that. Or, if you do not quite want to " cross
the floor" - Mr. President, I do not think you do it
in Russia - then you sit below the gangway. And if one
goes to the -=-Eouse of Commons in the United Kingdom
one sees reil (;arpets in front of both sides. This is not
to honour the Members, but because in the old days
these gentlemen used to hit each other and so it was
laid down that if anyone put his foot on the red carpet
he was out of order. It is like the mahout who puts a
little stick on the elephant's foot so that it cannot move
anywhere.

145. Un autre aspect de la situation actuelle est que
l'ancien premier ministre, l'ancien president de la
Chambre des representants, l'ancien president du Senat
sont en prison. Certains d'entre eux ont change de camp,
mais il n'y a pas qu'au Congo que cela arrive. Ce genre
de revirement est assez frequent en politique; dans un
pays, hautement evolue, comme le Royaume-Uni, cela
s'appelle: « traverser la salle ». Mais, en l'occurrence, it
s'agit d'un peu plus que cela. Dans 1.000 ans peut-etre,
tout le monde « traversera la salle », ou si VQUS preferez
une autre expression - car je crois, Monsieur le President, que cela ne se fait pas en Russie - disons que
tout le monde s'installera au milieu de la salle. En effet,
si vous visitez la Chambre des communes, vous verrez
qu'un tapis rouge separe en deux la salle. Il n'est pas
pose la pour faire honneur aux deputes, mais parce que
autrefois ces messieurs avaient la fiicheuse habitude de
se colleter: on a fini par d6creter que celui qui mettrait
le pied sur le tapis rouge serait a l'amende. C'est comme
le cornac a qui i1 suffit de poser un petit biiton sur le
pied de l'elephant pour l'empecher de s'en aller.

146. In any case, the point is that these rules cannot
be changed in this way. The President of the Republic
says that he is in favour of the reconvening of Parliament as soon as the necessary conditions of security
and freedom of action for members of Parliament have
been re-established. Why do we not take this gentleman
at his word? Why do we not request the countries which
no doubt have great influence on him, to advise him
to try and create conditions in which Parliament can

146. Quoi qu'il en soit, on ne change pas ces regles si
facilement. Le President de la Republique se declare
favorable a la reunion du Parlement des que les conditions indispensables de securite et de liberte d'action des
parlementaires seront a nouveau reunies. Pourquoi ne le
prendrions-nous pas au mot? Pourquoi ne demanderions-nous pas aux pays qui ont une si grande influence
sur lui de lui conseiller d'essayer de retablir les conditions indispensables a la convocation du Parlement?
35

be convened? That is all I shaH say about the question
of changed conditions; unfortunately time goes so quickly
that it is not possible for me to deal with that question
in any greater detail.

Je n'en dirai pas plus au sujet des modifications de la
situation. Le temps passe si vite que je ne pourrai malheureusement pas entrer dans plus de details.

147. I come now to the point that law and order cannot
be maintained unless, basically, law is respected. This
cannot be done if the present position of those who are
in charge of the administration, those with whom we
have to treat, is based upon lawlessness and if, what
is more, they make a gospel out of it. In such circumstances, it is quite impossible for the Secretary-General
or his officials to take the view of maintaining law and
order, in the sense of interpreting a criminal code under
a parliamentary system of government. That was not
what the United Nations went into the Congo to do.

147. J'en viens maintenant a mon argument selon
lequel il n'est possible de maintenir 1'0rdre public que
si les lois sont respectees. Or, il est impossible de faire
respecter les lois si les gens en place, ceux avec qui nous
devons traiter, sont eux-memes sans foi ni loi et, qui
plus est, s'en font une gloire. Dans ces conditions, il
est impossible au Secretaire general ou a ses representants de considerer le maintien de l'ordre comme une
simple question d'interpretation du code penal sous un
regime parlementaire. Ce n'est du reste pas pour cela
que 1'0NU est intervenut' au Congo.

148. But all that is vitiated by the presence of Mr.
Mobutu. Now, I am a pacifist myself - even though
I am Defence Minister of my country - and I would
not wish anything that I say now to be interpreted as
meaning that we desire the elimination of Mobutu.
Such an interpretation would mean that we were inciting
to violence. Mobutu is a colonel of the Congolese army
- at least he has had the decency not to give himself
titles and call himself a general. But his position is only
that of Chief of Staff. He has no political position.
However, he carried out a coup d'etat in which he captured power; and it is that illegal capture of power
which the Head of State is now apparently honouring,
or sanctifying, or ratifying, or whatever one wishes to
call it. That means that this is really government by
coup d'etat. The aim is to make it possible for the United
States and the United Kingdom to maintain that the
Head of State conforms to all the constitutional
requirements.

148. Mais tout cela est vicie par la presence de
M. Mobutu. Je m'empresse de dire que je suis, pour ma
part, un pacifiste - bien que je sois Ministre de la
defense de mon pays. Je ne voudrais pas que ceux qui
m'ecoutent puissent penser que nous desirons l'elimination de M. Mobutu. Interpreter mes paroles dans ce sens
reviendrait a dire que nous incitons les gens a la violence. Mobutu est un colonel de l'armee congolaise
- il a au moins eu le tact de ne pas se decerner le titre
de general. Mais ses fonctions sont celles d 'un chef
d'etat-major. 11 n'exerce aucune fonction politique. Et
pourtant il a fait un coup d'Etat qui lui a donne le pouvoir, et c'est cette prise de pouvoir illegale que le chef
de l'Etat a enterinee, ou sanctionnee, ou ratifiee, comme
on voudra. Cela signifie que nous sommes reellement
en presence d'un systeme de gouvernement par coups
d 'Etat. Le but poursuivi en l'occurrence est de mettre
les Etats-Unis et le Royaume-Uni en mesure d'affirmer
que le chef de l'Etat se conforme a toutes les exigences
de la Constitution.

149. I come now to my next point. My Government
agrees that we cannot make bad laws just because of
a bad and hard situation. We may not disregard the
Charter. We are, however, entitled to submit to the
Secretary-General that the Charter has to be read in
its entirety; every word is important. This is especially
necessary in the case of an instrument which allows of
interpretation in the light of moving circumstances.

149. J'aborde mon deuxieme argument. Mon gouvernement est d'avis qu'il n'y a pas lieu de faire des mauvaises lois simplement parce que la situation est difficile. Nous n'avons pas le droit de faire abstraction de la
Charte. Nous avons toutefois le droit de faire remarquer
au Secretaire general que la Charte doit etre observee
jusqu'au bout: chaque mot a son importance. Cela est
d'autant plus necessaire qu'il s'agit d'un document qui
se prete a des interpretations differentes suivant les
circonstances.

150. Now, in order to interpret the Charter we must
find out what is the disease with which we are dealing.
And here Mr. Hammarskjold comes to my assistance.
He says:

150. Pour pouvoir interpreter la Charte, nous devons
tout d'abord connaitre la nature du mal qui nous occupe.
Et la M. Hammarskjold me vient en aide quand i1 dit:

" The coup of the ANC Chief of Staff had introduced
a new factor " - and, therefore, changed conditions:
rebus sic stantibus - " adding to the complexity of the
situation... the eruption of the army into the political
scene" - I think that" eruption" is a bit too mild;
" intrusion" might be more apt - "constituted a
new menace to peace and security and actually inhibited peaceful political activity. " [8/4557, para. 118.]

« Le « COUp» du chef d'etat-major de l'ANC a
introduit un nouveau facteur - par consequent, situation nouvelle: rebus sic stantibus - « qui a ajoute a
la complexite de la situation ... L'irruption de l'armee
sur la scene politique» - je trouve « irruption»
un peu faible, « intrusion» conviendrait mieux -« a constitue une nouvelle menace contre la paix et la
securite et a, en realite, empeche une activite politique
pacifique. » [8/4557, par. 118.]

I stress the words " a new menace to peace and security ".
Now, the Secretary-General is not in the dock here, but
in these matters he is the highest authority I can quote.
We do not subscribe to any attacks made either upon

Je souligne les mots « une nouvelle menace contre la
la paix et la securite ». Bien entendu, le Secretaire general n'est pas ici au banc des prevenus, mais je ne puis
citer personne qui fasse davantage autorite en la matU:re.
36

the office or the individual; policies can be right, policies
can be wrong. Mr. Hammarslgold has indeed been good
enough to say that neither he not the Secretariat is
infallible.

Nous ne souscrivons it aucune attaque dirigee contre la
personne ou la charge du Secretaire general; une politique peut etre bonne ou mauvaise. M. Hammarskjold
a bien voulu reconnaitre que ni lui ni le Secretariat
n'etaient infaiilibles.

151. Mr. Hammarslgold has said that the resolution

151. M. Hammarskjold a dit que la resolution S/4387
« ne stipulait pas expressement que la Force des Nations
Unies devait maintenir l'ordre public, mais qu'il ressortait clairement du contexte que ce serait la sa fonction
essentielle». [913 e seance, par. 25.] A ce sujet je voudrais rappeler qu'il existe un principe de droit courant,
qui s'applique aussi bien au droit international,
selon lequel une chose est rendue legale par l'usage;
lorsque, par exemple, deux personnes concluent un
contrat, meme si l'acte juridique n'est pas parfaitement redige, le contrat devient valable du seul fait
qu'il est execute et que ses conditions sont respectees
par les deux parties. n en est de meme dans le cas present. M. Hammarskjold ajoute: « La justification juridique de la decision du Conseil se trouvait dans la menace
a la paix et a la securite » - ceci n'est pas une nouvelle
theorie de M. Hammarskjold, il y a toujours cru « qui avait surgi par suite de l'intervention de troupes
beIges au Congo, intervention quiavait elle-meme pour
motif declare les desol'dres internes qui s'etaient generalises dans le pays. » [Ibid.] Par consequent, nous sommes
parfaitement en droit de considerer cette affaire comme
basee sur la notion de paix et de securite, ce qui est
necessaire pour interpreter la Charte.

[8/4387]: "did not specifically state that the United

Nations Force was to maintain law and order, but it
was clear from the context that this would be its essential function " - and here I would say that it is a proposition of ordinary law, which also applies to international law, that something is made legal by practice;
that is to say, two people conclude a contract and,
even if the written instrument is not perfect, it is made
an agreement by performance, by conduct, by the honouring ofit. The same applies in tIns case. Mr. Hammarskjold
continues: "The legal justification for the Council decision was the threat to peace and security " - this is not
invention of Mr. Hammarskjold; he has always believed
it - "which arose as a result of the intervention of
Belgian troops in the Congo; this intervention, in turn,
occurred purportedly because of the widespread internal
disorders in the country". [913th meeting, para. 25.]
Therefore we are entirely justified in regarding this matter
as based upon the conception of peace and security,
which is necessary in order to interpret the Charter.

152. Now, according to Mr. Dayal, government in the
Congo is being conducted by a College of Commisioners - I do not know whether these Commissioners are
going to college or whether they have come from college.
Mr. Dayal states: "The College of Commissioners,
drawn from inexperienced young students " - and this
is not disrespectful to the Commissioners; sometimes
young students are very capable, and it is certainly no
crime to be young - " and whose declared purpose was
to keep the elements ofthe administration running, created
problems of its own in relation to the United Nations
effort" - and I would say that we are somewhat
familiar with that problem. The report continues:

152. Selon M. Dayal, le Congo est gouverne par un
j'ignore si ces commissaires vont encore au college ou s'ils en sont deja sortis.
M. Dayal declare: « Le Colleg~ des commissaires,
compose de jeunes etudiants sans experience ... » Il n'y
a rien d'irreverencieux a le dire, il y a des jeunes etudiants tres capables, et ce n'est certainement pas un crime
d'etre jeune; les gens qui ne sont plus jeunes sont en
tout cas de cet avis - « et dont l'objectif declare etait
d'assurer le fonctionnement des rouages de l'administration, a cree des problemes particuliers au point de
vue des efforts des Nations Unies» - nous commen;'
90ns a nous habituer a ce genre de problemes. M. Dayal
continue:

" The young men were invariably accompanied " this is the sinister part of it - " by numerous Belgian
advisers, occasionally drawn from among their own
teachers. The inevitable consequence was that the
Commissioners were more inclined to listen to their
own mentors than to act in co-operation with the
United Nations consultants who, in many ministries,
found a wall of opposition building up against them.
Indeed, instead of co-operating with the United Nations
technical aid mission, as was their proclaimed purpose,
the Commissioners actually set themselves up in opposition to it. Their inexperience, their lack of method
and order, their susceptibility to outside influences,
combined with a propensity to issue conflicting statements, introduced new elements of delay, confusion
and disorganization. As a result of these combined
factors, the chaotic administrative and economic situation reached the verge of collapse. "[8/4557, para. 121.]

« Ces jeunes gens etaient invariablement accompagnes» - voici le cote triste de la chose - « de
nombreux conseiIIers beIges dont certains avaient ete
leurs propres professeurs. L'inevitable consequence
en etait que les commissaires se montraient plus
enclins a ecouter leurs mentors qu'it cooperer avec
les consultants des Nations Unies, qui, dans de nombreux ministeres, se sont bientot heurtes a un mur
d'opposition. En verite, au lieu de cooperer avec la
mission d'assistance technique des Nations Unies, ce
qui, selon leurs declarations, etait leur objectif, les
commissaires ont en realite fait de l'opposition. Leur
inexperience, leur manque de methode et d'ordre,
leur vulnerabilite aux influences exterieures, joints it
une certaine propension aux declarations contradictoires, ont introduit de nouveaux elements de retard,
de confusion et de desorganisation, Par le jeu de ces
facteurs combines, la situation economique et administrative, qui etait chaotique, en est arrivee au bord
de la desagregation .» [8/4557, par. 121.]

37

« college de commissaires » -

153. Here I should like to say that I read in a newspaper that some Canadian sources had been reported
as stating that it was not possible to carry on United
Nations technical aid because of the opposition of the
Belgian authorities. In other words, whenever there was
a proposition for technical aid - whether for oil, or
for coal, or for anything else - there was tremendous
opposition. There was nothing doing: it was the vested
interests of the empire trying to push out the United
Nations. Thus, even in the field of technical aid we are
up against that situation.

153. Je voudrais ajouter que j'ai lu dans un journal
qu'on avait declare dans certains milieux canadiens
qu'il n'etait pas possible de poursuivre l'aide technique
de l'ONU en raison de l'opposition des autorites beIges.
En d'autres termes, chaque fois qu'une aide technique
etait proposee - que ce soit sous forme de petrole, de
charbon ou d'autre chose - on se heurtait a une formidable opposition. II n'y avait den a faire: l'empire
essayait de chasser les Nations Unies pour defendre
ses droits acquis. Ainsi, meme dans le domaine de l'assistance technique, nous sommes en butte a cette situation.

154. In this connexion Mr. Dayal has stated:
" In dealing with the College on a purely technical
plane, for the purpose of continuing the existing
technical aid programmes, there has been no question
whatsoever of recognizing the College as a legitimate
government" - in other words, the United Nations
has not recognized the College as a legitimate government - " for its existence does not derive any sanction from the Loi fondamentale. The College was
nominated by the ANC Chief of Staff" - that is,
by Colonel Mobutu - " and later formally installed
by the Chief of State, an action which the Chief of
Staff immediately criticized as unauthorized, since
he had 'neutralized ' the Chief of State." [Ibid.,
para. 123.]

154. A ce sujet, M. Daya1 a dit:
« Les rapports avec le College se sont situes sur le
plan purement technique et ils ont eu pour but de
poursuivre l'execution des programmes d'assistance
technique en cours; a aucun moment, it n'a ete question de reconnaitre le College comme gouvernement
legitime» - autrement dit, les Nations Unies n'ont pas
reconnu le College en tant que gouvernement legitime - « car son existence ne trouve aucune justification dans la Loi fondamentale. Le College a ete
nomme par le chef d'etat-major de l'ANC» - c'esta-dire le colonel Mobutu - « puis installe officiellement dans ses fonctions par le chef de l'Etat, acte
que le chef d'etat-major a immediatement qualifie
d'abus de pouvoir du fait qu'il avait « neutralise»
le chef de l'Etat. » [Ibid., par. 123.]

155. Now, the argument for this College of Commissioners is that politics has been neutralized; that is to
say, the administration has been taken out of the field
of political squabbles. That should mean objective and
learned men, young men who are idealistic - probably
they would be more idealistic without their advisersbut there is no evidence whatsoever that this band of
people is anything but a political instrument. That is
to say, there has been no neutralization of politics.
As I said a while ago, we are concerned, as citizens of
the world, with young people in a country, particularly
a liberated country, with the future before them and
the making not only of the Congo, but of Africa as a
whole. The contribution which they should make to
the world is dependent on the rising generation, especially
in the Congo where the Belgians did not think it necessary
to see the advantages of higher education when they were
there.

155. L'argument en faveur de ce college de commissaires est que la politique a ete neutraIisee, autrement
dit, que l'administration a ete soustraite a l'influence
des querelles politiques. Cela signifie que les commissaires sont des erudits a l'esprit objectif, des jeunes gens
pleins d'ideal - ils le seraient certainement davantage
n'etaient 1eurs conseilIers. Mais rien ne prouve que
cette poignee d'hommes soit autre chose qu'un instrument poIitique. Autant dire que la politique n'a pas
ete neutralisee. Comme je l'ai dit il y a un instant, nous
nous preoccupons, en tant que citoyens du monde, du
sort de la jeunesse d 'un pays - d 'un pays recemment
Iibere, surtout - qui a tout l'avenir devant elle et la
perspective d'edifier non seulement le Congo, mais
l'Afrique tout entiere; la contribution qu'apportera ce
peuple jeune au reste du monde depend de la generation
montante, et cela est particuIierement vrai au Congo ou
les BeIges n'ont pas juge utile de faire beneficier les jeunes
des bienfaits de l'instruction superieure.

156. Mr. Dayal continues:
" In the confused political situation which prevails,
the only two institutions whose foundations still stand
are the office of the Chief of State and the Parliament. " [Ibid., para. 127.]
That is our position, and with which, I am happy to
say, we are able to agree with this report.
" If the minimum conditions of non-interference and
security mentioned earlier could be established, it
would open the way to the leaders of the country to
seek peaceful political solutions through the medium
of these two institutions. " [Ibid.]
That is to say, in spite of all that is happening, if it
were possible for the Chief of State to function, as laid
down by the constitution, through the instrumentality
of its ministers and through the machinery of its ParP?J-

156. M. Dayal continue comme suit:
« Dans la situation poIitique confuse qui regne
actuellement, les deux seules institutions dont les fondements demeurent sont I'office de chef de l'Etat et
le Parlement. » [Ibid., par. 127.]
C'est egalement notre avis, et sur ce point j'ai le plaisir
de dire que nous sommes d'accord avec le rapport.
« Si les conditions minimums de non-ingerence et
de securite mentionnees plus haut pouvaient Stre
creees, les dirigeants du pays pourraient alors rechercher des solutions politiques pacifiques par l'entremise de ces deux institutions. » [Ibid.]
C'est-a-dire que, en depit de tous les evenements, si le
chef de l'Etat pouvait remplir ses fonctions, comme le
veut la Constitution, par le truchement de ses ministres,
des rouages de son parlement et conformement a la loi,
38

ment and in conformity with law, then, the Chief of
State, as the embodiment, the personality of the Congo
and the sovereignty of the people, would perform not
only a good service but would be entitled to high respect.
But if the Chief of State wants to appropriate to himself
functions that are not placed upon him by the constitution - and the Congo fundamental law, as I see it,
contains far more stringent measures, written down in
terms, than is contained in the unwritten law of the
United Kingdom or in our written constitution, where
it is left to conventions. But here, the Chief of State
has been tied down; the limitations are explicitly laid
down - " You cannot do this unless Parliament does
that; and you cannot initiate this unless a minister says
something else ". As it is a written constitution of the
Latin type, they have been more logical in that way
and therefore there is no question that while the status
can be respected, the functions cannot be.

il rendrait, en tant que symbole de la personnalite du
Congo et de la souverainete du peuple, un grand service
it son pays et aurait droit it notre plus profond respect.
Mais, s'il veut assumer des fonctions qui ne lui sont pas
devolues par la Constitution - et la Loi fondamentale
du Congo, comme j'ai pu m 'en assurer, contient, en
toutes lettres, des dispositions beaucoup plus strictes
que la loi non ecrite du Royaume-Uni ou que notre
propre constitution, on il est fait une large place it la
tradition - il outrepasse ses droits. Iei, le chef de I'Etat
est assujetti it des limites explicitement definies: « vous
ne pouvez pas faire ceci it moins que le Parlement ne fasse
cela; VOllS ne pouvez prendre l'initiative de cela it moins
qu'un ministre ne donne son approbation.» Etant
donne qu'il s'agit d'une constitution ecrite de type latin,
on a ete beaucoup plus logique it cet egard et il n'est
par consequent pas question que les fonctions ne soient
pas respectees si le statut l'est.

157. Now, if it is true that peace and security is endangered - I would not say that I join issue, because I
have not heard Mr. Hammarskjold objecting to thisthen the Government of India takes the view, as it has
been expressed here, that it is necessary for the United
Nations either to stay there and function or to think
of other things.

157.. S'il est vrai que la paix et la securite sont menacees - je n'ai pas entendu M. Hammarskjold soulever
d'objection sur ce point - le Gouvernement de I'Inde
est d'avis, comme il l'a deja dit ici, que I'OND doit
rester sur place et agir, ou bien s'occuper d'autre chose.

158. We think the withdrawal of the United Nations
would be a calamity, not only for the Congo but for
ourselves. It is not a question of losing face or anything
of that sort. The position of the United Nations is that
the capacity of the great Mrican countries should be
developed, without being canvassed by one side or the
other, or without being a kind of object of economic bargaining - all that should disappear; or the great schemes
of technical and economic advancement, the resurgence
of Africa, the development of its 200 million people
and of its large territory would become impossible.

158. Nous pensons que le retrait de I'ONU du Congo
serait une calamite non seulement pour le Congo, mais
aussi pour nous-memes. Il ne s'agit pas de perdre la
face ou de queIque chose de ce genre. La position de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies est que les possibilites des grands pays africains doivent etre developpees it
l'abri des sollicitations de l'un ou l'autre des deux camps
et des marchandages economiques - tout cela doit disparaitre, sinon les grands programmes techniques et
economiques, la resurrection de l'Afrique, le progres
de ses 200 millions d'hommes et le developpement de
son immense territoire - tout cela deviendrait impossible.

159. Therefore, I address your attention to Article 14
of the Charter:

159. C'est pourquoi j'attire votre attention sur le texte
de l'Article 14 de la Charte:

"Subject to the provisions of Article 12, the
General Assembly may recommend measures for the
peaceful adjustment of any situation, regardless of
origin, which it deems likely to impair the general
welfare or friendly relations among nations, including
situations resulting from a violation of the present
Charter setting forth the Purposes and Principles of
the United Nations. "
There are two words here which are the key to this:
" any situation ". It does not say any dispute; it does
not say any war. No one will doubt that there is a situation in the Congo - otherwise,. we would not be here.
As the sentence is constructed "general welfare or
friendly relations among nations " that is an alternate.
The "general welfare " is the welfare of the human
family as put out in the preamble of the Charter" We
the peoples of the United Nations" - that is "the
general welfare ". And the Congolese people are part
of it.

« Sous reserve des dispositions de l'Article 12,
l'Assemblee generale peut recommander les mesures
propres it assurer l'ajustement pacifique de toute
situation, quelle qu'en soit 1'0rigine, qui lui semble
de nature it nuire au bien general ou it compromettre
les relations amicales entre nations, y compris les
situations resultant d'une infraction aux dispositions
de la presente Charte on sont enonces les buts et les
prineipes des Nations Unies. »
Les mots clefs de cet article sont: « toute situation».
Il ne dit pas: « tout differend», ni: « toute guerre».
Personne ne doute qu'il y ait une situation au Congo,
sans quoi nous ne serions pas ici aujourd'hui. La phrase
est construite de telle fa90n que « le bien general» et
« les relations amicales entre nations» apparaissent
comme une alternative. Le « bien general» est le bien
de la grande famille des hommes telle qU'elle est definie
dans le preambule de la Charte: « Nous, peuples des
Nations Unies » - c'est cela que l'on entend par « bien
general». Et le peuple congolais en fait partie.

160. My Government submits that Article 14 is applicable to the present situation, that there is "a situation "
and we do not have to bother about the "origin"
although ! share the view that, in certain circumstances,

160. Mon gouvernement est d'avis que l'Article 14
est applicable it la situation actuelle, qu'il y a effectivement « une situation» et que nous n'avons pas it nous
embarrasser de son « origine », bien que, dans certaines
39

regardless of " origin ", even if it were purely a situation of anarchy and chaos, the United Nations should
intervene on account of " a violation of the provisions
of the Charter setting forth the Purposes and Principles
of the United Nations ".

circonstances, il me semble que, independamment de
la question de l' « origine» et meme s'il s'agit d'une
situation purement anarchique et chaotique, l'ONU ait
le devoir d'intervenir en raison « d'une infraction aux
dispositions de la... Charte ou sont enonces les buts et
les principes des Nations Unies ».

161. Therefore, from Article 14 we go back to Article 1,
to the Purposes, that is to say, "measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace ". It does
not say peace in the event of war between two countries - " removal of threats to the peace, and for the
suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of
the peace, and to bring about. . . adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might
lead to a breach of the peace ';.

161. De 1'Article 14, done, je passe a 1'Article premier,
aux buts, autrement dit aux « mesures ... en vue de
prevenir et d'ecarter les menaces a la paix». Cet article
ne parle pas de paix dans 1'eventualite d'une guerre
entre deux pays - il dit « en vue de prevenir et d'ecarter
les menaces a la paix et de reprimer tout acte d'agression ou autre rupture de la paix, et realiser ... l'ajustement ou le reglement de differends ou de situations
. .. susceptibles de mener a une rupture de la paix ».

162. In the view of my Government, in spite of what
may have appeared in some parts of the SecretaryGeneral's report, aggression continues. So long as
Belgian troops are there, whether they are in cold storage,
whether they are in technical assistance or whether they
are in Ruanda, there is aggression, and if what is going
to happen in Stanleyville, what has been happening in
Leopoldville, if these are not threats or breaches of the
peace, what else are they? Then we have "disputes or
situations " - it is not a situation - " situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace ".

162. L' opinion de mon gouvernement est que, malgre
ce qui semble ressortir de certains passages du rapport
du Secretaire general, 1'agression continue. Tant que les
troupes beIges sont la, qu'elles soient tenues au frais
quelque part, qu'eUes s'occupent d'assistance technique
ou qu'eUes soient stationnees au Ruanda, peu importe,
il y a bel et bien agression - et, si ce qui est sur le point
de se passer a Stanleyville, ce qui s'est passe a Leopoldville n'est pas une menace a la paix ou une rupture de
la paix, qU'est-ce done? Dans 1'Article premier, il y a
aussi les mots « differends et situations» - il ne s'agit
pas ici d'une situation - « susceptibles de mener a une
rupture de la paix ».

163. As I said, the Charter has to be read as one piece.
So' Article 14, read for the purposes of the Charter,
places this matter squarely within its conspectus. Therefore, we are not able to agree that there is any fear of
going beyond the Charter. My Government would not
subscribe to going beyond it. We have always held that
the torturing of procedures, the torturing of rules in
order to gain an immediate point, ultimately creates
problems. Hard cases make bad law.

163. Comme je l'ai dit tout a 1'heure, la Charte doit
etre consideree comme un tout. Ainsi 1'article 14, lorsqu'on le lit en tenant compte des buts des Nations Unies,
place carrement la question dans son contexte. Par
consequent, il nous est impossible de nous ranger a
l'avis de ceux qui craignent de depasser le cadre des
dispositions de la Charte. Mon gouvernement n'approuverait pas qu'on depasse ce cadre. Nous avons
toujours soutenu qu'en faisant violence aux regles ou
a la procedure pour marquer un point dans 1'immediat,
on ne fait que se creer des ennuis pour plus tard. Les
causes difficiles creent de mauvais precedents.

164. All we are saying is this: the Charter has to be
interpreted first in its normal order - and I say
" general welfare" does not apply merely to the welfare of
two nations; secondly" regardless of origin, a situation ".
If unfortunately a situation should develop in that way,
there are eleven sections of the Charter, which I shall
not go into detail, in Chapter VI and Chapter VII.
Long before we go to Chapter VI, Chapter VII becomes
relevant.

164. Ce que nous voulons dire est ceci: la Charte doit
etre interpretee, tout d'abord, dans son ordre logique
- et je pretends que le « bien general» ne s'applique
pas seulement au bien de deux nations; en second lieu,
« toute situation, queUe qu'en soit 1'origine». Si par
maIheur une situation prend une tournure aussi grave,
il y a 11 articles de la Charte - je ne les examinerai pas
en detail - que l' on peut invoquer aux Chapitres VI
et VII. D'autre part, le Chapitre VII devient applicable
bien avant que 1'on ait recours au Chapitre VI.

165. I say all this because, unfortunately, in some parts
of the statements made by the Secretary-General, some
parts of the report, certainly in all parts of the statement made by those who regard the present situation
as a legal one, as Mr. Wadsworth said yesterday [916th
meeting], it seems to be interpreted that not only the
intervention of the United Nations by force of arms,
but even the pacific settlement, is a matter of
intervention.

165. Tout cela, je le dis parce que, malheureusement,
on trouve dans certains passages des declarations du
Secretaire general, dans certains passages du rapport,
et siirement dans tous les passages des declarations de
ceux qui, comme M. Wadsworth 1'a dit hier [916e seance],
semblent considerer la situation actuelle comme conforme a la legalite, une interpretation selon laquelle non
seulement l'intervention de l'ONU par les armes, mais
meme le reglement pacifique du conflit sont a l1ssimiler
a une ingerence dans les affaires interieures d'un pays.

166. I should like to ask you, Mr. President, since
you come from a country that has been involved in this

166. Je vous pose la question, Monsieur le President,
vous qui venez d'un pays qui, dans 1'histoire contem40

quite a lot, in pre-present historic times, when does
a domestic event become a domestic event? It is only
when it is possible to isolate the home from the country. I
would like to ask whether the murder at Sarajevo was
a domestic event or not? It provoked a war all the same.
In all history the marriage oftwo people, of two dynasties,
has created both complications and otherwise. I should
have thought that it was a very domestic event. So it
is a question of what are the repercussions of a domestic
event?

poraine, a acquis pas mal d'experience dans ce domaine:
qu'est-ce qui fait d'un evenement un evenement interieur?
N'est-ce pas seulement quand il est possible d'isoler
la vie privee de celle du pays? L'assassinat de Sarajevo
n'etait-il pas un evenement interieur? Il n'en a pas moins
provoque une guerre. Tout au long de l'histoire, le mariage
entre deux personnes appartenant a des dynasties differentes a cree des complications; il semblerait pourtant
qu'il s'agisse la d'un evenement essentiellement interieur.
Par consequent, ce qui importe, c'est de savoir quelles
sont les repercussions d'un evenement interieur.

167. The history of the United Nations from September 1946 has been a history where, every time an attempt
is made by any side here, on the lines of progress, on
the lines of redressing of evils - for racial discrimination or otherwise - Article 2, para. 7, has always been
pleaded. We yield to no one in respect for the sovereignty of countries, particularly when those countries
respect the sovereignty of others. But you cannot have it
both ways. If this were a domestic matter, then why did the
United Nations go there at all? It could go there through
the machinery of the Economic and Social Council and
not with armed troops. What is more, the United Nations
having at the present moment no international police
forces - its military organization merely being an embryo
not functioning as was expected under the Charter - has
devised this machinery for the purpose.

167. L'histoire de l'ONU depuis 1946 a ete une histoire au cours de laquelle, chaque fois qu'une tentative
a ete faite par l'un ou par l'autre pour faire avancer
le progres, pour redresser les torts - qu'il s'agisse de
discrimination raciale ou d'autre chose - le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2 a ete invoque. Nous ne le cedons
a personne pour le respect de la souverainete des pays,
surtout si ces pays respectent eux aussi celle des autres.
Mais il n'y a pas deux fa!(ons de voir les choses. Si ceci
etait une affaire interieure, pourquoi I'Organisation des
Nations Unies se serait-elle rendue sur place? Elle aurait
pu intervenir par l'intermediaire du Conseil economique
et social, au lieu de le faire avec des forces armees. De
plus, l'Organisation ne disposant pas pour le moment
de force de police internationale - son organisation
militaire est encore embryonnaire et bien loin de fonctionner comme il etait prevu aux termes de la Charte elle a con!(u un systeme special pour les besoins de la
cause.

168. Therefore, it was not as though somebody slipped
it in absent-mindedly. The Security Council took a very
deliberate decision; and here it will not be considered
impertinence - my Government wishes to say something
in regard to the Security Council decisions. We have
heard here and elsewhere a great deal of criticism of
the Secretary-General. We put in no special pleading
for him. He can well look after himself. I do not doubt
that he made mistakes; if he did not he would not be
human; but the main responsibility lies on the Security
Council. The Security Council having passed the resolutions, the Security Council had the responsibility, in
our opinion, of continuous surveillance of the matter.
The Charter provides for periodic meetings of the Security Council and detailed instructions should have gone
out. The Secretary-General is the executive officerthough he is an organ of the United Nations he has to
function from day to day and I heard Mr. Hammarskjold
say the other day in the General Assembly or in the
Advisory Committee, I forget which, "Let the General
Assembly take the responsibility; let them say what is
wanted ". So when resolutions are passed and Member
States are asked to make contributions, not of money but
of people, when troops go in, it cannot be taken in a lighthearted way.

168. Ce n'est donc pas comme si 1'0n avait envoye ces
troupes au Congo par megarde. Le Conseil de securite
a pris une decision mfuement reflechie, et a ce propos
- j'espere que cela ne sera pas considere comme une
impertinence - mon gouvernement desire faire une
remarque au sujet des decisions du Conseil. Nous avons
entendu ici et la de nombreuses critiques a l'adresse du
Secretaire general. Nous n'avons pas l'intention de
prendre sa defense; il est parfaitement capable de se
defendre tout seul. Il a sans aucun doute commis des
erreurs; s'il n'en avait pas fait, il ne serait pas homme;
mais la responsabilite principale incombe au Conseil de
securite. Le Conseil ayant adopte les resolutions, il
devait, a notre sens, surveiller constamment l'evolution
de cette affaire. La Charte prevoit des reunions periodiques du Conseil de securite; des instructions detaillees
auraient donc dfi etre donnees. Le Secretaire general
est le fonctionnaire charge de l'execution des decisions,
bien qu'il ne soit pas un organe des Nations Unies il a l'obligation d'etre a son poste jour apres jour. J'ai
entendu M. Hammarskjold dire l'autre jour a l'AssembIee generaIe, ou au Comite consultatif - je ne me
souviens plus exactement - : « Que l'Assemblee en
prenne la responsabilite; qu'elle dise ce qu'il faut faire. »
Si bien que le vote des resolutions, les contributions
demandees aux Etats Membres - non en argent, mais
en hommes - l'envoi des troupes a pied d'ceuvre, tout
cela n'a pas pu etre decide a la legere.

169. It is a very serious matter, and therefore my
Government would regret the withdrawal of the United
Nations from this operation - I am not saying that in a
calamitous way - because that would lead to anarchy.
It would lead to a loss of prestige - I do not mean
in a false sense, but a loss of prestige for the United

169. Il s'agissait d'une affaire tres serieuse, et c'est
pourquoi mon gouvernement regretterait beaucoup que
l'ONU renonce a poursuivre I'operation - je ne dis
pas cela par pessimisme - car il en resuIterait une situation anarchique. Une telle decision entrainerait une
perte de prestige pour I'Organisation des Nations Unies.
41

Nations. And no one knows better than Mr. Hammarskjold how, in the under-developed countries, in
the less sophisticated countries such as ours, the United
Nations has such high prestige, not only among politicians but among ordinary people.

Et personne ne sait mieux que M. Hammarskjold de
quel prestige jouit l'Organisation dans les pays sousdeveloppes, dans les pays moins compliques comme le
notre, non seulement parmi les hommes politiques mais
au sein du peuple.

170. Although time is short I will tell the Council of
an incident. The Secretary-General visited our country.
He occasionally does that, and two years ago he wanted
to go to see some of the rural areas. Like all Governments,
I suppose, we take visitors to special places - although
not because they should not go anywhere else. But,
because we are a very disorderly people, I believe his
driver lost the way and he found himself in a village
where he was not scheduled to go. So there were no
brass bands or anything of tliat kind. They produced
a chair on which the Secretary-General was asked to
sit, then they asked him every possible question about
the United Nations, the Trusteeship Council, and so
on, and they finally asked him, "What are you paid
for "doing this job? " That is not a laughing matter. In
the rural areas of our country there are 600,000 villages.
Nobody asked them to say these things, the SecretaryGeneral was not expected to go there. That is the
general response of people, and, although I do not speak
for Mrica, I am quite certain that, in the whole of the
Mrican territories, there is an emotional, spiritual reaction to the conception of the United Nations and its
purposes, which is an asset that should not be wasted;
and any cynicism arising in connexion with this would
be a terrible thing, because it is a factor which might
cause conflicts of various kinds.

170. Bien que le temps presse, je vais raconter une
anecdote au Conseil a ce sujet. Le Secretaire general
visitait notre pays; cela lui arrive de temps a autre et,
il y a deux ans, il a voulu aller voir un peu les districts
ruraux. Comme tous les gouvernements, je SUppose,
nous emmenons les visiteurs dans des endroits determines
- bien que ce ne soit pas pour les empecher d'aller
ailleurs. Mais, comme nous sommes des gens tres desordonnes, je crois bien que le chauffeur a perdu sa route
et s'est retrouve dans un village qui n'6tait pas prevu au
programme. n n'y avait par consequent ni fanfare ni
aucune ceremonie a l'arrivee du Secretaire general.
On sortit une chaise et on demanda a celui-ci de s'y
asseoir, puis on lui posa toutes les questions possibles et
imaginables sur l'ONU, sur le Conseil de tutelle, etc.;
finalement, on lui demanda: « Combien gagnez-vous
pour faire ce travail?» 11 n'y a pas de quoi rire. Dans
la campagne de mon pays, il y a 600.000 villages.
Personne n'a dit aces gens ce qu'il fallait dire: le Secretaire general n'etait pas cense passer par la. Mais tel1e
est en general la reaction spontanee des peuples, et,
bien que je ne veuille pas parler pour I'Mrique, je suis
persuade que, dans tous les territoires africains, les gens
ont la meme reaction sentimentale et spirituelle vis-a.-vis
du concept de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et de
ses buts. Cette reaction est un atout qui n'est pas a
negliger, car, si ce concept provoquait des reactions
empreintes de cynisme, ce serait un danger terrible.
Maintenant au moins, cet atout peut jouer son role
dans des conflits de toutes sortes.

171. I do not think that I can deal with all these things
now. Therefore, we come to the question of what is
to be done. There has been a great deal of controversy
here with regard to the disarming of the Congolese
army. There has been a great deal of reaction to what
is called the disarming of an army that is not an army as though it were unfrocking a bishop. But we did not
start this. The Secretary-General started this business
of disarming the army. In his fourth report of 7 September on the implementation of the Security Council
resolutions he said:

171. Je ne crois pas avoir le temps de m'etendre la.-dessus a present. Venons-en donc a la question de ce que
nous devons faire. On a beaucoup discute id autour de
la question du desarmement de l'armee congolaise.
Beaucoup ont reagi contre ce que I'on a appele le desarmement d'une armee qui n'en est pas une - comme s'il
s'agissait de defroquer un eveque. Mais ce n'est pas nous
qui avons lance cette idee. C'est le S.ecretaire general qui
le premier a parle de desarmer l'armee. Le 7 septembre,
dans son quatrieme rapport sur la mise en application
des resolutions du Conseil, il declarait:

" ... emphasis now should be put on the protection of the lives of the civilian population in the spirit
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide. This may necessitate a
temporary disarming of military units which, in view
of present circumstances, are an obstacle to the reestablishment of law and order in the interest of the
people and the stability of the nation." [8/4482,

« ... il convient maintenant d'insister sur la protection de la vie de la population civile dans l'esprit de
la Declaration universelle des droits de I'homme et
de la Convention pour la prevention et la repression
du crime de genocide. Cela peut obliger a. desarmer
temporairement des unites militaires qui, en raison
des circonstances actuelles, sont un obstacle au reta"blissement de l'ordre public, dans l'interet de la population et de la stabilite de la nation. » [8/4482, par. 12.]

para. 12.]

172. And he says in another place that the disarming
was effected with the co-operation of the Congolese
people:

172. Ailleurs, il dit que le desarmement de l'armee
s'est effectue avec la cooperation du peuple congolais:

" ... throughout the early months of the United
Nations operation in the Congo, the Congolese security force " - which is rather an odd name for it-

« ... pendant les premiers mois de l'operation des
Nations Unies au Congo, la force de securite congolaise » - c'est une appellation pour le moins curieuse-

42

"re-styled as the Armee nationale congolaise,
remained for the most part inactive and, in several
instances, units of the Armee nationale congolaise had,
by agreement with the United Nations, voluntarily
disarmed themselves. " [913th meeting, para. 38.]

{( rebaptisee armee nationale congolaise, est restee en
majeure partie inactive et, en plusieurs occasions, des
unites de l'armee nationale congolaise ont en accord
avec les Nations Unies.. volontairement desarme.»

When there are 20,000 professional troops in the place
- quite a large number of people - in addition to a
lot of Belgian technicians, it is very difficult to see why,
for security in the present state of disorder, another
element should be contributed.

Quand il y a deja 20.000 soldats professionnels sur place
- cela fait beaucoup de monde - en plus d'un grand
nombre de techniciens beIges, on voit mal l'utilite
d 'un troisieme element pour le maintien de la securite
dans la confusion actuelle.

173. I have great sympathy with and I understand
the position expressed by our young friend from the
Congo, that no country can be forcibly disarmed, but
every country has to submit itself to the demands of
order, to the demands of international organization. We
do the same. It is important to stress that there are parts
of our country where, under international arrangement,
our armed forces stand away from certain places. That
is not to say that there is a subjugation of our sovereignty, but there can be no international orqer without
some agreement of this character. It is important to
stress that, with reference to the complete control of
the country as a whole, even aside from Katanga, which
is at least claiming to maintain a semblance of authority.
I shall take up the question of disarming afterwards.

173. J'ai beaucoup de sympathie pour notre jeune ami
du Congo et je comprends fort bien sa position lorsqu'il
dit qu'aucun pays ne doit etre desarme par la force,
mais il est egalement vrai que tous les pays doivent se
soumettre aux exigences du maintien de I'ordre et a
celles d'une organisation internationale. Nous le faisons
nous aussi. Et il me parait important d'insister sur le
fait qu'aux termes d'un accord international, nos propres
troupes se tiennent a l'ecart de certaines regions de
notre pays. Cela ne veut pas dire qu'il y ait la un renoncement a notre souverainete, mais il est evident que
l'ordre international ne peut etre maintenu sans un
accord de ce genre. Cela meriterait d'etre souligne a
propos de la question du controle integral sur l'ensemble du Congo, meme si l'on excepte le Katanga qui
pretend au moins maintenir un semblant d'autorite.' Je
reviendrai dans un moment sur la question du desarmemento

174. Much as been said about the ill-treatment of the
former Prime Minister. It is not my business to refer
to it because, first of all, my Government likes to place
this on the basis of institutions, not of personalities,
and Mr. Lumumba happens to be the person who had
the largest following in Parliament and who has been displaced illegally. Perhaps if legality was restored either he
would assert himself and help to maintain order, or
he would be shown up. In either case it would be better
to call Parliament.

174. On a beaucoup parle des mauvais traitements qui
ont ete infliges a l'a;ncien premier ministre. Je ne veux
pas y revenir, mon gouvemement desire placer la question sur le plan institutionnel et non sur celui des personnes. Mais i1 se fait que M. Lumumba est la personne
qui avait le plus de partisans au sein du Parlement,
et qu'il a ete destitue de fa~on illegale. Peut-etre qu'en
cas de retour a la legalit6, il reussirait it s'imposer et
contribuerait au maintien de I'ordre ou bien ses intentions seraient demasquees. Quoi qu'il en soit, il ,serait
preferable de rappeler le Parlement.

175. The Secretary-General I believe - or was it the
representative of the United States - referred to the
question of trials and magistracy. I think our young
friend, the representative of the Congo, also spoke
about the law of the Congo and how it would be done.
Now article 66 of the Loi fondamentale says:

175. C'est le Secretaire general, je crois
a moins
que ce ne soit le representant des Etats-Unis - qui a
souleve la question des proces et de la magistrature.
Je crois que notre jeune ami le representant du Congo
a, lui aussi, parledu droit congolais, de la fa~on dont
on l'appliquerait, etc. Mais voici ce que dit l'article 66
de la Loi fondamentale congolaise:

" No member of either of the two Chambers may
be prosecuted or arrested for penal offences, as long
as the session goes unless the Chamber to which he
belongs has given its authorization or he has been
surprised in flagrante delicto. "

{( Aucun membre de l'une ou de l'autre Chambre
ne peut, pendant la duree de la session, Hre poursuivi
ni arrete en matiere repressive qu'avec l'autorisation
de la Chambre dont i1 fait partie, sauf le cas de flagrant
delit. »

That is to say, there is no sanction for this action at all,
and the article continues:

Autrement dit, il n'y a pas de sanction du tout contre
un tel acte; l'article continue ainsi:

"When the session is over, a member of either of
the Chambers may be arrested only with the authorization of the Bureau of the Chamber of which he
was a member ... ".

{( Aucun membre de l'une ou l'autre Chambre,
ne peut, hors session, etre arret6 qu'avec l'autorisation du bureau de la Chambre dont i1 fait partie. .. »

But how can the action be authorized if both the Speaker
and the Chairman are in prison?

Mais comment peut-on autoriser une telle arrestation
si le President et le Vice-President du Parlement sont
en prison?

[913 e seance, par. 38.]

43

176. The Secretary-General's letter of 5 December to
President Kasa-Vubu states:
" Of special importance in this context is the concept of due process of law as developed in general
recognized law and the fundamental law of public
liberties. "
I take the liberty of asking Mr. Hammarskjold how he
can write this sentence and at the same time say, "we
are not concerned with the law of the Congo". Mr. Hammarskjold continues:
" I refer in particular to the questions of the necessity
for and legality of the warrant of arrest, the requirements that the detainee be informed, within 24 hours
at the latest, of the reasons for his arrest and of the
formal charges in detail entered against him, that he
shall not be prosecuted except in the cases provided
for by legislation and in accordance with the procedures in force at the time when the offence was perpetrated, that he may have counsel of his own choice,
and further, that he shall be entitled in full equality
to a fair and public hearing by an independent and
impartial tribunal in the determination of any criminal
charge against him. " [8/4571, and Add.I, annex 11.]

176. Dan'- sa lettre du 5 decembre au president KasaVubu le Secretaire general declare:
« La notion de legalite, telle qu'on 1'a degagee dans
les principes generaux du droit et dans la Loi fondamentale sur les libertes publiques, prend it. cet egard
une importance toute particuliere. »
Je me permets de demander it. M. Hammarskjold comment il peut ecrire une phrase comme celle-lit. et en
meme temps declarer que « nous n'avons rien it. voir
avec la loi au Congo». M. Hammarskjold poursuit:
« Je me refere en particulier aux questions de la
necessite et de la legalite du mandat d'arret, de l'exigence en vertu de laquelle toute personne arretee doit
etre informee au plus tard dans les 24 heures de la
raison de son arrestation et des chefs d'accllsationportes contre elle, du principe selon lequel nul ne peut
etre poursuivi que dans les cas prevus par la legislation et dans les formes prescrites au moment ou
1'infraction a ete commise, du droit de l'inculpe d'avoir
l'assistance d'un defenseur de son choix et, d'une
maniere generale, au fait qu'il a droit en pleine egalite it. ce que sa cause soit entendue equitablement et
publiquement par un tribunal independant et impartial qui decidera du bien-fonde de toute accusation
en matiere penale dirigee contre lui.» [8/4571 et
Add.I, annexe 11.]

177. Now President Kasa-Vubu replies. In his letter to
the Secretary-General of 7 December - that is, after
he came here - he states:
" ... if the entire judiciary had not been destroyed
to a large extent as a result of action taken by
Mr. Lumumba :himself and by the special courts he
set up, the judiciary would today have no difficulty
in conQucting the trial in accordance with the rules
in force in all civilized countries. This however will
be our main concern for the future. " [Ibid., annex Ill.]
But, even presuming that his previous Prime Minister
destroyed them - and I do not know the facts - two
wrongs never make a right, and this is our concern in
the future, not for the present.

177. Voici maintenant la reponse du president KasaVubu. Dans sa lettre du 7 decembre au Secretaire general- soit apres son arrivee it. New York - il ecrit:
« ... si nous n'avions pas eu toute la magistrature
demantelee, en grande partie sous l'action de M. Lumumba lui-meme et des "dbunaux d'exception qu'il
organisa, il ne serait pas l-ifficile au pouvoir judiciaire
aujourd'hui de mener le proces suivant les regles en
vigueur dans tous les pays civilises. Ce sera toutefois
notre principal souci de demain. » [Ibid., annexe IlL]
Mais, meme it. supposer que son precedent premier
ministre ait demantele la magistrature - je ne sais pas
au juste ce qu'il en est - un mal n'en efface pas un
autre, et ceci est notre souci pour l'avenir, non pour
le present.

178. Now Mr. Dayal says in his report what follows 178. M. Dayal en conclut:
from that:
" ... the magistracy exists only in name. " In the
« ... la magistrature n'existe que de nom ... en
absence of a magistracy, arrested persons are either
l'absence d'une magistrature, les personnes arretees
ou bien sont relachees ou languissent indefiniment
let off or languish indefinitely in the jails and lockups .
dans les prisons ou les cachots... »
"
Although his [Mobutu's] army has not itself
« ... Bien que son armee [celle de Mobutu] n'ait
formally assumed the prerogatives of the judiciary
pas elle-meme assume officiellement les prerogatives
or the functions of the police, members of the ANC
de la magistrature ni les fonctions de la police, des
have frequently usurped those functions. They have
membres de l'ANC ont souvent usurre ces fonctions.
Us se sont eriges en juges de ce qui est autorise ou
set themselves up as judges of what type of activity
they will allow or disallow, regardless of the laws of
interdit, sans egard pour les lois du pays. Ce sont eux
qui se sont arroge le droit de decider qui doit etre
the land. It is they who have taken upon themselves
to decide who is to be imprisoned or detained, for how
emprisonne ou detenu, pour combien de temps et
dans quelles conditions.» [8/4557, par. 58 et 64.]
long and under what conditions. [8/4557, paras. 58
and 64.]
That is to say that, when we talk about the due process En d'autres termes, quand nOU8 parIons du cours normal
of law, first of all we must be sure that the law is respec- de la justice, nous devons commencer par etre stirs que
ted, that the institutions are under the law, and, what les lois seront respectees, qu'elles le sont au moment
is more, that the ordinary judiciary machinery is func- ou l'on parle, que les institutions sont conformes au
. droit en vigueur, et, qui plus est, que l'appareil judiciaire
tioning at all, even in a limited form.
44

ordinaire fonctioIDle comme il faut, ne serait-ce que sous
une forme restreinte.
179. The question now arises - and I want again to
repeat that I would like the Secretary-General to take
note of what my Government has to say - with regard
to the possibilities that might come about in Stanleyvllle. On the one hand, there is the rather horrific position with regard to the hostages, and on the other hand
there is also the position that the United Nations forces
might get themselves embroiled with the paratroopers
of Colonel Mobutu. And if Colonel Mobutu has paratroopers to spare he should join the United Nations
Force. Again, there is the use of Urundi as a base of
operations, and thirdly there is the supply of arms in
large quantities. Therefore the question arises what is
to be done in those circumstances, and my Government, although it is, I believe, entitled to suggest resolutions and things of that character, does not intend to
do so. We are here by kind permission of the Security
Council- although perhaps entitled to be so - and
therefore we do not want to abuse the privileges that
have been offered to us.

179. La question se pose a present de savoir - et je
repete que je desirerais que le Secretaire general prenne
bonne note de ce que mon gouvernement a a dire a ce
sujet - ce qui adviendra a Stanleyville. D'un cote, il y
a la situation plutot penible des otages, de 1'autre, le
danger que les troupes des Nations Unies se trouvent
melees aux parachutistes de Mobutu. Si le colonel
Mobutu a des parachutistes a revendre, i1 devrait se
joindre a la Force des Nations Unies. D'autre part, i1
yale fait que l'Urundi est utilise comme base operationnelle, et enfin la fourniture d'armes en grandes
quantites. I1 s'agit done de savoir ce que nous devons
faire dans ces conditions, mais mon gouvernement, pour
sa part, bien qu'il ait le droit normalement de proposer
des textes de resolutions ou de motions, n'a pas 1'intention de faire usage de ce droit. Nous sommes ici les
invites du Conseil de securite - meme si nous avons
le droit d'y sieger - et par consequent nous ne voulons
pas abuser du privilege qui nous a ete accorde.

180. We would like to say that among the actions that
must be taken immediately, we have a right as a friendly
country, in regard to the United Kingdom, and as a
member of the Commonwealth, to ask it to use its best
influence with its NATO allies - we tried to once
before, in the case of Portugal, it did not work, but I
hope in this case it will- to try to see, together with
its NATO allies, that no arms made in Belgium or under
Belgian control, whether pooled in NATO or otherwise,
should hereafter reach the Congo; and what is more,
that whatever arms were there when Belgium was an
imperial Power should be withdrawn. And secondly,
among the things to be done is the creation of a climate
of a different character in the Congo itself - and that
takes me back on a little detour again, into this question
of interference in internal affairs.

180. Nous voudrions simplement faire remarquer que
1'une des mesures les plus urgentes a prendre serait
de demander au Royaume-Uni - et nous pouvons
bien lefaire en tant que pays ami et membre du Commonwealth - d'exercer ses bons offices a 1'egard de ses
allies de l'OTAN. Nous avons deja une fois essaye
ce moyen dans le cas du Portugal et nous n'avons pas
reussi, mais nous esperons que cela ira mieux cette fois.
Nous lui demanderons de veiller avec ses allies a ce
qu'aucune arme fabriquee en Belgique ou detenue par
la Belgique, qu'elle soit ou non mise en commun dans le
cadre de l'OTAN, ne trouve le chemin du Congo et
en outre a ce que toutes les armes qui s'y trouvaient au
moment ou la Belgique etait encore une puissance coloniale soient recuperees. De plus, la tache la plus urgente
est de creer un climat nouveau au Congo lui-meme.
Ceci me ramene a une petite digression sur la question
de 1'ingerence dans les affaires interieures.

181. In the changed circumstances - I should have said
that there are certain changed circumstances - I submit
that the General Assembly has intervened in the internal
affairs of the Congo. My Government regrets this,
because it will be misunderstood by others. We think
that all the excesses that characterize the present situation in the Congo and that have occurred during the
last mo~th or so would not have taken place if, in its
wisdom, the Assembly, in letting these things slide
had not spilt the salt. The fact of placing here in the
position of a Government the delegation of one side
or the other, the General Assembly decided [913th plenary meeting] that since there were difficulties about it
they would leave it alone, and then went on to pass a
motion, adjourning the whole matter until certain Members of the Assembly could go and see for themselves.
That was agreed to. I am not now raising the question
of whether it was procedurally correct or not; whether
it was precedurally correct or not, there is no doubt
that the spirit of the decision of the. General Assembly
was violated. And therefore these gentlemen who have
no legal authority now handle the authority by virtue
of their participation in the United Nations.

181. Etant donne les nouvelles circonstances - i1 me
semble bien qu'elles ne sont plus les memes - je pense
pouvoir affirmer que l'Assemblee generale est intervenue
dans les affaires interieures du Congo. Mon gouvernement le regrette, car cela sera malinterprete par d'autres.
Nous sommes persuades que tous les exces qui caracterisent la situation actuelle au Congo et qui se sont produits depuis environ un mois n'auraient jamais eu lieu
si l'Assemblee avait eu la sagesse de :le pas tout compromettre en voulant redresser la barque. Le fait d'admettre
a sieger ici a titre de Gouvernement, la delegation de
1'une ou 1'autre partie, quelle qu'elle soit, etait une
erreur. L'Assemblee generale a sa 913e seance pleniere
avait decide qu'en vue des difficultes soulevees par cette
question, elle ne se prononcerait pas et elle a finalement
mis aux voix une motion renvoyant toute 1'affaire pour
permettre a certains membres de l'Assemblee qui le
desiraient d'aller se rendre compte sur place. On s'est
mis d'accord la-dessus. Nous ne souleverons pas la question de savoir si cette decision etait justifiable du point
de vue de la procedure, car, que ce soit Oll non le cas,
il ne fait aucun doute que 1'esprit de la decision de
l'Assemblee generale a ete trahi. I1 en reswte que ces

45·

messieurs qui ne disposent d'aucune autorite legale
exercent a present cette autorite du fait de leur participation a I'OND.
182. We would not like to see the place of the Congo
left vacant for ever; but equally, we would not want
to have arise a situation such as exists in the case of
China. Therefore, this attitude of building a halo rouDd
them has not helped the forces of law and order.

182. Nous ne desirons pas que la place du Congo it
I'Organisation des Nations Unies reste vacante pour
toujours; mais nous ne voulons pas non plus que se
renouvelle une situation du genre de celle que nous avons
dans le cas de la Chine. En realite, cette fa~on de placer
une aureole sur la tete de ces gens n'a pas rendu service
a la cause de I'ordre et de la securite.

183. We are continually told that we may not interfere
in internal affairs. Is it not interference by the United
Nations in the internal affairs of the Congo when there
is a violation of the Constitution, when an unconstitutional authority has been set up and sanctity is conferred
upon it? That, if anything, is interference in the internal
affairs of the Congo. We have tried to take the view
that an atrocity in Stanleyville is just as bad as an atrocity
anywhere else, or even worse. There should not be this
double sense of values.

183. On ne cesse de nous dire que nous n'avons pas
le droit d'intervenir dans les affaires interieures d'un
pays. Mais n'est-ce pas une ingerence de I'ONU dans les
affaires interieures du Congo que de sanctionner une
violation de la Constitution en reconnaissant officiellelement I'autorite anticonstitutionnelle qui s'est etablie?
S'il existe un exemple d'intervention dans les affaires
interieures d'un pays, c'est bien celui-Ia Nous avons
tente de considerer qu'une atrocite commise a Stanleyville est aussi affreuse qu'ailleurs, sinon plus. 11 ne devrait
pas y avoir deux poids et deux mesures.

184. The representative of the United States has set
out his position with regard to this, and I quote him:
" As for the status of Mr. Lumumba in the political
system of.the Republic of the Congo, this is a matter
which can only be dealt with by the Congolese Government and people themselves. It is a problem of internal Congolese jurisdiction and not one for the Security
Council or the General Assembly to judge; it is not
for the Security Council or the General Assembly
to choose between sides in an internal conflict and
interfere in the internal affairs of a sovereign Member
State of the United Nations. " [916th meeting, para. 17.]

184. Le representant des Etats-Unis a explique sa position a cet egard: je cite:
« Quant au statut de M. Lumumba, dans le regime
politique de la Republique du Congo, c'est exclusivement au gouvernement et au peuple congolais qu'it
appartient de s'en occuper. 11 s'agit en I'espece d'un probleme qui releve de la juridiction nationale congolaise et
non du Conseil de securite ou de l'Assemblee generale. Ni le Conseil, ni I'Assemblee n'ont le droit de
prendre parti dans un conflit interne ou de s'immiscer
dans les affaires interieures d'un Etat souverain
Membre de I'Organisation des Nations Unies.»
[916e seance, par. 17.]
Nous sommes en partie d'accord sur ce point. C'est aux
Congolais de choisir le premier ministre qui leur, convient, comme c'est a eux de decider si le premier ministre
doit etre traduit en justice ou pendu haut et court ou
expulse. Mais, apres tout, l'Etat congolais a ete admis
a I'ONU a la condition qu'il respecte les termes de la
Charte et que son gouvernement soit capable de tenir
ses engagements. 11 doit s'acquitter de ses responsabilites.

Now, we agree with part of this; that is to say, what
Prime Minister they should have is for them to decide,
and whether the Prime Minister should be impeached
or hung by the neck Cl expelled is for them to decide.
But after all, the Congolese State was admitted to the
United Nations on condition of respect for the Charter
and on the condition that the Government was able
to deliver the goods. They must discharge their
responsibilities.
185. Therefore, if it is a question of one or another
being benefited, then it becomes necessary not to put
the matter before the Credentials Committee in the
middle of a civil war, or what amounts to one, but
rather to abide by the earlier wisdom of the General
Assembly and let things go.

185. Par consequent, s'il s'agit de savoir laquelle des
deux parties doit etre reconnue, i1 vaut mieux ne pas
poser la question au Comite de verification des pouvoirs
,'u. plein milieu de la guerre civile ou de ce qui equivaut
tout au moins a une guerre civile, mais plutot s'en tenir
a la sagesse passee de l' Assemblee generale et laisser
aller les choses.

186. Now, this is not an attempt to review the decisions
of the General Assembly, passed by a considerable majority and with support, not only in numbers but in weight,
supported by those who have great faith in democratic
institutions. I would be the last person to say that the
countries that supported this decision tho.'l.lght it was
the right thing to do, because they are the pioneers or
great leaders of the democratic world - some part of
it they call the "free world ". I believe the Soviet
counmiies also call themselves" people's democracies ",
so democracies generally, all over, accept it.

186. Mon intention n'est pas de corriger les decisions
de l'Assemblee generale, lesquelles ont ete adoptees a
une tres large majorite et avec I'appui non seulement
du nombre, mais aussi de l'autorite de ceux qui ont une
grande foi dans les institutions democratiques. Je suis
bien le dernier a penser que les pays qui ont donne leur
appui a ces decisions parce qu'ils croyaient bien faire
font de ce fait figure de pionniers et d'eminents dirigeants
du monde democratique, mais enfin iIs appellent une
partie de celui-ci le « monde libre». Les pays communistes s'appellent, eux aussi, des « democraties papU-

46

laires», de sorte que toutes les democraties dans le
monde entier ont accepte ces decisions.
187. So as to the question, we have no objection. We
cannot object; it would be improper for us to do so.
lt is entirely for them. But to say that there is any legal
sanction for this is what is difficult to follow. In that
respect I entirely agree with Mr. Wadsworth in saying
that the political system of the Congo is entirely a matter
to be left to the Congolese people. That is what we
are saying: leave it to the Congolese people, in the sense
that Parliament be convened.

187. Par consequent nous ne pouvons elever d'objection. Nous n'en avons du reste pas le droit et cela
ne serait point correct de notre part. Cette question
les regarde. Mais iI me parait difficile d'admettre qu'il
puisse y avoir une justification legale de ces decisions.
Sous ce rapport, je suis entie:rement d'accord avec
M. Wadsworth lorsqu'il dit que le regime politique du
Congo est une question qu'il appartient au peuple congolais lui-meme de regler. C'est precisement ce que nous
disons: laissez cela aux soins du peuple congolais;
autrement dit, que l' on convoque le Parlement. Voila
une des choses que l'on pourrait faire.

188. That is one of the things that could be done. And
the desire expressed later by Mr. Wadsworth that things
should be done according to accepted practice, where
he says that they have used their good offices, through
their Ambassador, " '" to inform President Kasa-Vubu
and Colonel Mobutu that the United States Government
hoped that former Prime Minister Lumumba would be
accorded humane treatment... ", although they have not
been able to get a report from the Red Cross, and that
they hoped " ... that he would be given a fair trial" [Ibid.,
para. 20]. But expressing the hope that he will be given
a fair trial when conditions are such that there is no
judiciary, that the whole administrative system is produced by ordinance which is sanctified only by the signature of an illegal Prime Minister - how can legality
come out of that? I suppose the United Nations is
accustomed to that, because they think peace will come
out of war.

188. M. Wadsworth exprime ensuite le desir que 1'on
revienne aux pratiques habituelles. Il annonce en effet
que le Gouvemement des Etats-Unis a employe les bons
offices de son ambassadeur pour « porter a la connaissance du president Kasa-Vubu et du colonel Mobutu
qu'il esperait - bien qu'il n'ait pas pu faire etablir un
rapport par la Croix-Rouge - que 1'ancien premier
ministre Lumumba beneficierait d'un traitement humain...
et qu'il serait juge d'une maniere equitable» [ibid.,
par. 20]. Exprimer 1'espoir qu'il obtiendra un proces
equitable alors qu'il n'existe plus de systeme judiciaire
et que tout le systeme administratif du pays resulte
d'ordonnances validees par la seule signature d'un
premier ministre illegitime est une chose - mais comment
peut-on considerer cette situation comme ayant un semblant de legalite? Il faut croire que cela n'etonne pas
1'ONU, parce qu'elle est persuadee que la paix vient
toujours apres la guerre.

189. Then there is this part of Mr. Wadsworth's
statement:
"In the view of the United States, this purpose
could be very significantly advanced if all Members
of the United Nations " - and I repeat: all Members - " would give full support and recognition to
what has been characterized as one of the only two
standing institutions in the Congo: the office of the
President, Mr. Kasa~Vubu; and if they would give
full suport to President Kasa-Vubu's efforts to restore
law and order throughout the Congo. " [Ibid., para. 24.]

189. Il y a un autre passage de la declaration de
M. Wadsworth que je voudrais citer:

190. Now, what I find in this paragraph is that there is a
reference to two organs in the first part of it, but as the
paragraph goes on it gets fatigued and loses sight of
one organ: there is only the President there. We entirely
endorse what has been said by representatives at the
United Nations, that there are only two legal organs we
can deal with at the moment, the Parliament and the
President. The President we recognize. Our Ambassadors
are accredited to the Head of the State, I assume. But
the implications of the statement may be carried out.

190. Je trouve au debut de ce paragraphe une reference a deux organes, mais dans la deuxieme partie je
n'en vois plus qu'un: le President. Toujours est-il que
nous adherons pleinement a ce qui a ete dit par certains
representants, a savoir qu'il y a encore en ce moment
deux organes legaux avec lesquels nous pouvons traiter:
le Parlement et le President. Le President, nous 1'avons
reconnu. Nos ambassadeurs sont accredites aupres du
chef de 1'Etat, a ce qu'il me semble. Mais il est facile
de comprendre ce qu'implique ce paragraphe.

191. Then comes another paragraph - and I quote
all this because I have great respect for the dedication
of the representatives of the United States and their
colleagues to the conception of government by law.
They have given a great deal to the world in that way,
and I am quite certain that for any small gains they
will not let it go. But to quote him:

191. Il y a ensuite un autre paragraphe - je fais
toutes ces citations justement a cause du respect que
j'ai pour la fidelite des representants des Etats-Unis et
de leurs collegues aux principes du gouvemement fonde
sur le droit. Le monde leur doit beaucoup dans ce
domaine, et je suis convaincu qu'ils n'abandonneront
pas leurs convictions en echange de maigres avantages.
Mais je cite:

« De l'avis du Gouvemement des Etats-Unis, nous
pourrions avancer a grands pas vers notre but si tous
les Membres de l'OND - je dis bien: tous les Membres appuyaient et reconnaissaient pleinement ce que
l'on a designe comme run des deux organes fonctionnant encore au Congo: la charge de President, et s'ils
consentaient a soutenir les efforts de M. Kasa-Vubu
pour retablir le droit et l'ordre sur tout le territoire
du Congo. » [Ibid., par. 24.]

" I personally believe with the utmost sin.cerity that
we must think not of our own prestige, not of any
quarrel between ideologies - East or West - not
necessarily even of which interested group or
party within the Congo should or should not have
the ascendancy; but of the Congolese people. We
should remember that the more difficult we make it
. for the Congolese people, the easier we make it for
Congolese to kill other Congolese. That is obviously
something which the United Nations was not established to do. We should remember our obligations
under the Charter. " [Ibid., para. 29.]

« Personnellement, j'estime avec la plus profonde
sincerite qu'il faut se preoccuper uniquement de la
population congolaise et non pas de questions de
prestige national ou des querelles ideologiques qui
opposent l'Est a l'Ouest, ni meme, necessairement,
du groupe ou du parti interesse qui devrait l'emporter
au Congo. Or, plus nous suscitons de difficultes a cette
population, plus nous facilitons les massacres de Congolais entre eux. De toute evidence, ce n'est pas pour
ce genre de resultats que l'Organisation des Nations
Unies a ete instituee. n ne faut pas oublier les obligations que nous impose la Charte.» [Ibid., par. 29.]

May I respectfully say that we agree with every word
of this.

Qu'il me soit permis de dire que nons sommes entiere.ment d'accord avec ce qui precede.

192. Now may I read the words of another supporter
of the four Power draft resolution [8/4578]. Mr. Ortona,
the representative of Italy, tells us, at the 916th meeting,
there are four points to be considered, and we are quite
willing to consider them. He says: " In the first instance,
in my delegation's opinion, we must make an effort to
use all ways and means to stop violence ". For what it
is worth, my Government would like to say we are in
accord with this. Mr. Ortona continues: " An unbiased
and highly respected organization, such as the International Red Cross, would help very much in that direction. " The only qualification we would put on this is
that the International Red Cross should function in all
contexts, not only in certain contexts.

192. A present, je voudrais vous citer les mots d'un
autre partisan du projet de resolution des quatre puissances [8/4578]. Le representant de l'Italie, M. Ortona,
nous a dit a la 916e seance que nous devons prendre
quatre points en consideration, et nous sommes tout
disposes a les examiner. n a dit: « De l'avis de ma delegation, nous devons en premier lieu mobiliser tous les
moyens en notre pouvoir pour mettre un terme it. la
violence. » Mon gouvernement se plait a dire qu'il est
d'accord avec cette phrase. M. Ortona a dit ensuite:
« Une organisation impartiale aussi respectee que la
Croix-Rouge internationale exercerait a cet egard une
influence des plus utiles ». La seule remarque que nous
ferions a ce sujet est que la Croix-Rouge internationale
devrait jouer un rOle en toutes circonstances, et pas seulement dans certains cas.

193. Then Mr. Ortona goes on to other matters, mentioning the "respect of human dignity and the preservation of human rights ". If all this were also universally
applicable, that would be a good idea.

193. M. Ortona passe ensuite it. d'autres questions,
notamment celle du « respect de la dignite humaine»
et de la « sauvegarde des droits de l'homme n. Tout cela
serait bien beau, si c'etait universellement applicable.

194. Therefore, we submit that if we are to create,
even before we go into the question of arming and disarming, a situation in the Congo which to some degree
is receptive to these ideas of peaceful reconstruction; if
we are to bring to an end all the violence, and the resort
to doctrines such as the holding of hostages on the one
hand and the beating of political opponents on the other
- and my Government hopes this will be taken by the
great Powers in. the spirit in which it is offered - we
submit that, if those influential countries that have
greater contact with the authorities in the Congo and
to whom the present Congolese authorities owe some
debt of obligation for the assistance they have had
- and I have no doubt at all that, as pointed out in
Mr. Wadsworth's statement here, they used their good
offices - if those countries, in that way, through their
good offices, privately or publicly used, would warn
them, whoever they are, against lawlessness and violence,
by whomsoever committed. Also, as the SecretaryGeneral has pointed out, if they could get the Congolese
army itself - that is Mr. Mobutu himself, whom according to Mr. Wadsworth, they recognize now, for that is
what he has said - to agree to disarm, or I should not
say" disarm ", to agree to the neutralization or the nonactivity of the Congolese forces - I would suggest that
they get three months' privileged leave, or something
of that kind - and if it could be done in. that way it
would be far better than a,'direct appeal for disarmament,
because disarming the aPnY might quite likely evoke

194. I1 nous parait donc que, si nous voulons creer au
Congo, avant meme d'aborder la question du desarmemement de l'armee, une situation plus ou moins propice
a ces idees de reconstruction pacifique, si nous voulons
parvenir a mettre fin it. la violence et a des methodes
comme celles qui consistent, d 'une part, it. prendre des
otages et, d'autre part, a rouer de coups ses adversaires
politiques - mon gouvernement espere que les grandes
puissances ne se meprendront pas sur le sens de mes
paroles - il faudrait que les pays tres influents, qui ont
le plus de contacts avec les autorites du Congo et envers
qui ces autorites ont une dette de reconnaissance pour
l'assistance qu'elles en ont obtenue - et je ne doute
pas un instant que ces pays, comme l'a indique M. Wadsworth, aient offert leurs bons offices - il faudrait, dis-je,
que ces pays, grace a leurs bons offices, it titre prive ou
officiel, les mettent en garde contre l'anarchie et la violence, quels qu'en soient les auteurs. I1 faudrait aussi,
comme l'a souligne le Secretaire general, que ces pays
obtiennent de l'armee congolaise - autrement dit de
M. Mobutu qu'ils ont maintenant reconnu, selon ce
qU'd (.)it M, Wadsworth - qu'elle consente it. se laisser
desarmer -_. .le ne devrais pas employer le mot « desarmer» - dis(;.',!s qu'elle consente it. se laisser neutraliser ou mettre en veilleuse; elle pourrait par exemple
partir en conge pour trois mois, ou quelque chose dans
ce genre; si cette operation pouvait s'eff'ectuer ainsi,
ce serait de loin preferable a un desarmement direct,
car le fait de desarmer l'armee pourrait faire penser it

48

the kind of action, understandable though it is, that
has been already referred to - if all this were done,
we submit, same progress might be made toward our
goals.

ce genre d'action - si comprehensible soit-elle ..."...
auquel j'ai deja fait allusion. Si tout se passait ainsi
nous pensons que nous pourrions sans doute faire
quelques progres vers les buts que nous nous sommes
fixes.

195. There is no reason at all why their friends should
not persuade them that there are other troops there
and that this may create difficulties when one army
meets another army. Why is it called the Congolese
national army? The Secretary-General's report speaks
about two things. He speaks of private armies - those
are the words he used - and the intervention of the
army in politics. If this influence could be used in that
way ~nd the army could go back to barracks as it was
before the day of the United Nations, that would be
of great assistance.

195. Il n'y a aucune raison pour que leurs amis ne parviennent pas ales persuader qu'il y a d'autres troupes
dans le pays et que la rencontre entre deux armees pourrait causer des difficultes. Pourquoi d'ailleurs appellet-on ces troupes l'armee nationale congolaise? Le rapport
du Secretaire general fait mention de deux choses: il
parle, d'une part, d'armees privees - ce sont ses motset, d'autre part, d'intervention de l'armee dans la politique. Si ces pays pouvaient se servir de leur influence
de la fa90n indiquee, pour que l'armee congolaise reintegre les casernes ou elle se trouvait avant l'arrivee des
troupes des Nations Unies, il en resulterait une nette
amelioration de la situation.

196. Secondly, we recall the words of the Italian
Ambassador, that there should be on our side an adjuration to refrain from violence or incitement to violence.
I think that the example set by the United Nations in
this respect will probably go some distance.

196. En second lieu, nous nous rappelons 1es paroles
du representant de l'Italie: nous devrions de notre cote
lancer un appel adjurant les Congolais de renoncer a
la violence et it l'incitation it la violence. n semble que
l'exemple qu'a donne l'OND sous ce rapport doive
produire au moins quelque effet.

197. We also submit that if these things are to be
operative, the good offices of whoever can be of use
to the people concerned, should result in a general
gaol release, that is, the release of all political prisoners,
on one side or the other. This is necessary in any country
to restore order. There would not be any peace between
warring factions so long as there were some leaders in
prison. So those who have influence with the President
- or, I suppose, really with Mobutu - we would request
to use that influence, in the sense that these are former
political colleagues. As the representative of the Congo
pointed out [915th meeting], they were all fellow fighters
together, but temporary difficulties have landed them in.
different places. Therefore a general release from prison,
not of ordinary criminals but of the others, should be
undertaken.

197. Nous pensons, d'autre part, que, pour donner un
resultat, les bons offices de ceux, quels qu'ils soient,
qui peuvent se rendre utiles au peuple congolais devraient
aboutir a la liberation de tous les prisonniers politiques
appartenant a l'un ou l'autre camp. Cette mesure est
indispensable dans n'importe quel pays ou l'on veut
retablir l'ordre. Il n'y aura jamais de paix entre les factions antagonistes tant qu'il restera des dirigeants en
prison. Par consequent, celL"{ quijouissent d'une certaine
influence sur le President - je suppose qu'en realite
c'est le colonel Mobutu qui s'occupe de cela - devraient,
comme nous le leur demandons, se servir de cette
influence et faire valoir que tous ces prisonniers sont au
fond d'anciens collegues politiques. Comme l'a fait
remarquer le representant du Congo [915e seance], ils
ont tous combattu cote a cote, mais, a la suite de diffi-·
cultes passageres, ils se sont retrouves dans des positions
differentes. n faut done decreter une amnistie generale,
non pour les prisonniers de droit commun, mais pour
les autres.

198. There should be, on the part of the United Nations
and the Secretary-General, in this case, an interpretation
of the mandate given to him which fits in with the present purpose. This is not by any means a counsel of opportunism, as I have tried to point out. If I have not been
successful, I am sure the Secretary-General himself will
be able to pursue this, but there should be an interpretation of the Charter, according to its words, according
to its purpose, according to present conditions and, what
is more, taking into account the consequences. You
cannot be in the position of holding a tiger by the tail;
then you can neither leave it nor continue to hold it.
So we are fully entitled to put forward the position
that there should be an interpretation of the Charter,
with the idea of assisting in the restoration of good
conditions and, what is more, warding off the evils
that might arise in the form of a breach of peace and
security.

198. L'Ol\TU et le Secretaire general devraient, dans
ce cas, donner au mandat une interpretation qui corresponde a cette fin. Il ne s'agit nullement d'un conseil
opportuniste, ainsi que je l'ai dit. Si je n'ai pas reussi
a le faire comprendre, je suis certain que le Secretaire
general s'en chargera lui-meme. En tout cas, il faudrait
trouver une interpretation de la Charte qui soit a la fois
conforme a sa lettre, a ses buts et aux conditions actuelles,
et qui, en outre, tienne compte des consequences eventuelles. On ne peut pas rester dans la position de quelqu'un qui tient un tigre par la queue, et qui ne peut ni
le lficher, ni continuer a le tenir. Nous sommes done
absolument en droit de proposer une interpretation de
la Charte qui permette de contribuer a retablir des
conditions normales, et, en plus, d'eviter les dangers qui
peuvent surgir sous la forme d'une rupture de la paix
et de la securite.

49

199. Next, I would point out that the United Nations
is there for the maintenance of law and order, because
the breakdown of legal institutions has created a state
of anarchy, and that has established rule by private
armies. Having regard to the position in Stanleyville
and so on, the best thing to do is to get Parliament
convened. We recognize that the United Nations has no
authority to convene Parliament, but we also recognize
that Mr. Kasa-Vubu has the authority to call Parliament. Our appeal would be to those who have greater
access to Mr. Kasa-Vubu to ask him to call Parliament,
because Parliament has not been dissolved. It would
be to his honour and glory if Parliament were called.
Simply calling Parliament by sending out a letter would
not be sufficient. It would be the business of the United
Nations to neutralize some area, with the consent of
everybody concerned, to neutralize some place where
Parliament could meet and function in peace, because
Mr. Kasa-Vubu himself has said that one of the difficulties in calling Parliament is the fact that there are
these physical troubles. This area would be large or
small, as required, and not necessarily Leopoldville.
I suppose that the Congolese followed our example of
having the United Nations in New York; they like the
most crowded place, and therefore the Parliament is
in Leopoldville. That is not a matter for us. We think
that the convoking of Parliament should be made part
of policy until it is dissolved by due process. Even to
be dissolved: it must meet. Therefore, the political
prisoners have to be released and some sort of immunity
provided by the protective arm of the United Nations.
This is the submission we would make.

199. En troisieme lieu, je voudrais faire observer que
l'ONU est au Congo pour y maintenir l'ordre, et pour
la raison expresse que l'effondrement des institutions
legitimes a engendre un etat d'anarchie qui a permis it
son tour it des armees privees de s'emparer du pouvoir.
Eu egard it la situation it Stanleyville et ailleurs, le mieux
it faire est de convoquer le Parlement. Nous admettons
que l'OND n'est pas habilitee it convoquer le Parlement,
mais nous reconnaissons egalement it M. Kasa-Vubu
l'autorite necessaire pour ce faire. Notre appel devrait
s'adresser it ceux qui sont le mieux places aupres de
M. Kasa-Vubu pour qu'ils lui demandent de rappeler
le Parlement, celui-ci n'ayant pas ete dissous. Ce geste
serait tout it son honneur et it sa gloire. Mais il ne suffirait
pas d'envoyer une lettre de convocation aux parlementaires. De son cote, l'OND devrait neutraliser une
region avec le consentement de tous les interesses, afin
que le Parlement puisse s'y reuuir et travailler en paix.
M. Kasa-Vubu n'a-t-il pas dit en effet que l'une des
difficultes materielles qui s'opposaient it la convocation
du Parlement etait la presence de troubles de tous cotes?
La region neutralisee pourrait etre grande ou petite,
et ne serait pas necessairement Leopoldville. Je suppose
que les Congolais ont suivi l'exemple que nous avons
donne en etablissant le Siege des Nations Unies it New
York; ils aiment les endroits tres peuples, c'est pourquoi
ils ont etabli le siege du Parlement it Leopoldville. Ce
n'est d'ailleurs pas notre affaire. Nous pensons que la
convocation du Parlement doit faire partie de la politique it suivre jusqu'au moment ou ce parlement sera
dissous dans les regles. Mais, pour pouvoir le dissoudre,
il faut d'abord le convoquer. Par consequent, les prisonniers politiques doivent etre liberes et les deputes
doivent jouir d'une certaine immunite sous l'aile protectrice de l'OND. Telle est notre maniere de voir.

200. In these circumstances, if, coupled with this, the
resistance to technical assistance and to the functioning
of the various organs of the Econonric and Social Council and the competition that arises from other technicians,
could also be removed. In other words, if it is the desire
of those who are powerful in this Organization to restore
to the Congo what belongs to it, namely, the right of
the people to live their own lives; then, instead of being a
problem, a matter for concern, we would have a country
in Africa that attained its independence and, though it
unfortunately went through a little trouble, was able
to get over it and profit from its experience.

200. Dans ces conditions, si, en plus de cela, la resistance it l'assistance technique et au fonctionnement des
divers organes du Conseil economique et social pouvait
etre brisee et la concurrence des techniciens venus
d'ailleurs supprimee, si, en d'autres termes, les puissances
de notre organisation manifestaient le desir de restituer
au Congo ce qui lui appartient, it savoir le droit de son
peuple de vivre sa propre vie, alors, au lieu d'etre un
probleme et un objet de preoccupations, la situation
serait telle que nous nous trouverions enfin en presence
d'un pays d'Mrique qui, apres avoir accede it l'independance et surmonte une crise malheureuse, saurait tirer
profit de son experience.

201. We have made these subnrissions in !lV spirit of
being doctrinaire. We believe that this cannot be left
as it is. We are very sorry to hear that friendly countries
like the United Arab Republic and others have withdrawn their troops. It would be very difficult to see
what they could do otherwise, when their Ambassadors
are turned out and called persona non grata, and not
only individuals but the Embassy is turned out. In fact,
one of the cardinal principles of the importation of
United Nations troops is the consent of the country.
In the case of Gaza, the Egyptians and the other side
agreed; otherwise United Nations forces could not go
there. But we hope that the Secretary-General's good
offices and his arm will extend so far as to change conditions, so that those who are there will not have to go,
and those who have left will be able to come back.

201. Nous n'avons pas fait ces propositions dans un
esprit doctrinaire. Nous pensons simplement qu'on ne
peut pas laisser les choses en l'etat. Nous sommes desoJ.es
d'apprendre que des pays amis comme la Republique
arabe uuie et d'autres ont retire leurs troupes. Pourtant, nous ne voyons pas comment ils auraient pu falre~
autrement, alors que leurs ambassadeurs sont expulses·
et declares persona non grata et, que, de plus, l'ambassade
elle-meme est supprimee. En fait, une des conditions
essentielles de l'envoi de troupes des Nations Unies dans
un pays 'est le consentement de ce dernier. Dans le cas
de Gaza, les Egyptiens et leur adversaire avaient donne
leur accord, sans quoi les forces des Nations Unies
n'auraient pas pu s'y rendre. Mais nous esperons que,
grace it ses bons offices et it son influence, le Secretaire
general parviendra it modifier la situation de telle maniere

50

que ceux qui sont encore la n'eprouvent pas le besoin
de partir et que ceux qui sont deja partis soient en mesure
de revenir.
202. Once having begun, once having had to start in
this place with the introduction of army personnel or
service personnel- and it would be very difficult at
the present moment to do anything else - it is difficult
to change conditions. But we would like to see conditions change in this way and an appeal made to the
Congo, asa Member State of the United Nations, not
to take the view that those who do not agree with everything that goes on there are necessarily opponents of
the regime or enemies of the country. We wish it well,
and we do not say this in a patronizing manner, for we
believe that it is a country with tremendous resources
and a population of great ability, with men like our
distinguished colleague whom we have seen here, and
these could be utilized for this great purpose. Again
I may say this both to Congolese and to non-Congolese.

202. Une fois la chose en train, une fois qu'on a commence a amener sur place du personnel militalre et civil
- et on ne voit pas ce que l'on pourrait faire d'autre
en ce moment - il est malaise de modifier la situation.
Mais nous aimerions la voir changer dans ce sens, nous
aimerions qu'un appel soit lance au Congo en tant qu'Etat
Membre de l'OND, afin qu'il ne considere pas comme
des opposants du regime et des ennemis tous ceux qui
ne sont pas d'accord avec tout ce qui s'y passe. Nous
lui voulons du bien, et nous ne disons pas cela sur un
ton protecteur, car nous pensons que c'est un pays
avec d'enormes ressources et une population pleine de
capacites qui comprend des hommes comme notre eminent collegue que nous avons rencontre ici: toutes ces
qualites pourraient concourir a la realisation du but
eIeve que nous poursuivons. Cela, je le dis aussi bien
aux Congolais qu'aux non-Congolais.

203. There is no break with an empire unless all its
works go with it. There cannot be peace with an empire
in the place. I have great respect for those who say
that there are doctors, people in leper camps, who are
doing good work in the Congo - all honour to thembut it is very difficult to convince members of Parliament, in India or anywhere else, that what the Belgian
Government has not been able to do in the eighty years
they have been there, the education they have not provided, the leadership they have not prepared, the
economic redirection they did not undertake, will be
accomplished through the dropping in of paratroopers.
No Belgian national in foreign territory can be protected
by Belgian arms. In the world as it is today, that is to
apply the law of piracy on land.

203. n n'est pas possible de rompre avec un empire
a moinsde rompre avec tout ce qu'il a fait. Si l'empire
n'abandonne pas la place, la paix est impossible. J'ai
le plus grand respect pour ceux qui nous disent qu'il
y a des medecins et d'autres personnes dans les camps
de Iepreux et que ces gens font du bon travail au Congo
- c'est tout a leur honneur. Mais il est difficile de faire
croire aux membres du Parlement, en rude ou ailleurs,
que ce que le Gouvernement n'a pas ete capable de faire
pendant les 80 ans qu'il a occupe le pays: l'enseignement qu'il n'a pas dispense, l'elite qu'il n'a pas entramee
a la direction des aft:'tires, les reformes economiques qu'il
n'a pas entreprises pendant tout un siecle, que tout cela
puisse etre accompli en 1Jll tournemain en laissant tomber
du ciel quelques parachutistes. n n'est pas admissible
qu'un ressortissant belg,~ en territoire etranger soit protege par l'armee beIge. Dans le monde d'aujourd'hui,
cela revient a appliquer le droit de la piraterie sur terre.

204. Therefore, we come back to the beginning of our
enterprise and I hope the Secretary-General will succeed
in the formal removal- I do not say of Belgians, but
of all non-Congolese who are now in the Congo, except
those who are there for United Nations purposes or
who are from United Nations agencies. Whatever may
be the law - and there are many things where we have
the right to ask the question whether we should exercise
the law - that would be in the interests of peace in
the Congo. It should be possible for the Congolese
authorities to assist in the matter by placing their customs
and immigration machinery, in co-operation with the
United Nations, to prevent incursions into their territory.
Even the so-called leaders of private armies may find it
to their temporary advantage, but once you get these
people in you do not get them out so easily.

204. Ainsi, nous en revenons au commencement, et
j'espere que le Secretaire general reussira a imposer
officiellement le retrait, non seulement des BeIges, mais
encore de tous les non-Congolais qui se trouvent en ce
moment au Congo et dont la presence n'est pas necessitee par leur contribution aux objectifs de l'Organisation des Nations Unies ou par leur appartenance a
l'une de ses institutions. 11 y a beaucoup de choses a
l'egard desquelles nous avons le droit de nous demander
s'il y a lieu d'appliquer la loi - ce serait la une action
dans l'interet de la paix au Congo. Les autorites congolaises devraient pouvoir apporter une contribution utile
dans ce domaine en pla~ant leur appareil douanier et
leurs services d'immigration a la disposition de l'OND
afin d'empecher des infiltrations dans leur territoire. 11
est possible que les soi-disant chefs d'armees privees
aient avantage a ces infiltrations dans l'immediat, mais,
une fois que les gens sont dans la place, il est plus diffi.cile de les en faire sortir.

205. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I
have been asked by another of the representatives
admitted to the Council table for permission to make
a short statement, as he will unfortunately be unable
to address the Council tomorrow. We shall then take
a decision about our next meeting, which, I presume,

205. Le PRESIDENT [traduit du russe]: Un autre
representant admis par nous a la table du Conseil,
m'a aussi demande de lui permettre de faire aujourd'hui
une breve declaration, car il regrette de ne pouvoir le
faire d<;main. Nous prendrons ensui.te une decision concernant notre prochaine reunion qui, je presume, devrait

51

should take place tomorrow. If members have no objection, I shall call on the representative of Morocco to
make this relatively short statement.

avoir lieu demain. S'il n'y a pas d'objection de la part
des membres du Conseil, je donnerai la parole au representant du Maroc pour une courte declaration.

206. Mr. BOUCETTA (Morocco) (translated from
French): Thank you for giving me this opportunity of
explaining my country's point of view in regard to the
problem which is now exercising, not only the Security
Council, but world opinion as a whole.

206. M. BOUCETTA (Maroc): Je vous remercie de
l'occasion que vous me donnez d'exprimer le poiut de
vue de mon pays sur le probleme qui preoccupe le
Conseil de securite et, par-dela le Conseil, l'opinion
mondiale tout entiere.

207. His Majesty King Mohammed V, the Moroccan
Government and the Moroccan people are much disturbed and deeply concerned at the deterioration of the
situation in the Republic of the Congo.

207. S. M. Mohammed V, le gouvernement et le peuple
marocains sont tres inquiets et tres preoccupes par la
deterioration de la situation dans la Republique du
Congo.

208. I will not take up too much of the Council's
time, and will endeavour to be· brief. Previous speakers
have already given a full enough description of the
situation and how it has evolved.

208. Je n'abuserai pas du temps du Conseil, j'essaierai
d'Stre bref. Les orateurs qui m'ont precede ont suffisamment decrit la situation et ses developpements.

209. The situation in the Republic of the Congo has
reached so serious a stage that it may endanger the peace
of the world at any moment. That is our deep conviction, and we feel it is our duty to sound the alarm.
All the tricks and smoke-screens which have been used
to conceal the situation and its increasing seriousness
cannot and should not hide that lamentable fact from
our eyes. This situation might create a schism in Mrica,
might be the spark which ignites the powder magazine,
might involv.e the world in final catastrophe.

209. La situation, dans la Republique du Congo, a
atteint un stade de gravite telle qu'elle risque de mettre,
a tout moment, la paix du monde en danger. Tel est
notre sentiment profond et c'est un devoir pour nous
de jeter le cri d'alarme. Tous les artifices, tous les voiles
qui sont jetes sur cette situation et sur son aggravation
ne peuvent et ne doivent nous cacher cette triste realite.
Eile risque de diviser I'Afrique, de mettre le feu aux poudres et de jeter le monde dans un cataclysme definitif.

210. The Secretary-General has reported to the Council
on the latest developments. Certain messages have been
received from Leopoldville telling us that the arrest of
Prime Minister Lumumba would probably allow things
to return to normal, the reconstruction of the Congo
to be resumed and the Conciliation Commission to
be sent.

210. Le Secretaire general a fait au Conseil un rapport
sur les derniers developpements de la situation. Certaines
correspondances sont parvenues de Leopoldville pour
nous dire que l'arrestation du premier ministre Lumumba
etait de nature a permettre la reprise de la vie normale,
la reconstruction du Congo et la venue de la Commission
de conciliation.

211. Let me say at once, quite clearly, that we do
not agree with this point of view; that the arrest of
Mr. Lumumba and the brutal and shocking treatment
he was given are not at all likely to be a good solution
for the question or to pave the way to conciliation.
What is happening is exactly the opposite; Lumumba's
prestige is growing, his people's love for him is becoming
ever stronger, and his present martyrdom will only tend
to make him, more and more, the authentic representative of a divided, mutilated people, abandoned to
chaos and anarchy, and of a country coveted by others
and seething with intrigue.

211. Permettez-moi de declarer nettement que nous ne
sommes pas d'accord avec cette fa\lon de voir, que l'arrestation et les mauvais traitements scandaleux infliges it.
M. Lumumba sont loin d'Stre un bon reglement de la
question et ne menent pas a la conciliation. Ce que nous
constatons est exactement le contraire; le prestige de
Lumumba grandit, l'amour que lui porte son peuple n'en
devient que plus intense, le martyre qu'il subit en fera
de plus en plus le representant authentique d'un peuple
dechire, mutile, livre au chaos et a l'anarchie et d'un
pays objet de convoitise et grenouillere d'intrigues.

212. That is the true situation in the Congo. We venture
to say so quite openly, for its consequences are serious
and may become more serious still.

212. Car telle est la situation reelle au Congo. Nous
nous permettons de le dire tres c1airement, car ses consequences sont graves et risquent de devenir plus graves
encore.

213. When, at the request of the legitimate and legal
Government of the Congo, the United Nations first
went to that country, the people welcomed its representatives enthusiastically, with open arms, and felt that
this was the end of occupation and oppression and that
there would be no more lashing across the face such as,
in the Congo, had previously been common practice.
They welcomed them in the hope that their hearts and
bodies would no longer be shaken by fear of the paratroops, that legality and constitutionalism would be
respected and that they would at last live by their own
efforts and for themselves.

213. Lorsque l'Organisation des Nations Unies, appelee
par le gouvernement legitime et legal du Congo, a mis
pied sur la terre du Congo, le peuple a accueilli ses representants dans la joie, dans l'enthousiasme et avec le
sentiment que le regne de l'occupant etait termine,
que l'oppression etait achevee, que les coups de fouet
sur le vhage, qui etaient de pratique courante, ne se
verraient plus au Congo. lIs les ont accueillis pour que
soient extirpees de leurs creurs et de leurs corps la peur
et la terreur du para-commando, pour que soient respectees
la legalite, la constitutionnalite, et pour qu'enfin ils
vivent par eux-mSmes et pour eux-mSmes.

52

214. Last August, at the Conference of Independent
African States, my country was one of the first, among
all the independent African countries, to stress the
necessity for co-operation with the United Nations, to
congratulate the Organization on the work of peace
it had undertaken in the Congo; and the delegations at
Leopoldville unanimously adopted a resolution to that
effect. That shows how proud we were to participate
in this action to eradicate colonialism, and how happy
we were to respond to the appeal of the Secretary-General
and the legal Government of the Repu:Jlic of the Congo.

214. Nous etions les premiers, avec tous les pays independants d'Afrique, lors de la conference de Leopoldville au mois d'aout dernier, a souligner la necessite de
la cooperation avec l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
a feliciter l'Organisation pour l'reuvre de paix qu'elle
a entreprise au Congo, et c'est a l'unanimite des delegations presentes a Leopoldville que nous' avons adopte
une resolution dans ce sens. C'est dire combien nous
etions fiers de participer a cette action de decolonisation
et avec quel empressement nous avons repondu a l'appel
du Secretaire general et du gouvernement legal de la
Republique du Congo.

215. But alas, what we now see is that colonialism has
not been entirely eradicated in the Congo and that,
after a period of normal functioning, a step backwards
has been taken. Not only in Katanga - in the guise
of technical assistance, in the form of gendarmes and
soldiers - but everywhere in the Congo colonialism is
creeping back in various forms and aspects.

215. Ce que nous constatons, belas! c'est que le colonialisme au Congo n'a pas perdu pied totalement et
que, apres une periode ou le mecanisme fonctionnait
normalement, c'est un retour en arriere devant lequel
nous nous trouvons. Non seulement au Katanga, sous
couvert d'assistance technique, sous forme de gendarmes
et de soldats, mais partout au Congo le colonialisme
revient sous des formes et des aspects divers.

216. We are also sorry to have to note that both in
New York and at Leopoldville there has been a deterioration in the action of the United Nations.

216. Nous sommes auregret de constater aussi que,
tant a New York qu'a Leopoldville, il y a regression
dans l'action menee par I'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

217. First of all, in New York: for more than a month,
contradictions, shilly-shallying, hesitations and a maze
of procedure have prevented the taking of any rapid
and effective action, any energetic measures, such as
alone could have remedied an already seriously impaired
situation.

217. D'abord a New York: depuis plus d'un mois,
des contradictions, des atermoiements, des tergiversations et un labyrinthe de procedure empechent toute
action serieuse, rapide et toutes mesures energiques,
seules capables de redresser une situation deja fort
compromise.

218. For more than a month, indeed, the Advisory
Committee and the Secretary-General have not succeeded
in giving effect to the decisions taken; the Conciliation
Commission is marking time in New York when it
should have been in Leopoldville several weeks ago.
Every sort of quibble, the emptiness of which is obvious,
has been advanced to dampen its enthusiasm and prevent
its departure. Difficulties over hotel rooms and cars
have even been mentioned, when it was clear to anyone
that such things could be found and that in any case
these were secondary considerations, that the situation
demanded urgent measures and that they should have
been taken, in a more responsible manner. Several
dates have been set for the Commission's departure, but
not a single one has been observed. The Commission is
still here. As a well-justified protest against all this dillydallying, several of its members have already resigned,
when they could have been very helpful and, by participating, would have strengthened the impression that its
efforts were sincere and its work authoritative.

218. En effet, depuis plus d'un mois, le Comite consultatif et le Secretaire general n'arrivent pas a appliquer
des decisions prises; la Commission de conciliation pietine a New York alors qu'elle devrait se .trouver a Leopoldville depuis plusieurs semaines. Toutes ks arguties
dont l'inanite n'est plus a demontrer ont ete avancees
pour briser son elan et pour l'empecher de partir. On a
parle meme de difficultes de chambres d 'hotel et de
voitures, alors que l'on sait que tout cela existe, que tout .
cela est secondaire, que la situation requiert des mesures
urgentes et qu'il convenait de les prendre avec un peu
plus de serieux. Plusieurs dates ont ete retenues pour le
depart de la Commission mais aucune n'a ete respectee;
elle est encore ici. Pour protester, a tres juste titre,
contre tous ces atermoiements, plusieurs de ses membres
1'0nt quittee deja, alors que leur concours etait tres
utile, alors que leur participation ne pouvait que renforcer la sincerite du travail qu'elle aura a accomplir
et eviter toute contestation.

219. Secondly, we have noted, here in New York, one
of the most baffling contradictions. Hardly a week
after the General Assembly's wise decision to adjourn
the debate on the Congo in order to give time for conciliation and not to exacerbate the situation, the Credentials Committee took one side against the other and,
with incomprehensible haste, involved the General Assembly. We have already drawn attention to the seriousness
of this act. Its consequences, with which we are now
faced, show how right we were. When we drew attention to this, it was with no desire to win a procedural
victory or a tactical triumph; on the contrary, foreseeing

219. En second lieu, nous avons constate a New York
l'une de ces contradictions les plus deroutantes. Une
semaine a peine apres la sage decision de l'Assemblee
generale de renvoyer la discussion sur le Congo en vue
de rechercher la conciliation et de ne pas envenimer
la situation, la Commission de verification des pouvoirs
prenait parti pour une tendance contre l'autre et, dans
une precipitation incomprehensible, saisissait l'Assemblee generale. Nous avons attire l'attention sur la gravite
de cet acte. Les consequences qui en decoulent sont
aujourd'hui devant nous pour confirmer la solidite et
la justesse de notre these. Nous n'avons pas chercbe,

53

the disastrous repercussions which the act would have,
we realized that any such triumph or victory would
be hollow. With all due respect to the delegations which
exercised their free vote on this subject in the General
Assembly [924th plenary meeting], I should like to say
that in the short time which has since elapsed it has
been proved how right the minority, which included
ourselves, was; and I will not stress the point.

ce faisant, it. remporter une victoire de procedure ou
un triomphe de tactique, car, prevoyant les repercussions
desastreuses d'un tel acte, nous savions combien etait
vaine pour nous la recherche d'un quelconque triomphe
ou d'une quelconque victoire. Avec tout le respect que
j'ai pour les delegations qui ont exprime librement
leur vote it. ce sujet, je dirai que le peu de temps qui
s'est ecoule depuis ce vote it. l'Assemblee generale [924e
Seance pleniere] nous montre combien la minorite dont
nous faisions partie avait raison, et je n'insiste pas.

220. In the Congo, the situation has steadily deteriorated. Let me repeat: the arrest and ill treatment of
Patrice Lumumba constitute no solution. An internal
affair, some will say; but how weak that argument is,
and hO\v fraught with (,'lnsequences. To expel ambassadors and to close emba~ ies: how sad that is, and how
far removed from international co-operation and understanding. To engage in yet more trickery and expand
the number of confederates in it: how much that complicates and inflames the situation.
i

220. Au Congo, la situation n'a fait qu'empirer. Je
le repete, arreter et battre Lumumba n'est pas la solution.
Affaire interieure, disent quelques-uns: comme cet argument est fragile et lourd de consequences! Chasser des
ambassadeurs et fermer des ambassades: comme cette
mesure est triste et combien elle eloigne de la cooperation et de l'entente internationales! Multiplier les comparses et les intrigues: combien tout cela complique la
situation et l'envenime!

221. A military regime, frail and insubstantial, is es\~b­
lished against the will of the Congolese people. Unable
to deal with the realities of the problem, the administration is in process of collapse, the country's economy
in ruins, chaos supervenes and the crisis is at its
culminating point.

221. Le regime militaire, inconsistant d'ailleurs et fragile, s'installe contre le gre du peuple congolais. Incapable de faire face aux donnees reelles du probleme,
l'administration s'effondre, l'economie du pays est en
ruine, le chaos s'installe et la crise est it. son paroxysme.

222. What is the object, what is to come of it? We, for
our part, are baffied and disturbed. In time, and sooner
rather than later, all this will be known and the world
will judge.

222. Que cherche-t-on et it. quoi veut-on en venir?
Nous sommes, quant it. nous, deroutes et troubles. A
long terme ou plutot it. court terme, tout cela se saura
et le monde jugera.

223. In a laudable attempt to be objective, some
delegations have tried to divorce the problem and its
solution from personalities. They speak not of KasaVubu or Lumumba or Mobutu, but of the Congolese
people, the happiness of the Congolese people, the
prosperity of the Congolese people. Well, that is all
right. But in that case, who are the Congolese people,
if not their representatives, authentic and democratically
elected, unchallengeable and unchallenged, in the Chamber of Representatives and the Senate?

223. Certaines delegations, par souci louable d'objectivite, ont cherche it. situer le probleme et sa solution
au-dessus des personnes. Ni Kasa-Vubu, ni Lumumba,
ni Mobutu, mais le peuple congolais, le bonheur du
peuple congolais, la prosperite du peuple congolais.
Eh bien, qu'il en soit ainsi. Mais alors, quel est ce peuple
congolais si ce n'est ses representants authentiques, elus
democratiquement, ses representants incontestables et
incontestes it. la Chambre des representants et au Senat.

224. I should like to tell you something that I saw
with my own eyes. I was present at the last two meetings
held by this Parliament - a Parliament like any other,
anywhere else in the world. I heard statements from the
legitimate and legal Government of the Republic of the
Congo - that is, from the Prime Minister, Mr. Lumumba,
the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Gizenga, and the Minister for Youth, Mr. Mpolo. I heard members of Parliament supporting the Government; I also heard members
of the opposition, speaking out freely and forcefully.
Both sides gave their explanations and defended their
points of view. And, after several hours of debate, a
vote was taken. By an overwhelming majority, the Parliament gave the legitimat.; Government a vote of confidence and renewed its mandate. That is legality, that
is constitutionalism, that is the valid and unchallenged
expression of the will of the Congolese people.

224. Permettez-moi de donner id un temoignage oculaire et direct. J'ai assiste it. l'avant-derniere et it. la
derniere seances tenues par ce parlement. Il est identique
a ceux qui existent partout it. travers le monde. J'ai
entendu l'intervention du gouvernement legitime et legal
de la Republique du Congo, c'est-it.-dire le premier
ministre Lumumba, le vice-president Gizenga et le ministre de la jeunesse Mpolo. J'ai entendu les parlementaires
qui appuient le gouvernement; j'ai entendu aussi l'opposition s'exprimer librement et avec force. Les uns et les
autres ont donne leurs explications et defendu leurs
points de vue. Et, apres plusieurs heures de debat, un
vote a eu lieu. A une ecrasante majorite, le Parlement
a confirme le gouvernement legitime et lui a renouvele
sa confiance et son mandat. C'est cela la legalite, la
constitutionnalite, c'est cela l'expression valable et incontestee du peuple congolais.

225. The next morning, a hundred soldiers, with helmets
and with sub-machine-guns at the ready, and an old
tank with a rusty gun, were stationed in front of
the Parliament building. The elected representatives of the

225. Le lendemaih matin, 100 soldats en casque, mitraillette au poing, un vieux char portant un canon rouille,
etaient devant le batiment du Parlement. L'acces en
etait interdit aux elus du peuple pour poursuivre leurs

people were not allowed to enter to continue their
deliberations and carry out their tasks. The curtain
had fallen on legality.

deliberations et accumplir leur mandat. Le rideau etait
tombe sur la Iegalite.

226. The Presidents of the Chamber and the Senate
wrote to the Secretary-General's Special Representative
asking him to defend legality and allow constitutional
matters to be dealt with in the normal way. What was
the result? Whatever the pretext - that it was a ::'omestic
affair or something else - the fact remains that the
Parliament has not met since that day. The members
of Parliament were rounded up and hustled away,
payment of their allowances was stopped, and the voice
of the people was stifled. That is what, with bitterness
and regret, we saw.

226. Les presidents de la Chambre et du Senat ont
ecrit au representant special du Secretaire general pour
proteger la legalite et pour permettre le deroulement
normal de la vie constitutionnelle. Qu'en a-t-it ete?
Affaire interieure ou tout autre motif, toujours est-it
que depuis ce jour-la le Parlement ne s'est plus reuni.
Les parlementaires etaient traques, leurs indemnites
bloquees et la voix du peuple etouffee. C'est cela que
nous avons constate avec amertume, avec regret.

227. On 7 October 1960, after many efforts and approaches, the diplom{ltic representatives at Leopoldville
of the independent African States sent the following
letter to the Secretary-General's Special Representative:
" As agreed as a result of the interview you were
good enough to grant us on 6 October in the presenq:
of the representatives of Liberia, Ghana, Morocco,
Guinea and the United Arab Republic, we wish to
repeat that respect for parliamentary immunity, freedom of movement for the people's elected representatives and for citizens, payment of the indemnities
and allowances due to the Deputies and Senators,
and the unblocking of bank accounts, are measures
likely to encourage the free functioning of democratic
institutions in this country.
"We take note of the assurances which you were
kind enough to give us to the effect that a rapid solution for these problems would be found.
" We have the honour, etc. "

227. Le 7 octobre 1960, apres bien des demarches et
des interventions, les representants diplomatiques des
Etats independants d'Afrique a Leopoldville ont adresse
au representant specilXl du Secretaire general la lettre
suivante:
« Comme it a ete convenu a la suite de l'entretien
que vous avez bien voulu nous accorder le 6 octobre
en presence des representants du Liberia, du Ghana,
du Maroc, de la Guinee et de la Republique arabe
unie, nous venons vous confirmer que le respect de
l'immunite parlementaire, la liberte de circulation des
representants elus et des citoyens, la liberation du
versement des indemnites et allocations dues aux deputes et senateurs et des comptes bancaires sont de nature
a permettre le libre exercice des institutions democratiques de ce pays.
« Nous venons par la meme prendre acte des assurances que vous avez bien voulu nous donner pour
une solution rapide de ces problemes et vous prions
d'agreer l'expression de notre haute consideration. »

All that was in vain. The institutions are still paralysed,
and the representatives of the people persecuted.

Tout cela a ete fait en vain. Les institutions sont restees
bloquees et les representants du peuple brimes.

228. I will add, simply as a reminder, that the Mouvement national congolais, of which Patrice Lumumba is
the founder-president, is in the majority throughout the
country, despite the great number of parties created
by the Belgians. It has majority representation in the
Parliament, and it was by an agreement between men
of honour that Mr. Kasa-Vubu became Head of the
State. It was Patrice Lumumba who, in the higher
interests of his country and for the sake of national
unity, to consolidate the independence of the Congo,
secured a massive vote from his party in favour of his
ceding the office of Head of State to Mr. Kasa-Vubu.
Certain African States, prompted by the same desire for
Congolese national unity, greatly assisted in that process.
They are now accused of being responsible for all the
misfortunes which have befallen the Congo, and have
been driven from the territory by unidentified forces.

228. J'ajouterai, mais uniquement pour memoire, que
le Mouvement national congolais, dont le president- .
fondateur est Patrice Lumumba, se trouve le parti
majoritaire dans tout le pays, malgre la multitude des
partis qui ont ete crees par les BeIges. Sa representation
au Parlement est la plus forte et c'est par un accord
entre honnetes hommes que M. Kasa-Vubu s'est trouve
etre le chef de l'Etat. C'est Patrice Lumumba qui, dans
l'interet superieur de son pays et dans un but d'union
nationale, afin de consolider l'independance du Congo,
apporta en masse les voix de son parti et ceda la place
de chef d'Etat a M. Kasa-Vubu. Certains Etats africains, animes du meme souci d'union nationale congolaise ont beaucoup fait pour cela. Ils sont aujourd'hui
accuses de tous les maux et chasses du Congo par des
forces obscures.

229. The role assigned to the United Nations ·in the
Congo was first and foremost that of protecting persons
and property and maintaining order. We have always
considered that the maintenance of order was more
than a negative or defensive task. It also implies the
preventing of all encroachments upon freedom. Peace
and order have no meaning unless the country's institutions are· functioning normally. Mr. Kasa-Vubu and

229. Le role qui etait devolu it l'Organisation des
Nations Unies au Congo etait avant tout la protection
des personnes et des biens et le maintien de l'ordre
public. Nous avons toujours estime que le maintien de
l'ordre public n'etait pas seulement une action negative
ou une action defensive. Il est aussi la protection de
toute atteinte a la libe!te. La paix n'a de sens et 1'0rdre
public n'a de signification que lorsque les institutions
55

Mr. Mobutu have been protected. Why was not Parliament protected also? It is the supreme body which
appoints and dismisses the Head of the State in the
Congo. The paralysis of the country's institutions is,
in our opinion, one of the main factors in the chaos
which is taking root in the Congo. This chaos is a threat
not merely to the country itself, but to the neighbouring
countries, to the whole of Mrica.

marchent normalement. On a bien protege M. Kasa.
Vubu ou M. Mobutu.Que n'a-t-on protege le Parle.
ment? C'est l'institution supreme qui fait et defait le
chef de I'Etat au Congo. Le fait du blocage des institutions est a notre avis 1'un des facteurs essentiels du
chaos qui s'instaUe au Congo. Ce chaos menace le pays
lui-meme; il menace aussi les pays voisins, il menace
toute I'Mrique.

230. The United Nations has in the Congo more than
20,000 troops, over 3,000 of whom are from my own
country. It also has hundreds of technical assistants
there. It really cannot continue to claim that it, has
nothing to do with the situation.

230. L'Organisation des Nations Unies a plus de
20.000 hommes de troupe au Congo, dont plus de 3.000
de mon pays. Elle a aussi des centaines d 'assistants
techniques. Eile ne peut valablement continuer a dire
qu'elle est etrangere a cette situation.

231. My country is very concerned at the development
and deterioration of this situation, and also at the role
and the attitude which the United Nations proposes to
adopt. Yesterday my Government issued the following
statement, which I will venture to read to you:

231. Mon pays est tres inquiet du developpement et
de la deterioration de cette situation, et aussi du role
et de l'attitude que compte prendre 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies. Hier, mon gouvernement a fait la declaration suivante, que je me permets de vous lire:

" If the United Nations does not change its attitude
with regard to the Congo, we shall be forced to act
without it.

« Si 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies ne modifie
pas son attitude au Congo, nous serons obliges d'agir
sans elle.

" King Mohammed V is very worried by the political developments in the Congo, and the United
Nations seems to have marked out for itself a course
diametrically ,opposed to that prescribed for it last
summer. The triple aim of its mission was to insure
achievement of the Congo's independence, to defend
the country's integrity and to protect its legitimate
and legal authoritif~S.

« Le roi Mohammed Vest tres preoccupe par l'evolution politique au Congo et 1'0NU parait devoir
suivre une voie qui est diametralement opposee a
celle qui lui avait ete fixee au cours de l'ete dernier.
Le triple but de cette mission est d'assurer la realisation de l'independance du Congo, defendre son integrite et organiser la protection de ses autorites legitimes
et legales.

" But foreigners are now making threats to which
the United Nations takes no exception. The Congolese
Prime Minister, Mr. Patrice Lumumba, who had
himself appealed to the United Nations, is now in
prison.

« Or des menaces sont faites par l'etranger sans que
1'0rganisation des Nations Unies s'y oppose. Le President du conseil congolais, qui avait fait lui-meme
appel aux Nations Unies, M. Patrice Lumumba, se
trouve en prison.

" For this reason the King of Morocco intends to
consult, through the diplomatic channel, all the Mrican States, particularly those which have sent military
detachments to the Congo. The Sovereign desires
- through these consultations - the consideration and
adoption of a united front, in harmony with the objectives originally assigned to the United Nations and to
the Mrican troops. "

« C'est pourquoi le Roi du Maroc a l'intentio!l de
consulter, par la voie diplomatique, tous les Etats
africains et, en particulier, ceux qui ont envoye des
contingents militaires au Congo. Le souverain desire,
par ses consultations, etudier et adopter une attitude
commune, conforme aux objectifs primitivement assignes aux Nations Unies et aux troupes africaines.»

232. That shows with what concern my country is
following the work of the Security Council, and how
anxiously it is awaiting positive and concrete results
from its deliberations. It is no longer a matter of proclaiming respect for human rights - that was done long
ago - or of confirming such respect. What is at issue
is a problem of the utmost seriousness. We are disturbed,
and we cannot stand idly by while the situation is developing so dangerously. While our troops are on the spot,
we cannot just watch the re-establishment of colonialism
in the Congo; still less can we passively witness the
return of its abettors. We responded to the United
Nations' appeal for the defence of the Congo's real
independence, of its unity and of its territorial integrity,
and for the defence of legality and constitutionalism.
We. undertook to defend and support the independence
of Mrica, of which we are an integral part.

232. C'est vous dire avec quelle anxiete mon pays suit
les travaux de votre conseil, avec queUe angoisse il
attend les resultats positifs et concrets de ses deliberations. n ne s'agit point de proc1amer le respect de la
personne humaine; cela a ete fait il y a longtemps. Il
ne s'agit pas non plus de le confirmer. Il s'agit d'un
probleme serieux et d'un probleme grave. NO\lS sommes
inquiets et nous ne pouvons rester le!> mains liees devant
le developpement dangereux de cette situation. Nous ne
pouvons etre les temoins passifs, alors que nos troupes
sont sur place, de l'implantation du colonialisme et de
son retour au Congo, et encore moins ses complices.
Nous avons repondu a l'appel de 1'0ND pour la defense
de l'independance reelle du Congo, de son unite et de
son integrite territoriale, pour la defense aussi de la
legalite et de la constitutionnalite. Nous nous sommes
engages a defendre et a soutenir l'independance de
l'Mrique dont nous faisons partie integrante.

S6

233. Our embarrassment and pangs ofconscience, today,
are great. My hope is that you should share them. We
believe in the United Nations. We want it to be an
instrument of peace and justice. We cannot consent to
its cloaking injustice and illegality, or remaining passive
in face of them. Because of our faith in the United Nations
and our attachment to its principles, we have submitted
to it, at the present session, one of our gravest problems,
involving infringement of our national sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We have great hopes that the United
Nations will intervene in a conflict on our frontiers
which has been threatening the peace and security of
Africa for the last six years.

233. Notre embarras, aujourd'hui, est grand et le cas
de conscience dans lequel nous nous trouvons est douloureux. Je voudrais que vous les partagiez avec nous.
Nous avons foi en l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Nous desirons qu'elle sait un instrument de paix et de
justice. Nous ne pouvons admettre qu'elle serve cl couvrir l'injustice ou l'illegalite ou qu'elle reste passive
devant elles. Notre foi en elle et notre attachement cl
ses principes ont fait que nous lui avans soumis, cl cette
presente session, l'un de nos problemes les plus graves
ou il etait porte atteinte cl notre souverainete et cl notre
integrite territoriale. Notre espoir est grand qu'elle
interviendra aussi dans un conflit qui, sur nos frontieres,
menace depuis plus de six ans la paix et la securite en
Mrique.

234. That is why my country is awaiting the Council's
decision and is expecting it to announce the energetic
measures which it proposes to adopt to end the present
situ:ltion in the Congo.

234. C'est pourquoi mon pays attend la decision du
Conseil et les mesures energiques qu'il entend adopter
pour mettre fin cl la situation au Congo.

235. We urge that the United Nations reconsider its
position in time. Having no vote in the Council, we can
only express the hope that the measures to be taken
will enable certain friendly countries, which have been
obiiged to withdraw from certain United Nations bodies
or to take their troops or technicians out of the Congo,
to renew their useful and essential contribution.

235. Nous formulons le vreu que l'Organisation des
Nations Unies se ravisera cl temps. Nous ne pouvons
ici participer au vote, mais nous esperons que les mesures
qui seront prises par le Conseil permettront cl ceux
des pays amis qui ont ete obliges de quitter certains
organismes de l'ONU ou de retirer leurs troupes ou
leurs techniciens du Congo d'y apporter de nouveau
leur contribution utile et necessaire.

236. In any event, I should like to emphasize that if
the situation remains as it is, and procedural difficulties,
hesitations, and equivocations continue, my country will
find itself obliged to take, at its own level, very humbly
and modestly, whatever steps it feels to be necessary.
Let this not come as a surprise.

236. En tout etat de cause, je voudrais souligner que,
si la situation reste ce qu'elle est, si la procedure, les
atermoiements ou les tergiversations se poursuivent, mon
pays en tirera cl son niveau, tres humblement et tres
modestement, les consequences qui s'imposent. Que
personne n'en soit surpris.

237. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian): There
is a proposal that we conclude our work for today [Lt
this time and fix the Council's next meeting for tomorrow,
at 3 p.m., if this is convenient to members. If it is not,
we could arrange it for 5 p.m.

I

237. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe): n a ete
propose de terminer aujourd'hui les travaux du Conseil
sur cette intervention et de tenir la prochaine seance
demain a 15 heures si cela convient aux membres du
Conseil. Si cela souleve une difficulte, nous pourrions
fixer la seance cl 17 heures.

238. Mr. BARCO (United States of America): Mr. President, I understand it is your proposal that we meet
tomorrow at 3 o'clock. I believe that the Security Council's consideration of the Congo question can best be
facilitated if we meet again on Monday morning, following
the meeting of the General Committee. I understand
that the meeting of the General Committee will be
scheduled for an early hour on Monday morning.

238. M. BARCO (Etats-Unis) [traduit de l'anglais]: Je
crois comprendre, Monsieur le President, que vous
nous proposez de nous reunir demain cl 15 heures. n
me semble cependant que l'examen de la question du
Congo par le Conseil de securite serait grandement
facilite si nous nous reunissions lundi matin, apres la
seance du Bureau qui, je crois le savoir, est prevue pour
lundi matin cl la premiere heure.

239. We have been meeting here steadily for several
days and nights, occasionally into the early morning.
Moreover, there is an unprecedented number of delegations participating in the debate who are not members
of the Council, and this inevitably prolongs the Council's
deliberations.

239. Voici plusieurs jours et plusieurs nuits d'affilee que
nous nous reunissons, et nos seances durent parfois
jusqu'aux premieres heures de la matinee. De plus,
un nombre inhabituel de delegation~ qui ne sont pas
membres du Conseil participent aux debats, ce qui a
pour effet de prolonger les deliberations du Conseil.

240. I might also say that some of the argumentation
that has prolonged our debate has not been constructive,
unhappily, nor has the general attitude of some Governments whose representatives have spoKen on this
question.

240. J'ajouterai que certaines des argumentations qui
ont prolonge nos debats n'ont malheureusement pas ete
constructives, pas plus d'ailleurs que I:attitude de certains gouvernements dont les representants ont pris la
parole sur cette question.

241. If there were an urgent need to take a decision
tonight or tomorrow on the question before us, I would

241. Je serais le premier cl appuyer tou te motion tendant cl poursuivre cette seance jusqu'cl la fin des debats
57

be the first to support any motion to continue this s'il etait urgent de prendre une decision ce soir ou demain
session until we have finished; but the ~ourse of the debate sur la question qui nous occupe; mais, a la fa~on dont
has so far not given me the impression that such a sense s'est deroule le debat jusqu'ici, je n'ai pas l'impression
of urgency is shared either by the Council or by those que le Conseil ni les pays invites qui prennent part a
non-members who are participating. I propose, therefore, la discussion attachent un caractere d'urgence a cette
that we now adjourn and that we meet again on Monday question. Je propose done que nous levions maintenant
morning after the meeting of the General Committee. la seance et que nous nous reunissions a nouveau lunm
I realize that this may mean that there will have to be matin apres la seance du Bureau. Je me rends compte
simultaneous meetings of the Security Council, the First . que, de cette fa~on, le Conseil de securite, la Premiere
Committee, and the Plenary, but I think, at this stage, Commission et I'Assemblee generale siegeront peut-etre
we have to face that. We have reached the point where en meme temps, mais je crois qu'a ce stade nous devons
we have little alternative.
nous resigner a cela. Nous sommes arrives a un point
oil nous n'avons plus guere le choix.
242. I therefore hope, Mr. President, that there will
be no objection to my proposal, and that if there is,
you will find it possible to put it to the vote as quickly
as you can in order to conserve what time we have left.

242. J'espere, par consequent, Monsieur le President,
quSil n'y aura pas d'objection a ma proposition, et que
s'il y en a, vous voudrez bien la mett"e aux voix aussi
rapidement que possible afin d'epargner le peu de temps
qui nous reste.

243. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (poland): I will, of course,
pass over the evaluation of our deliberations today
made by the representative of the United States, in
order not to start a discussion, but I should like to
point out, with regard to his last statement about Monday,
that there is a very crowded schedule for Monday and
it would be entirely against the work of the three bodies,
the General Assembly, the First Committee and the
Security Council, to postpone our proceedings until
Monday.

243. M. LEWANDOWSKI (pologne) [traduit de ['anglais]: Bien entendu, je passerai outre a l'appreciation

244. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): It might be useful
if I state that my information as of this moment is that
there is going to be a meeting of the First Committee
on Monday. But that, in my opinion, is not the important point. I do not think it is quite correct to say that
members of the Council are not concerned with the Congo
situation. We are very concerned, and at the moment
we are engaged in preparing a draft resolution which
we should like to submit to the Council. For that special
reason, I would prefer the suggestion made by the United
States representative, namely, that we should have a
meeting on Monday morning, despite the existence of
other meetings. That would give us time to prepare a
well-considered draft resolution. If the Security Council
meets on Sunday, we will still try to prepare this draft
resolution, but it would help us greatly if we had more
.:"tne to deal with it, and a meeting on Monday morning
would be very useful.

244. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylan) [traduit de l'anglais]:
nest peut-etre utile de signaler que, selon les renseignements dont je dispose actuellement, il y aura une seance
de la Premiere Commission lundi. Mais, a mon avis,
ce n'est la qu'un probleme d'interet secondaire. En
revanche, je ne pense pas qu'it soit juste de dire que les
membres du Conseil se preoccupent peu de la situation
au Congo; elle nous preoccupe enormement au contraire,
et nous preparons en ce moment un projet de resolution
que nous aimerions soumettre a l'attention du ConseiI.
Pour cette raison bien particuliere, je donne la preference a la proposition du representant des Etats-Unis
selon laquelle nous devrions nous reunir lundi matin,
en depit du fait que d'autres seances auront lieu simultanement. Cela nous donnerait le temps de preparer un
projet de resolution soigneusement etudie. Si le Conseil
se reunit dimanche, nous essayerons tout de meme de
mettre au point ce projet; mais cela nous rendrait grand
service si nous disposions de plus de temps pour nous
en occuper, et le renvoi de la seance a lundi matin serait
le bienvenu.

245. I venture again to emphasize that we do feel a
great deal of concern about the situation in the Congo,
and, at least for the record, I want to emphasize that it
is not right to say the members of the Council are not
concerned with what is happening in the Congo. We
are deeply concerned.

245. Je me permets de souligner une fois de plus que
la situation au Congo nous preoccupe beaucoup et, au
moins pour le proces-verbal, je desire insister sur le fait
qu'il n'est pas juste de pretendre que les membres du
Conseil ne sont pas preoccupes par la situation au Congo.
Nous en sommes tres preoccupes.

246. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): If
no one else wishes to speak on the proposals before us,
I should like to say a few words on the subject in my
capacity as representative of the UNION OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.

246. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe): Quelqu'un
desire-toil prendre la parole sur ces propositions? Si
personne ne desire intervenir je voudrais dire quelques
mots a ce sujet en ma qualite de representant de l'UNION
DES REPUBLIQUES SOCIALISTES SOVIETIQUES.

58

que le representant des Btats-Unis a donnee de nos
deliberations, afin de ne pas entamer une nouvelle discussion. Toutefois, je voudrais faire remarquer, en ce
qui concerne sa proposition de nous reunir lundi, que
l'horaire de ce jour-la est extremement charge, et qu'i!
serait contraire a la bonne marche des travaux de l'Assemblee generale, de la Premiere Commission et du Conseil
de securite de renvoyer nos deliberations a lundi.

247. I must say that I was somewhat surprised. by what
the United States representative had to say both as
regards an appraisal of the discussion proceeding in
the Council and as regards the urgency of the item.
We consider it altogether contrary to the facts to evaluate the discussion as unconstructive and we can account
for that evaluation only by the fact that certain views
have been expressed in the course of the discussion
which do not coincide with that of the United States.
That, however, is a matter of taste, so to speak, for each
delegation - to consider anything that does not coincide
with its own position unconstructive. There is no need,
I think, to go into detail on the matter of the nature
of the discussion, since that is not the subject of our
debate: I only referred to it because the United States
representative brought it up. As for the matter of urgency,
here again I cannot agree with the comments which
the United States representative had to make in this
connexion. Today's discussion, in particular, and yesterday's have clearly shown that urgent measures are called
for to avoid any serious consequences of our failure
to act on the Congo question. To my mind, therefore,
the urgency of the matter is perfectly clear. I suppose
that each member of ~he Council has his own view on
the subject; I also understand the Ceylonese representative's desire to work constructively on the preparation
of a Council resolution.

247. Je dois dire que j'ai ete quelque peu surpris par
ce que nous a dit le representant des Etats-Unis, tant
en ce qui concerne son appreciation de la discussion
qui a lieu devant le Conseil qu'en ce qui concerne la
question de l'urgence du probleme. Nous estimons
contraire it la realite d'affirmer que la discussion n'a pas
ete constructive. Je ne peux m'expliquer cette affirmation
que parce que la discussion a fait ressortir des points
de vue qui ne correspondent pas it l'opinion des EtatsUnis d'Amerique. Mais, apres tout, c'est question de
gout pour chaque delegation de dire que ce qui ne correspond pas it sa position n'est pas constructif. Je ne
pense pas qu'il soit necessaire d'entrer maintenant dans
le detail des appreciations sur la valeur de la discussion.
Ce n'est pas la. l'objet du debat. Je n'en ai parle que
parce que le representant des Etats-Unis y a fait allusion.
En ce qui concerne la question de l'urgence, je ne suis
pas d'accord non plus avec les observations du representant des Etats-Uni$. La discussion d'aujourd'hui et
d'hier a montre c1airemen~ qu'il est indispensable de
prendre des mesures urgentes afin d'eviter les consequences
graves qu'entrainerait toute inaction de notre part
dans la question du Congo. Par consequent, l'urgence
du probleme est evidente it mon sens. Je crois, d'ailleurs,
que tous les membres du Conseil ont evidemment leur
opinion it cet egard et je comprends le desir du representant de Ceylan de se livrer it un travail constructif pour
preparer un texte de decision du Conseil.

248. I am accordingly prepared to meet him half-way
on this matter. I think that if we meet tomorrow at
5 p.m. that will perhaps give him enough time to prepare
the proposals on which he said he was working. Monday
will certainly be a very busy day and I am afraid we
should find ourselves in great difficulty as far as our
work was concerned. I would therefore urge that the
Council should meet tomorrow at 5 p.m.

248. C'est pourquoi je suis pret it aller dans ce sens
au-devant de son decir. J'estime que, si nous nous reunissions demain it 17 heures, il aurait peut-etre le temps
necessaire pOUf preparer les propositions correspondantes qu'il nous a dit envisager. Lundi sera une journee
extremement chargee et je crains que nous n'eprouvions
de grandes difficultes dans nos travaux. J'insisterai donc
pour que le Conseil se reunisse demain apres-midi cl
17 heures.

249. I would propose, as PRESIDENT, in order to
save time, that we d.ecide the matter by a vote. There
is one proposal, which I made at the very beginning,
that we should meet· tomorrow, as I have now made
clear, at 5 p.m. There is another proposal, which was
made by the United States representative and with
which the representative of Ceylon has apparently agreed,
that we should meet on Monday morning after the meeting of the General Committee. If there are no other
proposals or objections, we shall proceed to vote on
the first proposal that we should meet at 5 p.m. tomorrow.

249. Afin de gagner du temps, je propose, en tant que
PRESIDENT, de regler cette question par un vote.
11 y a une premiere proposition que j'ai presentee d'abord
et que je viens de preciser; elle consiste it nous reunir .
demain, it 17 heures. 11 y en a une seconde, soumise
par le representant des Etats-Unis, cl laquelle, je crois,
le representant de Ceylan a donne son accord, et qui tend
it ce que le Conseil se reunisse lundi matin, apres la
seance du Bureau. S'il n'y a pas d'autres propositions
ou d'objection, nous passerons au vote sur la premiere
proposition consistant cl tenir une seance demain it
17 heures.
.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
Infavour: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: Argentina, China, France, Italy, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining: Ceylon, Ecuador, Tunisia.

11 est prodde au vote a main levee.
Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
Votent contre: Argentine, Chine, France, Italie,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
S'abstiennent: Ceylan, Equateur, Tunisie.

The proposal was rejected by 6 votes to 2, with 3 abstentions.

Par 6 voix contre 2, avec 3 abstentions, la proposition
est rejetee.

250. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I
shall now pu.t to the vote the second proposal- that
we should meet on Monday morning at 10.30 a.m.

250. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe): Je mets aux
voix la seconde proposition consistant it tenir une reunion
du Conseil de securite lundi, it 10 h 30.

59

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Argentina, China, Ecuador, France, Italy,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Against: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstaining: Ceylon, Tunisia.

11 est prodde au vote a main levee.
Votent pour: Argentine, Chine, Equateur, Francl
Italie, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irland
du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Am6rique.
Votent contre: Pologne, Union des R6publiques sociI
listes sovi6tiques.
S'abstiennent: Ceylan, Tunisie.

The proposal was adopted by 7 votes to 2, with 2
abstentions.

Par 7 voix contre 2, avec 2 abstentions, la propositio
est adoptee.

The meeting rose at 8.20 p.m.

La seance est levee a 20 h 20.

60

DiSTRIBl.,;TORS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA·ARGENTlNE
Editorial Sudamericana. S.A.• Alsina 500,
Buenos Ai res.

AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE
Melbourne University Press, 369 lons·
dole Street, Melbourne C. I.

AUSTRIA·AUTRICHE
Gerold & Co., Graben 31, Wien, 1.
B. Wijllerslorff, Markus Sittikusstrasse 10,
Salzburg.

BELGIUM·BELGIQUE
Agence et Messogeries de la frene,
S.A•• 14·22, rue -du Persil. Bruxelles.

BOLlVIA.BOLlVIE
Libreria Selecciones. Casilla 972. la Paz.

BRAZIL·BRESIL
livraria Agir, Ruc Mexico 98·8, ,Caixa
Postal 3291, Rio de Janeiro.

aURMA-BIRMANIE
Curator, Govt. Book Depot, Rangoon.

CAMBODIA·CAMBODGE
Entreprise khmere de librairie, Impri.
merie & Papeterie Sari, Phnom·Penh.

CANADA
The Queen's Printer/lmprimeur de la
Reine, Ottawa, Ontario.

CEYLON.CEYLAN
lake House Bookshop,Assoc. Newspapers
of Ceylon, P.O. Bo> 244, Colombo.

CHILE·CHILI
Editorial del Pacifico. Ahumada S7.
Santiago.
Libreria Ivens, Casilla 205. ~'mtiago.

CHINA·CHINE
The World Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung
King Road, 1st Section, Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Commercial Press, ltd., 211 Honan
Rd., Shonghoi.

COLOMBIA·COLOMBIE
Libreria Buchholz, Av. Jimenez de Quesada 8--40, Bogota.

COSTA RICA
Imprenta y libreria Trejos, Apartado
1313, San Jose.
CUBA
La Casa Belga, O'Reilly 455, la Habane.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA·
TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
Ceskoslovensky Spisovatel, Narodni !rida
9, Proha 1.
DENMARK.DANEMARK
Einer Munksgaard, Ltd., N"rrsgade 6,
Klltbenhavn, K.
DOMINICAN REPL'BLlC.
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
libreria Do~inicana, Mercedes 49, Ciu..
dad TrujiJIo.
ECUADOR-liQUATEYR
Librerfa Cientifica, Casilla 362, Guayaquit.
EL SALVADOR.SALVADOR
Manuel Novas y Cia., la. Avenida sur
37, San Salvador.
ETHIOPIA·ETHIOPIE
International Press Agency, P.O. Box
120, Addis Aboba.
FINLAND.FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu.
Helsinki.
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone, 13, rue Soufflot,
Paris (V").
GERMANY·ALLEMAGNE
R. Eisenschmidt, Schwonthaler Str. 59,
Frankfurt/Main.
Elwert und Meurer, Hou::~strasse 101,
Berlin.Schoneberg.

Alexander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9, Wiesbaden.
W. E. Saorbach, Gertrudenstrasse 30,
Koln (1).

GHANA
University Bookshop, University College
of Ghana, legon, Accra.
GREECE-GRECE
Kauffmann Bookshop, 28 Stadion Street,
Athenes.
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Eeonomh;o-Financiero. 60. Av.
14-33, Guatemola City.
HAITI
librairie"A la Caravelle". Port·au-Prince.
HONDURAS
libreria Panamericana, Tegucigalpa.
HONG KONG • HONG.KONG
The Swindon Book Co., 2S Nathen Road,
Kowloon.
ICELAND.ISLANDE
80kaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
F., Austurstraeti 18, Reykjavik.
INDIA.INDE
Orient longmans, Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, New Delhi and Hyderabad.
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., New
Delhi and Calcutta.
P. Varadachary & Co., Madras.
INDONESIA·INDONESIE
Pembangunan, Ltd., Gunung Sahari 84,
Djakarta.
IRAN
Guity, 482 Ferdowsi Avenue, Teheran.
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad.
IRELAND·IRLANDE
Stationery Office, Dublin.
ISRAEL
Slumstein's Bookstores, 3S Allenby Rd.
and 48 Nachlat Benjamin St., Tel Aviv.
ITALY ·ITALlE
Libreria Commissionaria Sansoni. Via
Gino Capponi 26, Firenze, & Via D. A.
.
Azuni 15/A, Romc.
JAPAN·JAPON
Maruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Tori·Nichome,
Nihonboshi, Tokyo.
JORDAN-JORDANIE
Joseph J•. Bahous & Co., Dar-ul-Kutub,
SO)( 66, Amman.
KOREA..cOREE
cul-Yoo Publishing Co., Ltd., 5, 2.KA,
Chongno, Seoul.
LEBANON·L1BAN
Khayot's College Book Cooperative;
92·94, roe Bliss, Beyrouth.
LUXEMBOURG
librairie J. Trausch-Schummer, place du
Theatre, Luxembourg.
MEXICo-MEXIQUE
Editorial Hermes, S.A., Ignacia Mariscal
41, Mexico, D.F.
MOROCCO·MAROe
Centre de diffusion documentaire du
B.E.P.J., 8, rue Michaux-Beilaire, Robat_
NETHERLANDS-PAYS.BAS
N.V. Martinus Niihoff, lange Voorhout
9, 's-Gravenhage.
NEW ZEALAND.NOUVELLE.ZELANDE
United Nations Association of New Zea.
lond, C.P.O. 1011, Weliinglon.
NORWAY.NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tonum Farlag, Kr. Au.
gustsgt. 7 A, Oslo.

Orders and inquiries From countries not listed above may be
!:ent to: Soles Section, Publishing Sevice, United Notions,

New York, U.S.A.; or Soles Section, United Nations, Palais
des Notions, Geneva, Switzerland.

Printed in Belgium

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Co.operative Book Society,
Daeea, East Pakistan.
Publishers United. ltd., la hare.
Thoma~ & Thomas. Karachi.

PANAMA
Jose Menindez, Agencia Internacional
de Publicacion~s. Apartado 2052, Av.
SA, sur 21-58,- ·Panama.

PARAGUAY
Agenda de librerias de Salvador Nizza,
C:allePte. Franco No. 39-43, Asuncion.

PERU-PEROU
Libreria Internacional del Peru, S.A.,
Casilla 1417, Lima.

PHILIPPINES
Alemar's Book Store, 769 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
Livraria Rodrigues, 186 Rua Aurea,
lisboa.
SINGAPORE·SINGAPOUR
The Cily Book Store, Ltd., C.ollyer Quay.
SPAIN.ESPAGNE
librerlo Bosch, 11 Randa Universidad,
Barcelona.
Libreria Mundi·Pl"cnsa, Castello 37, Madrid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Frilze's Kungl. Hovbokhondel A·B,
Fredsgatan 2, Stockholm.
SWITZERLA ND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot, S.A., Lausanne, Geneve.
Htms Raunhardt, Kirchgasse 17, Zurich 1.
THAILAND.THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit, Ltd., 55 Chakrcswat Road,
Wat Tuk, Bangkok.
TURKEY.TURQUIE
librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Ceaddesi,
Beyoglu, Istanbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
UNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Van Schaik's Bookstore (Ply), Ltd.,
Church StrGet, Box 724, Pretoria.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS-UNION DES REPUBLlQUES
SOCIALlSTES SOVIETIQUES
Mezhdunarcidnaya Knyiga Smolenskaya
Plo'hchad, Moskva. ..
UNITED AIIAB REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE ARABE UNIE
librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte", 9
Sh. Adly Pasha, Coiro.
UNITED KINGDOM-IlOYAUME·UNI
H. M. Stotionery Office,' P.O. Bo> 569,
London, S.E. 1 (and HMSO branches in
Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff,
Edinburgh, Manchester).
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
Sales Section, Publishing Service, United
Nations, New York.
URUGUAY
Representacion de Editoriale!, Prof. H.
O'Elia, Plaza Cagancha 1342, 1 0 piso,
Montevideo.
VENEZUELA
Librerio dei Este, Av. Miranda No. 52,
Edf. Galipan, Caracas.
VIET·NAM
librairie.Papeterie XUQn Thu, 185, rue
Tu·Do, B. P. 283, Saigon.
YUGOSLAVIA·YOUGOSLAVIE
Cankarjeva Zaloiba, Liub1jana, Slovenia.
Drzavno Preduzec:e, Jugoslovenska Knii.
go, Terazije 27/11, Beograd.
Prosvjeta, 5, Trg Bratstva i Jedinstva,
Zagreb.
[61B1J

Les commandes et demandes de renseignements emanant de
pays au it n'exisfe pas encore de clepositaires peuvent ilre
adressees 0 la Secfioncles ventes, Service des pubUcations,
Organisation des Notions Unies, New York (Etats·Unis d'Ame·
rique). ou a la Section cles ventes, Office europeen cles Nations
Unies, Polois des Nations, GEmeve (Suine).

Price: $U.S, 0,75; 5/- stg.; Sw. fr. 3.00
(or equivalent in other currencies)

12954-0ctober 1961-1,725
