3. Calls upon all the parties concerned to continue
to co-operate with the Force on the basis of the present
mandate.

"The members of the Council share the SecretaryGeneral's disappointment that it has not been possible to achieve concrete results to date in developing
an agreed outline of an overall agreement. In this
regard, they share the Secretary-General's hope that
direct and meaningful talks can be resumed early
next year.
"The members of the Council urge both leaders to
proceed as suggested by the Secretary-General durmg their most recent meetings and, as agreed in June,
to co-operate with him and his Special Representative in completing work on an outline. They also urge
the two parties to make a further determined effort
to promote reconciliation. They share the SecretaryGeneral's view that the adoption of good will measures could prove useful in this regard.
"The members of the Council are concerned about
the difficulties encountered by the Force during the
last mandate period. They call on all parties to co-operate with the Force and to take effective measures
to ensure that the integrity of the buffer zone is
safeguarded.
"The members of the Council also note the continuing financial difficulties facing the Force as indicated by the Secretary-General. They take note of his
appeal for greater financial contributions to the
Force, which would help it continue its important
peace-keeping role in Cyprus and would reduce its
financial difficult ics.
"The members of the Council request the Secretary-Genera\ to report hack to the Council by 1
March 1990 on what progress has been made in resuming intensive talks and developing an agreed outline of an overall agreement."

Adopted unanimously at the
2898th meeting.

Decision

At the same meeting, the President made the following statement on behalf of the members of the Council:85
"The members of the Security Council take note of
the Secretary-General's rcport 82 on the United Nations operation in Cyprus and express their full support for his continuing efforts in pursuing the
initiative launched in August 1988.
"The members of the Council recall the statement
made on their behalf by the President ofthe Council
on 9 June 1989,82 in which they expressed their regret
that, in the more than 25 years since the establishment of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, it had not been possible to achieve a negotiated settlement of all aspects of the Cyprus problem.
"The members of the Council note the SecretaryGeneral's assessment that a basis for effective negotiations exists provided both leaders manifest the
necessary good will and recognize that a viable solution must satisfy the legitimate interests of both communities.
85

S/21026.

MARKING OF PLASTIC OR SHEET EXPLOSIVES FOR THE PURPOSE OF DETECTION

Decision

Concerned about the case with which plastic or sheet
explosives can he used in acts of terrorism with little risk
of detection,
Taking note of the International Civil Aviation Organization Council resolution of 16 February 1989, in
which it urged its member States to expedite current
research and development on detection of explosives
and on security equipment,
I. Condemns all acts of unlawful interference
against the security of civil aviation;
2. Calls upon all States to co-operate in devising and
implementing measures to prevent all acts of terrorism,
including those involving explosives;
3. Welcomes the work already undertaken by the
International Civil Aviation Organization, and by other
international organizations, aimed at preventing and
eliminating all acts of terrorism, in particular in the
field of aviation security;
4. Urf;es the lntcnrntional Civil Aviation Organization to intensify it, work aimed at preventing all acts of
tcrwrism again'1 international civil aviation, and in
p:111 icula, its wnr k ()fl devising an international regime
l()r the marking of plastic or sheet explosives for the
purpose of detection;

At its 2869th meeting, on 14 June 1989, the Council
discussed the item entitled "Marking of plastic or sheet
explosives for the purpose of detection".

Resolution 635 ( 1989)
of 14 Jun~ I 989

The Security Council,
Conscious of the implications of acts of terrorism for
international security,
Deeply concerned by all acts of unlawful interference
against international civil aviation,
Mindful of the important role of the United Nations
in supporting and encouraging efforts by all States and
intergovernmental organizations in preventing and
eliminating all acts of terrorism, including those involv
ing the use of explosives,
Determined to encourage the promotion of effective
measures to prevent acts of terrorism,
18

5. Urges all States, and in particular the producers
of plastic or sheet explosives, to intensify research into
means of making such explosives more easily detectable, and to co-operate in this endeavour;

International Civil Aviation Organization and other
competent international organizations, an international regime for the marking of plastic or sheet explosives for the purpose of detection.

6. Calls upon all States to share the results of such
research and co-operation with a view to devising, in the

Adopted unanimously at the
2869th meeting.

CENTRAL AMERICA: EFFORTS TOWARDS PEACE

ary 1988 at Alajuela, Costa Rica 88 and on 14 February 1989 at Costa del Sol, El Salvador,89
Aware of the importance which the Central American
Presidents attach to the role of international verification as an.essential component for the implementation
of the above-mentioned instruments, including, in particular, their commitments relating to regional security,
especially non-use of territory to support destabilization of neighbouring countries, and democratization,
especially free and fair elections, as well as to the voluntary demobilization, repatriation or relocation of irregular forces, as agreed in the Costa de) Sol accord of
14 February 1989,
Aware also that the commitments enshrined in the
Guatemala agreement 87 form a harmonious and indivisible whole,
Noting with appreciation the efforts undertaken to
date by the Secretary-General in support of the Central
American peace process, including his assistance in the
establishment of appropriate mechanisms to verify
compliance with the provisions of the Guatemala agreement and of the Joint Declaration adopted by the Central American Presidents at their meeting held in El
Salvador on 14 February 1989,89 and particularly the
Secretary-General's agreement with Nicaragua to deploy a United Nations observer mission to verify the
electoral process,
l. Commends the desire for peace expressed by the
Central American Presidents in signing on 7 August
1987 at Guatemala City the agreement on "Procedures
for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in
Central America" 87 and in the Joint Declarations subsequently signed in pursuance of it;
2. Expresses its firmest support for the Guatemala
agreement and the Joint Declarations;
3. Calls upon the Presidents to continue their efforts to achieve a firm and lasting peace in Central
America through the faithful implementation of the
commitments entered into in the Guatemala agreement
and in the expressions of good will contained in the
Joint Declaration of 14 February 1989;
4. Appeals to all States, in particular to those which
have links with the region and mterests in it, to back the
political will of the Central American countries to comply with the provisions of the Guatemala agreement and
of the Joint Declaration, particularly that regional and
extra-regional Governments which either openly or co-

Decision
At its 2871st meeting, on 27 July 1989, the Council
discussed the item entitled "Central America: efforts
towards peace".

Resolution 637 (1989)
of 27 July 1989

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 530 (1983) of 19 May 1983
and 562 (1985) of 10 May 1985 and General Assembly
resolutions 38/10 of 11 November 1983, 39/4 of 26 October 1984, 41/37 of 18 November 1986, 42/1 of7 October 1987 and 43/24 of 15 November 1988, as well as the
initiative that the Secretary-General of the United Nations undertook on 18 November 1986 together with the
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States,
Convinced that the peoples of Central America wish
to achieve a peaceful settlement of their conflicts without outside interference, including support for irregular
forces, with respect for the principles of self-determination and non-intervention while ensuring full respect
for human rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
26 June 1989 submitted in pursuance of Security Council resolutions 530 (1983) and 562 (1985), 86
Recognizing the important contribution of the Contadora Group and its Support Group in favour of peace
in Central America,
Welcoming the agreement on "Procedures for the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace in Central
America" signed at Guatemala City on 7 August 1987
by the Presidents of the Republics of Costa Rica, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua87 as the
manifestation of the will of the peoples of Central
America to achieve peace, democratization, reconciliation, development and justice, in accordance with their
decision to meet the historical challenge of forging a
peaceful destiny for the region,
Welcoming also the subsequent Joint Declarations
issued by the Central American Presidents on 16 Janu86
Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-fourth Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1989, document S/20699.
87
Ibid., Forty-second Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1987, document S/19085, annex.

88 Ibid., Forty-third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March J9R8, document S/]9447, annex.
89
Ibid., Forty fourth }'rnr, Supplement for January, February and
March 1989, document S/20491, annex.

19
