S/PRST/2016/15

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 November 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7799th meeting of the Security Council, held on 1 November 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions and the
statements of its President on the situation in Lebanon, including its statement
of 22 July 2016 (S/PRST/2016/10). The Security Council reaffirms its strong
support for the territorial integrity, sovereignty, and political independence of
Lebanon, in accordance with resolutions 1701 (2006), 1680 (2006), and 1559
(2004).
“The Security Council welcomes the election of the President of the
Republic of Lebanon Michel Aoun in accordance with the Lebanese
constitution. The election is a long-awaited and critical step to overcome
Lebanon’s political and institutional crisis. The Security Council urges the new
President of the Republic of Lebanon and Lebanese leaders to build on their
efforts thus far by continuing to work constructively to promote the country’s
stability, and by swiftly forming a government.
“The Security Council stresses that the formation of a unity government
and the election of a parliament by May 2017, in accordance with the
Constitution, are critical for Lebanon’s stability and resilience to withstand
regional challenges. The Security Council encourages all parties in Lebanon to
demonstrate renewed unity and determination to that end, in order to ensure
Lebanon’s ability to address the growing security, economic, social and
humanitarian challenges facing the country.
“The Security Council affirms that the preservation of Lebanon’s
stability is essential to regional stability and security. The Security Council
underscores its previous calls on all Lebanese parties to recommit to
Lebanon’s policy of dissociation and to cease any involvement in the Syrian
crisis, consistent with their commitment in the Baabda declaration.
“The Security Council commends Prime Minister Tammam Salam for his
leadership throughout the difficult period and his efforts to enable the
Government to function effectively without a President. The Security Council

16-19083 (E)

021116

*1619083*

S/PRST/2016/15

further commends Speaker Nabih Berri for his efforts at fostering continued
dialogue among all Lebanese parties.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the Internat ional
Support Group (ISG) for Lebanon and calls on the international community,
including international organizations, to ensure continued support to Lebanon
in addressing the economic, security and humanitarian challenges facing the
country. The Security Council reiterates its support to the Special Coordinator
for Lebanon, and encourages her to pursue her good offices role in this crucial
period for Lebanon, in close coordination with the ISG.”

2/2

16-19083
