A/63/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

60

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 26 November 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Siles
Alvarado (Bolivia), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 16 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/63/L.32, A/63/L.33,
A/63/L.34 and A/63/L.35)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Members will recall that the General Assembly held
the debate on agenda item 16 at its fifty-seventh and
fifty-eighth plenary meetings on 24 and 25 November
2008.
Before giving the floor to the speakers in
explanation of vote before the vote, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America in explanation of vote.
Ms. House (United States of America): The four
draft resolutions under this agenda item, in
combination with over 15 other draft resolutions that
will come before the General Assembly this year, as
every year, form a clear pattern of institutional bias
directed at one State Member of the United Nations.
The United States has clearly stated its policy that
there should be two democratic States, Israel and

Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. We
back up that policy with substantial diplomatic support
for both sides, consistent with the process launched in
Annapolis in November 2007. We also contribute very
significant financial and programmatic support to the
Palestinian Authority and to Palestinian refugees, for
whom the United States is the largest single State
donor.
We see no contradiction whatsoever between
support for the Palestinian people and support for
Israel. Both sides need support to be able to take the
steps necessary for a just and lasting peace.
Each year, therefore, we are distressed and
discouraged as the General Assembly unhelpfully
devotes a disproportionate number of resolutions
related to the Middle East. All of them are unbalanced
by the explicit or implicit one-sided criticism of Israel.
The draft resolutions discussed under this and
other upcoming agenda items entitled, “The situation
in the Middle East”, “Report of the Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories”, “Permanent sovereignty of the
Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including Jerusalem, and of the Arab
population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their
natural resources” and others are repetitive and, I
repeat, unbalanced. They are completely at odds with
the General Assembly’s actions regarding any other
Member State, geographic area or issue. They place
demands on the Israeli side while failing to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-62083 (E)

*0862083*

A/63/PV.60

acknowledge that both sides have obligations and both
must take difficult steps towards peace that can only be
agreed through negotiations between the parties.
The United States accepts the principle that the
General Assembly may look into the practices of
individual States. However, last year, the Assembly
adopted 14 resolutions specifically criticizing Israel
and seven more expressing support for the Palestinian
people vis-à-vis their relations with Israel.
In the same year, the Assembly adopted only six
resolutions specifically critical of any Member State
other than Israel. We supported some of those and
opposed others, but all together, the 21 resolutions
addressing alleged Israeli violations and obligations
stretched to 61 pages of text compared to only 20 for
resolutions critical of the six other nations. The
Assembly is on course to repeat that same pattern again
this year.
Whatever the merits of the issue, this represents
an extraordinarily disproportionate and unjustified
focus on one Member State. The situation in the
Middle East is very important, but viewed in relation to
all problems facing our planet, this matter does simply
not warrant three quarters of all the time and energy
the General Assembly devotes to critical review of the
action of its 192 Member States.
Of particular concern to the United States are two
draft resolutions submitted for adoption today:
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”
(A/63/L.33) and “Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People”
(A/63/L.32). Additionally, there is a text that will be
considered under agenda item 30, entitled “Work of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories”
(A/C.4/63/L.15).
These entities, established more than a generation
ago, perpetuate and institutionalize the perception of
inherent United Nations bias. By their very nature, they
fail to properly demand actions from both sides and,
instead, focus only on Israel. The millions of dollars
expended on them and the significant staff
contributions consumed by them could be better
directed towards more pressing issues, including direct
assistance to needy Palestinians.

2

Consistent with the overall programme of United
Nations reform, the time has come for the Assembly to
seriously review these bodies with a sharp focus on
what, if anything, they contribute towards a solution to
the Middle East conflict.
These institutional arrangements, backed by
nearly two dozen one-sided draft resolutions, serve
more to undermine than advance ongoing negotiations.
They also undermine the credibility of the United
Nations which, as a member of the Quartet, must be
seen by both sides as an honest broker in facilitating a
resolution to the Middle East conflict. They make no
positive contribution to achieving a just resolution to
the conflict. Instead, these draft resolutions can have a
corrosive effect on the negotiations, both by
convincing many on the Israeli side that Israel will be
treated unfairly by the United Nations no matter what
compromises it offers and by convincing extremist
Palestinians such as Hamas that they will be spared
criticism no matter what they do, including terrorist
attacks intentionally targeting civilians. Certainly these
draft resolutions add nothing to the far more detailed
and up-to-date monthly discussions of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East.
Finally, these draft resolutions presuppose the
outcome of permanent status issues, such as the return
of refugees, checkpoints and settlement activity, which
properly belong to ongoing bilateral negotiations. In
the 9 November briefing to the Quartet, the Palestinian
and Israeli negotiators pledged to continue bilateral
talks until they achieved their goal of a comprehensive
agreement on all issues without exception, as agreed at
Annapolis. Both sides attested that the negotiating
structure is effective and productive and affirmed their
intent to keep it in place. They noted — and I wish to
emphasize this — that third parties should not
intervene in the negotiations absent their joint request.
The United States is acutely aware of the
suffering of the Palestinian people. We have been and
will continue to be at the forefront of international
efforts to address the underlying causes of that
suffering. But it is impossible to see how supporting
resolutions so detached from the reality on the ground
and so intrusive into the substance of sensitive,
sustained negotiations will either alleviate that
suffering or contribute to a solution. Therefore, we
cannot support these draft resolutions.

08-62083

A/63/PV.60

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the only speaker in explanation of the vote
before the vote.
We turn first to draft resolution A/63/L.32,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”. Since the
introduction of this draft resolution, Nigeria and
Somalia have become co-sponsors.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.32. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.

08-62083

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay.
Draft resolution A/63/L.32 was adopted by 107
votes to 8, with 57 abstentions (resolution 63/26).
[Subsequently the delegation of Belize advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.33, entitled “Division for Palestinian Rights of
the Secretariat”. I should like to inform the Assembly
that since the introduction of this draft resolution,
Nigeria and Somalia have become co-sponsors.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.33. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab

3

A/63/PV.60

Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
Draft resolution A/63/L.33 was adopted by 106
votes to 8, with 57 abstentions (resolution 63/27).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Belize informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.34, entitled “Special information programme
on the question of Palestine of the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat”. I should like to
inform the Assembly that since the introduction of this
draft resolution, Nigeria and Somalia have become
co-sponsors.

4

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.34. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.

08-62083

A/63/PV.60

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Tonga.
Draft resolution A/63/L.34 was adopted by 162
votes to 8, with 4 abstentions (resolution 63/28).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Belize informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/63/L.35, entitled “Peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine”. I should like to inform the
Assembly that, since the introduction of this draft
resolution, Nigeria and Somalia have become
co-sponsors.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.35. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,

08-62083

Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Tonga.
Draft resolution A/63/L.35 was adopted by 164
votes to 7, with 3 abstentions (resolution 63/29).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Belize informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote after
the vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to put on record at this Assembly that my delegation
voted in favour of all the resolutions just adopted under
agenda item 16 in the spirit of solidarity with the
Palestinian people. However, I would like to express
my delegation’s reservations on those parts of the said
resolutions which may not be in line with the stated
policies and positions of my country or may be
construed as recognition of the Israeli regime.
Mr. Kassianides (France) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European

5

A/63/PV.60

Union. The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia; and Ukraine align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union voted in favour of
resolution 63/28 on the special information programme
on the question of Palestine of the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat. The European
Union welcomes the new elements introduced by the
Palestinian mission in the spirit of cooperation. These
new elements enabled the improvement of the
resolution on which we have just voted.
In light of the ongoing peace process, the
European Union encourages the Department of Public
Information and the parties to improve the contribution
of the special programme in the promotion of dialogue
and comprehension between Israeli and Palestinian
societies. The European Union is ready to work
together with the Department of Public Information
and the parties to achieve this objective.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 16.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/63/L.36 and A/63/L.37)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Members will recall that the General Assembly held a
debate on agenda item 15 on 25 November 2008 at its
fifty-ninth plenary meeting.
Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): On this
very agenda item on the situation in the Middle East,
this Assembly heard a number of unfounded distortions
and allegations against the Islamic Republic of Iran by
the representative of Australia. In the exercise of the
right of reply while rejecting the said allegations and
distortions, which were made under an agenda item
with no relevance to the issue, I wish to bring the
following points to the attention of Member States.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has consistently
condemned terrorism in all its forms and

6

manifestations. Iran has been and is a victim of
terrorism — a terrorism committed by terrorist groups
that have been supported by certain Western countries.
Given the history of unqualified support by Australia to
the State terrorism perpetrated by the Israeli regime
against the Palestinians, Lebanese and others in the
region, Australia is the last to be in a position to judge
the record of others in this area.
Iran has fully cooperated with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran’s nuclear
programme has been and is absolutely peaceful. Any
claims to the contrary are ill-intended and absurdly
false. Iran’s cooperation with the Agency and the
peaceful nature of our nuclear programme has been
confirmed by the IAEA’s own reports on numerous
occasions. While the representative of Australia
claimed that Iran has not cooperated with the IAEA —
a claim that is totally groundless — he, in a seriously
questionable and utterly inexplicable manner,
neglected the fact that the Israeli regime, that enjoys
all-out support from Australia, has clandestinely
developed hundreds of nuclear weapons and warheads.
Moreover, it is not a party to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty and other international instruments on weapons
of mass destruction and is the most serious threat that
the region is facing today.
If Australia is genuinely worried about the
Middle East, which we doubt it is, it had better cease
and desist from its complicity with the Israeli regime in
its war crimes and join the international community in
condemning the said regime’s atrocities and
destabilizing policies and practices in the region.
Australia’s voting record on the resolutions on the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East, adopted by this Assembly every year, as it has
today, is adequately self-explanatory. That record
suffices to show the political motivation behind
Australia’s behaviour in crying wolf on behalf of
others in the Middle East.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
will now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/63/L.36 and A/63/L.37.
We will turn first to draft resolution A/63/L.36,
entitled “Jerusalem”. I should like to inform the
Assembly that, since the introduction of this draft
resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors: Nigeria and Somalia.

08-62083

A/63/PV.60

The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/63/L.36. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.

08-62083

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Haiti,
Tonga.
Draft resolution A/63/L.36 was adopted by 163
votes to 6, with 6 abstentions (resolution 63/30).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.37, entitled “The Syrian Golan”. I should like
to inform the Assembly that, since the introduction of
this draft resolution, the following countries have
become sponsors: Nigeria and Somalia.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/63/L.37. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,

7

A/63/PV.60

Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Draft resolution A/63/L.37 was adopted by 116
votes to 6, with 52 abstentions (resolution 63/31).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote after
the vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): With your permission, Mr. Vice-President, I
would like to speak in Portuñol.
I would like to explain the vote of the delegations
of Brazil and Argentina on draft resolution A/63/L.37
on the Syrian Golan, which has just been approved by
the Assembly. Brazil and Argentina voted in favour of
this draft resolution because we understand that the
essential aspect of this draft is linked to the illegality
of acquiring territory by force. Article 2, paragraph 4,
of the Charter of the United Nations prohibits the use
or threat of force against the territorial integrity of a
State. This constitutes an imperative standard of
international law.
At the same time, I would like to qualify the
position of our delegations with regard to operative
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution in question. Our
vote does not prejudge the content of that operative

8

paragraph, in particular in its reference to the border of
4 June 1967. On behalf of the Governments of Brazil
and Argentina, I would like to take this opportunity to
urge the Israeli and Syrian authorities to renew
negotiations with a view to finding a definitive solution
to the situation in the Syrian Golan, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) of the Security
Council and the principle of land for peace.
Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to put on record in this Assembly that my delegation
voted in favour of all the draft resolutions just adopted
in the spirit of solidarity with the Palestinian people
and other peoples under occupation. However, I would
like to express my delegation’s reservations on those
parts of the said draft resolutions that may not be in
line with the stated policies and positions of my
country or may be construed as recognition of the
Israeli regime.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express its full
and deep appreciation and gratitude to the General
Assembly for adopting once again, as in every year
since 1981, with a majority of votes based on justice
and law, of draft resolution A/63/L.37, entitled “The
Syrian Golan”, as well as other draft resolutions
relating to the question of Palestine and the situation in
the Middle East. By the same token, I would like to
thank the delegations of Somalia and Nigeria for
joining the sponsors of the draft resolution that has just
been adopted by the Assembly.
The international community’s continuous
support for these resolutions exemplifies the upholding
of the principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter by Member States and their backing of our
right to recover our land occupied by Israel, which has
been supported by a super-Power and a few other
States for more than 40 years. There is no doubt that
voting for these resolutions sends an explicit
international message to Israel and those who protect it
that occupation, killing, expansionist policies and
aggression, the construction of settlements, faits
accomplis and the annexation of the land of others are
practices that the entire international community
repudiates and rejects.
I wish to reiterate my country’s thanks to all the
States that sponsored the draft resolution entitled “The
Syrian Golan” and to the States voting for it. I also
urge those States that abstained or voted against the

08-62083

A/63/PV.60

resolution to listen to the voice of international law,
which should govern our conduct, our behaviour, our
actions and our voting in this Organization whenever
the matter relates to respect for the Charter, respect for
the sovereignty of United Nations Member States and
refraining from aggression and attacks against their
sovereignty.
I wish to reiterate my country’s sincere appeal on
behalf of the pursuit of a comprehensive and lasting
peace, and our insistence, stronger now than ever, on
the liberation of the Syrian Golan from Israeli
occupation by all means as guaranteed by international
law.
I would like to take this opportunity to urge the
international community to help us achieve this
objective in order to prevent the eruption of war,
through continuing to bring pressure to bear on Israel,
the party that impedes peace, and those who protect it,
thus forcing Israel to accept a just and comprehensive
peace that will secure a promising future for the region.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Palestine would like to
express its gratitude and appreciation to all countries
that played a very important role in introducing the
resolutions just adopted and all the countries that voted
in favour of them. We also express our gratitude to all
the political blocs that collaborated with us in order to
introduce very balanced and responsible draft
resolutions that have become resolutions.
We want to thank the Arab Group, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Non-Aligned Movement, the African Union, the Rio
Group, the European Union and all those who worked
with us in reaching responsible language that is
reflective of the position of nearly the entire
international community. We are grateful to them and
will continue to work with them to bring Israel into
compliance with international law, to uphold
international law and to allow for the implementation
of these resolutions. We will work to bring peace and
justice to our region and put an end to the occupation,
which started in 1967, of our land and areas, including
East Jerusalem, and to find a just and agreed-upon
solution to the refugee question based on resolution
194 (III).
We believe that the challenge for the international
community is to bring Israel into compliance. It is not
in the interests of the international community or the
United Nations to allow Israel to have preferential

08-62083

treatment, to continue acting outside of the law, and to
continue to get away with not fulfilling its obligations
enshrined in the United Nations Charter and in General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
These resolutions are very balanced. The fact that
almost all Member States voted in favour of them
reflects the position of the international community in
trying to find a just solution to this conflict, which has
lasted too long — 61 years since the Nakba — and 41
years since occupation. Israel is getting away with not
abiding by international law and the will of the
international community. I believe that shielding Israel
from being brought into compliance does a disservice
to this international Organization, to international law
and to the belief in a just solution to the conflict.
When we all responded to the invitation of the
United States to Annapolis — when 50 countries and
international organizations went there about a year
ago — we were all representing in essence the United
Nations in order to help the two parties achieve a just
solution to the conflict. We were hoping that by now
we would have a peace treaty that would allow for the
birth of the Palestinian State.
Unfortunately, it does not seem as if this peace
treaty will be agreed by the end of this year. Until it is
agreed, it is the duty of the international community,
which played a role in creating the problem and in
trying to find a solution to the problem through the
adoption of resolution 181 — the partition plan — to
remain engaged on this issue until it is resolved in all
its aspects. We promise that we will continue to work
with the United Nations and will continue to appreciate
what it does for us until we bring about a just solution
to this conflict.
Once again, we express our gratitude to all
Member States and groups, including the European
Union as I mentioned, under the presidency of France,
for its cooperation and support in attaining the
balanced and effective language which enabled a large
number of countries to vote in favour of the
resolutions.
We hope that next year if we move effectively
towards peace and achieve a peace treaty, we promise
you that we will reflect the essence of that peace treaty
that would allow for the birth of our State, in the
resolutions that we adopt next year. But that we would
really like to do is not to adopt a single resolution if
our State is born, if the Israeli occupation is terminated

9

A/63/PV.60

and if our flag, the flag of the independent, contiguous,
viable State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its
capital, is raised with the 192 other flags outside of this
building. We will be so delighted that we will not
bother the Assembly with a single resolution nor
engage in discussions of balanced or unbalanced or of
upholding international law or anything of that sort.
We are so eager for that moment when we have our
own State and to open a new chapter of relationships
between us and our neighbours, including Israel, where
we can live in peace and security.
So the vote of the Assembly today is helping us
and giving our people strength to continue with the
struggle until that moment when we can relieve the
Assembly from the task of dealing with and adopting
so many of our resolutions. But until we reach that
moment, we will not forget about those resolutions and
the need to uphold international law.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 49
Sustainable development
(d) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of mankind
Report of the Second Committee
(A/63/414/Add.4)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): If
there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the report of the Second
Committee that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of
vote. The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Second Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,

10

explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the report of the Second
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Second Committee.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Second Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution entitled “Protection of global
climate for present and future generations”. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
resolution, as recommended by the Second Committee?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/32).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 49.
Agenda item 44 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/63/L.28)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Members will recall that the General Assembly held
the debate on agenda item 44 jointly with agenda items
107 and 112 at the fifty-first plenary meeting on
17 November 2008. Members will also recall that draft
resolution A/63/L.29 was introduced under this agenda
item at the same plenary meeting.
We will now take action on draft resolution
A/63/L.28, entitled “Global health and foreign policy”.
I should like to announce that, since the introduction of
the draft resolution, the following countries have
become sponsors: Albania, Argentina, Austria, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia,
Egypt,
Equatorial
Guinea,
Guyana,

08-62083

A/63/PV.60

Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Maldives, Mali, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, New Zealand, Peru,
the Philippines, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and Zimbabwe.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.28?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/33).

A/63/L.28

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 44.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(A/63/L.40)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community (A/63/L.38)
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
(A/63/L.39)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Members will recall that the Assembly held a debate on
agenda item 114 and its sub-items (a) to (u) at its 36th
and 37th plenary meetings on 3 November 2008.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): It is often the case for draft
resolutions dealing with cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations to focus
largely on the dimension of the cooperation that the
United Nations offers. For this reason, I was careful,
when I had the honour, on 3 November last, of
addressing this Assembly in the name of the Caribbean
Community on the subject of cooperation between the
United Nations and the Caribbean Community and
Common Market (CARICOM), not to end my
statement without drawing attention to what we in
CARICOM offer to this Organization. We do believe
that, through our active participation in the dialogue on
the various issues on the agenda of this Organization,
whether as individual States or as a grouping of States,
we are helping to infuse greater life into the Charter, to
ensure the attainment and the consistent fulfilment of
its high and lofty purposes, and to strengthen faith in

08-62083

the principle of international cooperation. We believe
that there is no more practical or valuable cooperation
that we can render to the United Nations and we are
proud of our record in this regard.
Today, it is my honour to introduce the draft
resolution entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Caribbean Community”, contained in
document A/63/L.38. I do so not only on behalf of the
member States of CARICOM but also on behalf of all
the countries that have generously extended themselves
to sponsor the current draft.
In the preambular section of this draft resolution,
we would have the Assembly recall previous
commitments by the United Nations to the principle of
cooperation with the Caribbean Community. But
beyond that, the draft resolution would also have the
Assembly give due recognition to what are, for us,
particular landmarks in the development of this
cooperation. The most important of these landmarks
relate, of course, to those areas that for us are the most
sensitive, or where our needs for the benefits of
cooperation are greatest. These areas are constituted
first by the death-dealing combination of illicit narcotic
drugs and weapons. Then there are the challenges to
the sustainable development of our predominantly
small-island and low-lying coastal States, as
highlighted in the outcome of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg, South
Africa in 2002, and the Mauritius Strategy adopted at
the
International
Meeting
to
Review
the
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, adopted in 2005, and other such outcome
documents. Other important areas of concern to us are
our vulnerability to natural disasters, in which context
Haiti stands as the most dramatic example, and the
ravaging effects of HIV/AIDS on our societies.
In the same preambular paragraphs, the draft
resolution would also have the Assembly recall the
abiding cooperation that has existed between the two
secretariats, and affirm the need, in the light of the
multiple crises characterizing the international
environment, for the further strengthening of such
cooperation.
This assessment is sustained in the operative
portion of the draft resolution. In paragraph 2, the
Secretary-General is called upon to continue to assist
in furthering the development and maintenance of

11

A/63/PV.60

peace and security in the region, while in paragraph 3
he is invited to work for deepening the capacity of the
two sides to attain their objectives.
Recognizing that the United Nations development
system depends, for its effectiveness, on a strengthened
multilateral development framework, the draft
resolution, in paragraph 4, has the Assembly call on the
developed countries to make a vastly increased effort
in that regard. At the same time, the specialized
agencies are being urged in paragraph 5 to step up their
cooperation with the organizations’ respective
Secretaries-General, with a view to intensifying
cooperation
programmes
with
the
Caribbean
Community, paying special attention to areas and
issues identified by the two sides, as well as to the
decisions of major international conferences dealing
with the sustainable development of small island
developing States, such as those emanating from the
World Summit on Sustainable Development and the
International Meeting to Review the Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, for
example.
The operative section of the draft resolution also
notes the existing cooperation taking place with the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations in areas of critical importance to the
development of our countries, such as industrial
development on the one hand and agriculture and food
security on the other. But quite beyond cooperation in
these specific areas, the operative section also makes a
call to the specialized agencies and other organizations
and programmes of the United Nations to assist our
countries in addressing the social and economic
consequences of the vulnerability of our economies
and the consequent challenges for fulfilling the
Millennium Development Goals.
The threats posed to the region in the area of
security have led us to stress the urgent need for the
reopening of the office of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in the region in order to reinforce our
efforts in combating the interrelated scourges of drugs,
violent crime and the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons.
We could not, of course, fail to mention and give
credit to the Department of Public Information for the
very valuable cooperation that it extended to us in the

12

implementation of the activities commemorating the
200th anniversary of the ending of the trans-Atlantic
slave trade, and also in the activities for the
establishment of the permanent memorial to the
victims of that trade.
In like manner, we could not fail to include in this
draft resolution a note of welcome and encouragement
for the initiatives of Member States to assist
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community.
Finally, a critical dimension of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the Caribbean
Community is formed by the cooperation agreement
signed by the Secretaries-General of the two
organizations on 27 May 1997. In that framework,
there have been a number of fruitful and actionoriented exchanges, as our draft resolution states, one
of the high points of which has been the holding of a
series of biennial meetings between the two sides at the
highest level. The fourth such general meeting took
place in the Caribbean in 2007, and preparations are
currently under way for the holding of the fifth in New
York in January 2009. The draft resolution would have
the Assembly welcome that event as an opportunity to
review and appraise progress in the development of our
cooperation and to identify ways in which it can be
intensified.
As in previous years, we have had the privilege
of having a significant number of countries join with us
in presenting to the Assembly our draft resolution for
adoption by consensus. We once again express our
gratitude to them for having so accompanied us. In
draft resolution A/63/L.38, we have recorded our
vision of the effectiveness of the cooperation that we
have received from the United Nations since this item
was last considered; our vision of the areas in which,
we feel, that cooperation can be enhanced; and our
strong faith in the solidity of the bases on which it is
proceeding. In the light of that, we trust that States
Members of the Organization in all regions will see our
draft resolution as one that warrants their most
enthusiastic support, for which we thank all of them in
advance.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
call on the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position before action is taken on the draft resolution.

08-62083

A/63/PV.60

Mr. Ortega Sánchez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We should like to make
a statement regarding the draft resolution contained in
document A/63/L.38, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Caribbean Community”.
The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela wishes to reaffirm its firm commitment to
supporting Caribbean integration through supportive
cooperation aimed at overcoming the region’s limited
base of financial resources, its high poverty levels and
the resulting social problems.
In that connection, in addition to supporting draft
resolution A/63/L.38, we wish to reiterate our position
on the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, in particular its paragraphs 21 and 22, which
refer to the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, in the understanding that they are directed at
States parties to the Convention. We stress that, since
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not a State
party to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, its norms do not apply to us under
customary international law, save those that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has expressly
recognized or will recognize in the future through their
incorporation into its domestic legislation. Those
paragraphs are not binding for our country.
Finally, we wish to reiterate that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela will continue to strongly
support all efforts required to make progress in
attaining the objectives of the present draft resolution
in order to promote activities aimed at strengthening
cooperation with the Caribbean Community.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I call
on the representative of Afghanistan to introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.39.
Mr. Ayoob (Afghanistan): My delegation, in its
capacity as Chair of the Economic Cooperation
Organization (ECO) group in New York, has the
honour to introduce the draft resolution contained in
document A/63/L.39, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organization”, sponsored by the 10 States members of
the Economic Cooperation Organization: Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan.

08-62083

The Economic Cooperation Organization is an
intergovernmental regional organization established for
the purpose of promoting economic, technical and
cultural cooperation among Member States and stands
for the same principles as those that guide the United
Nations. The ECO region is full of bright trading
prospects and opportunities. Despite its young age and
the lack of appropriate infrastructure and institutions in
the region, ECO has developed into a successful
regional organization.
The Economic Cooperation Organization seeks to
develop, on a prioritized basis, its infrastructure and
institutions, which make full use of the resources
available in the region. Specifically, ECO has
embarked on several projects in priority areas of its
cooperation, including energy, trade, transportation,
agriculture and drug control. In addition, we have
established relations and signed memorandums of
understanding with regional and international
organizations, including United Nations specialized
agencies and international financial institutions.
Consequently, ECO’s international stature is growing.
This draft resolution invites the various
specialized agencies, organizations and programmes of
the United Nations system, as well as other relevant
international financial institutions, to join in ECO’s
efforts to achieve the shared goals of the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization
through regional cooperation and to achieve
internationally agreed development goals, including
those set out in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration. In addition, it stresses the importance of
the continuation and expansion of the areas of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization, expresses
appreciation for the technical and financial assistance
extended by the United Nations and its specialized
agencies and calls for a further increase in the technical
assistance provided by United Nations agencies to the
States members of the Economic Cooperation
Organization.
In conclusion, I would like to take this
opportunity to invite all interested countries to sponsor
draft resolution A/63/L.39. We would be grateful for
their sponsorship and hope that the draft resolution will
be adopted by consensus, as it was at the sixty-second
session.

13

A/63/PV.60

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Thailand, to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.40.
Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand): On behalf of the
10 States members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) — Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam — and 71 other
sponsors in various regions of the world, I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.40, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations”. I am pleased
to inform the Assembly that, since the introduction of
the draft resolution, the following 16 countries have
joined the list of sponsors: Belgium, Bulgaria, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Greece, Grenada, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Jamaica, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova, Senegal, Serbia
and Somalia.
ASEAN is going through an exciting period in its
evolution to become the ASEAN Community, resting
on the three pillars of the ASEAN Security
Community, the ASEAN Economic Community and
the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community. Presently, all
10 ASEAN member States have submitted their
instruments of ratification for the ASEAN Charter, thus
ensuring that that landmark document will enter into
force when ASEAN leaders meet at their Summit in
Thailand next month.
The aim of ASEAN leaders is that the ASEAN
Charter will provide a legal and institutional
framework to make ASEAN a more rules-based,
people-centred, effective and efficient organization. It
is the aspiration of all 10 ASEAN member States to
move ahead towards closer integration, with the goal of
transforming South Asia into a single market and a
production base with free movement of goods,
services, skilled labour and freer movement of capital.
Through that process of community-building and
integration, ASEAN will emerge as a stronger partner
to the United Nations in the pursuit of the shared
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
At the same time, the partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations has also been
undergoing an exciting period over the past two years.
As reflected in draft resolution A/63/L.40, the

14

Secretaries-General of ASEAN and the United Nations
signed a memorandum of understanding on ASEANUnited Nations cooperation in 2007, in order to
promote cooperation between the two secretariats on a
wide range of issues of mutual benefit. ASEAN has
also worked in close partnership with the United
Nations in response to humanitarian needs in the wake
of the devastating Cyclone Nargis in May this year.
Next month, the third ASEAN-United Nations Summit,
to be held in Thailand, will provide a good opportunity
for ASEAN leaders and the United Nations SecretaryGeneral to exchange views about issues of common
interest and to develop an effective partnership in
response to those critical issues.
ASEAN would like to express its sincere
appreciation to all sponsors of this draft resolution,
which currently number 97. We are grateful for the
strong support extended to ASEAN by all dialogue
partners and our friends from all regions. It is our wish
that the General Assembly adopt this draft resolution
by consensus, as in the past. By doing so, the General
Assembly will send a message of strong support for the
growing partnership between ASEAN and the United
Nations and for the growing importance of effective
regionalism as a building block for an effective global
multilateralism.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
proceeding further, I would like to inform members
that, at the request of the sponsors, action on draft
resolution A/63/L.39, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organization”, has been postponed to a later date that
will be announced at the appropriate time.
We shall now proceed to consider draft
resolutions A/63/L.38 and A/63/L.40. The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolutions A/63/L.38
and A/63/L.40.
We turn first to draft resolution A/63/L.38,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community”.
Before proceeding to take action on draft
resolution A/63/L.38, I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Benin,
Burundi, Cambodia, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea,
Finland, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Lithuania,
Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Portugal, Senegal, Serbia,
Slovenia, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of

08-62083

A/63/PV.60

Macedonia, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.38?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/34).

A/63/L.38

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/63/L.40, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations”. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/63/L.40?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/35).

A/63/L.40

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to the speakers in explanation of vote,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America.
Mr. Godard (United States of America): My
remarks
concern
resolution
63/34,
entitled

“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”. The United States is pleased
to have joined consensus on this resolution and
welcomes cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community. In particular, the United
States recognizes the need to support States in the
region in their efforts to fight illicit trafficking in all its
aspects, and we recognize the ongoing work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in the region to that end. We would only caution that,
given the budget situation, it is important that any field
office be sustainable and that the UNODC carefully
evaluate the feasibility of reopening any field offices in
the context of its existing budget.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the only speaker in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-items
(c), (e) and (i) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
adjourning the meeting, I would like to appeal to those
Member States intending to submit draft resolutions on
the remaining sub-items to do so as soon as possible.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

08-62083

15
