S/PV.9367

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9367

th meeting
Thursday, 6 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Fifteenth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2023/473)
Letter dated 27 June 2023 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2023/479)
Letter dated 30 June 2023 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2023/488)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-19623 (E)
*2319623*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Fifteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2023/473)
Letter dated 27 June 2023 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2023/479)
Letter dated 30 June 2023 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2023/488)
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have a point of order. But first and foremost,
I would like to say that, as announced at the very
beginning, time management was to be one of the
priorities of the British presidency. For that reason, we
should convene our meetings on time. The presidency
has time to lobby and discuss its national interests with
Member States — before the meeting.
Secondly, I would like to ask you, Madam President,
to clarify the basis on which you propose that the
representative of Ukraine be invited to participate in
this meeting; for, unlike Iran and Germany, Ukraine is
not a party to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
The President: Following receipt of Ukraine’s
request to participate in this meeting under rule 37,
we as President consulted all Council members. We
accepted Ukraine’s request on the basis that a clear
majority of Council members expressed support.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I want to warn members that the question of
the participation in this meeting on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) by a State that is neither
2/25

06/07/2023

a member of the Council nor a party to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is far from
being routine, as the presidency is trying to make it out
to be.
The subject of resolution 2231 (2015) and its being
an integral part of the JCPOA is extremely important
and sensitive. That is why, for many years, it was
discussed only among the members of the Security
Council and the parties to the JCPOA. That was the key
for a constructive, depoliticized discussion, the need for
which was recognized by all members of the Council.
That was the case last December (see S/PV.9225),
in June 2022 (see S/PV.9085), in December 2021
(see S/PV.8930) and earlier. Members of the Security
Council who held the presidency during the respective
reporting periods recognized their responsibility for
maintaining a pragmatic, results-oriented dialogue in
the Council on subject of the JCPOA. After all, there
were others, including States of the region, that wanted
to take part in the meetings of the Security Council on
the topic. But each time the Council wisely decided
to limit the discussion to those delegations directly
involved in the negotiations concerning the JCPOA.
After all, this nuclear deal is our shared achievement,
which was already under threat of derailment as a
consequence of reckless action by a participant that
withdrew from it in 2018.
Consider this: colleagues are today called upon
to depart from that arrangement for the sake of the
parochial agenda of the British presidency, which wants
to Ukrainize everything, even the most important work
of the Council. Our British colleagues, to our great
regret, have no concern that, ultimately, instead of a
meaningful, substantive discussion, which is urgently
needed in the context of the JCPOA, we will have in
the Security Council an openly politicized farce, as we
have seen more than once.
We categorically disagree with this approach and
request that the question of the participation of the
representative of Ukraine be put to a vote. We rely on
the common sense of the members of the Council and
their responsible attitude to the fate of the debate on
JCPOA issues in the Security Council.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): The
United States urges fellow Council members to vote
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

to allow the representative of Ukraine to speak under
rule 37 during this briefing on resolution 2231 (2015).
Both Iran and Russia have violated their obligations
under resolution 2231 (2015) by participating in the
transfer of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) without
obtaining advance approval from the Security Council.
Iranian UAV development has direct implications for
Ukraine. Over the past several weeks, we have seen
Russia repeatedly use UAVs in attacks that have killed
Ukrainian civilians and destroyed Ukrainian public
works. This is a matter of life or death for the Ukrainian
people. It would be unconscionable to deny Ukraine
the opportunity to speak at this meeting when it is
experiencing the devastating effects of Iran’s violation
of resolution 2231 (2015) first-hand.
The President: The first thing to say is that I reject
the Russian Permanent Representative’s assertion that
the discharge of our duties as President was in any way
irregular; there is a long-established procedure on the
issue of rule 37 participation, which we followed.
In view of the comments made by Council members,
I therefore propose to put to the vote the proposal to
extend an invitation under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure to the representative of
Ukraine to participate in the Security Council briefing
under the agenda item “Non-proliferation”. I shall put
the proposal to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Japan, Malta, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Against:
China, Russian Federation

S/PV.9367

States voted in favour of the participation of Ukraine in
today’s meeting, while it was the United States that was
behind the crisis with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), having withdrawn from the deal in
2018 and not yet returned.
We regret that, at the behest of the British presidency
today, we are witness to the breakdown of the established
format for the discussion on the subject of the JCPOA in
the Security Council. The consequences of this are yet
to be understood, but it is already clear that they will
be far-reaching. A major question is whether it will be
possible to avoid the projection of this unprecedented
situation to the course of negotiations on rekindling
the work on the JCPOA. The responsibility for that lies
entirely with the United Kingdom.
Unfortunately, the President did not draw any
conclusions from her mistakes during the United
Kingdom’s last tenure in the presidency of the Security
Council in 2022, and continues to disregard procedure
and undermine the established working methods of
Council and to openly abuse the presidency in the
interests of their national political agenda. Today the
world has once again witnessed the double standards
of Western States for the sake of their clients in Kyiv,
London, Washington, D.C., and their Western allies,
who are willing and ready to sacrifice any and all
achievements in multilateral diplomacy, imperilling
even the most pressing issues on the multilateral
agenda. We call on Members of the United Nations to
draw the relevant conclusions.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Germany, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.

The proposal to invite the representative of Ukraine
has been adopted.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and His Excellency Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations, in his capacity as Coordinator of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action Joint Commission.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We draw attention to the fact that the United

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2023/473, which contains

Abstaining:
Mozambique
The President: The proposal received 12 votes in
favour, 2 against and 1 abstention.

begin

its

23-196233/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

06/07/2023

the fifteenth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015); S/2023/479, which contains the text of a letter
dated 27 June 2023 from the Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
S/2023/488, which contains the text of a letter dated
30 June 2023 from the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

Iran issued a joint statement to expedite the resolution
of outstanding safeguards issues and to allow the
IAEA to implement further appropriate verification
and monitoring and reporting activities. In its report
of May 2023, the IAEA reported that, in line with that
joint statement, it had installed surveillance cameras at
workshops where centrifuge parts are manufactured.
The Agency added that it had no further questions
regarding the presence of high-enriched uranium
detected at one location.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Skoog and Ambassador Vanessa
Frazier, Permanent Representative of Malta, in her
capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

That encouraging step notwithstanding, we are
alarmed that the Agency remains unable to verify
the stockpile of enriched uranium in the country. It
estimates that Iran now has a total enriched uranium
stockpile of more than 20 times the allowable amount
under the JCPOA. That includes increased quantities of
uranium enriched to 20 per cent and 60 per cent. Such
a stockpile of enriched uranium is of serious concern.

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
The conclusion of the Plan and its endorsement by
the Council eight years ago were the result of intensive
negotiations to achieve the common objectives of nuclear
non-proliferation and regional security, in a manner
that delivers tangible economic benefits for the Iranian
people. When I last briefed the Council on this issue
(see S/PV.9225), in December 2022, all participants in
the Plan and the United States had reaffirmed that a
return to the full and effective implementation of the
Plan was the only viable option to resolve the Iranian
nuclear issue. Six months later, negotiations to restore
the Plan remain stalled.
Diplomacy is the only way to effectively address
the Iranian nuclear issue. It is essential that all parties
renew the dialogue as quickly as possible and reach an
agreement on the outstanding issues. In that context, I
reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal to the United
States to lift or waive its sanctions, as outlined in the
Plan, and to extend waivers with regard to the trade in
oil with the Islamic Republic of Iran. And I echo his
call on Iran to reverse the steps it has taken that are not
consistent with its nuclear-related commitments under
the Plan. It is also important for Iran to address concerns
raised by participants in the Plan and by other Member
States in relation to annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).
In a welcome development, in March of this year,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
4/25

I now turn to the restrictive measures set out
in annex B, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
fifteenth report on resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2023/473).
First, on the nuclear-related provisions, no new
proposals were submitted to the procurement channel
in the past six months. The Council, however, received
10 notifications, submitted pursuant to paragraph
2 of annex B, for certain nuclear-related activities
consistent with the Plan. The renewal by the United
States of waivers with respect to certain nuclear
non-proliferation projects foreseen in the Plan and the
nuclear-related provisions in annex B for another 180day period was an important step.
Secondly, regarding the ballistic missile-related
provisions, France, Germany, Iran, Israel, the
Russian Federation and the United Kingdom provided
information to the Secretary-General and the Council
concerning a test flight of a space launch vehicle
conducted by Iran in March of this year. We also
received information from the same Member States
about the testing and unveiling of two new ballistic
missiles by Iran in May and June, respectively. The
letters received from Member States continue to reflect
the divergent views as to whether that launch and missile
developments are inconsistent with the resolution.
Thirdly, we examined information related to
paragraph 4 of annex B. That paragraph pertains to
the supply, sale or transfer to or from Iran of all items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology as set
out in Council document S/2015/546, which require
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

prior approval of the Council. It includes the list of
complete delivery systems and subsystems, as well as
the associated components and equipment, including
ballistic missiles, cruise missiles and other unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV) systems with a range of 300
kilometres or more.
During the reporting period, we received information
from the United Kingdom about ballistic missile parts
seized by the British Royal Navy in February 2023 in
international waters in the Gulf of Oman. The United
Kingdom shared imagery of the seized components
and its analysis that the components were of Iranian
origin and transferred in a manner inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015). The Permanent Representatives
of France, Germany and the United Kingdom conveyed
their view that some of the seized components are
controlled items listed in the document S/2015/546 and
that their transfer without prior approval of the Council
was therefore inconsistent with the resolution. In their
responses, Iran and the Russian Federation stated that
there was no evidence linking the intercepted vessel
and its cargo to Iran, and no clear indication that the
seized components were of Iranian origin. We continue
to analyse the available information.
We also received letters from Ukraine, France,
Germany and the United Kingdom concerning alleged
transfers of unmanned aerial vehicles from Iran to
the Russian Federation, in a manner inconsistent with
paragraph 4 of annex B. The United Kingdom and
Ukraine also provided photographs and their analyses
of the UAVs recovered in Ukraine. The two countries
assessed the devices to be of Iranian types Shahed-131,
Shahed-136 and Mohajer-6, and that they had been
transferred by the Islamic Republic of Iran in a
manner inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015). Their
assessment was based on comparison with debris of
other UAV attacks in the Middle East and with imagery
of Iranian UAVs available via open sources. France,
Germany, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the United
States have also reiterated their request, in letters to
the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council and in statements to the Council and the media,
for the Secretariat to examine the debris of those
UAVS, in Kyiv or any other suitable location. Noting
that the accusations were not substantiated by evidence,
the Permanent Representatives of Iran and the Russian
Federation disputed the imagery and evidence of the
UAVs provided by the United Kingdom and Ukraine,
as well as the claim by France, Germany, Ukraine and

S/PV.9367

the United Kingdom that Iran had transferred UAVs to
the Russian Federation in a manner inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015). The Secretariat will continue to
examine the available information.
The Secretariat also received an invitation from
the Government of Yemen to examine the debris of a
cruise missile used in an attack by the Houthis on the
Al-Dabba oil terminal last November. The Secretariat
is still analysing the available information.
Finally, the Secretariat did not receive any official
information alleging actions inconsistent with the
assets-freeze provisions of the resolution.
Eight years after the conclusion of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and its endorsement
by the Council, we remain convinced that the Plan is
the best available option for ensuring the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, as well as
for enabling Iran to reach its full economic potential.
In closing, I would like to thank Her Excellency
Mrs. Vanessa Frazier for her leadership as Facilitator for
resolution 2231 (2015), as well as the Coordinator of the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission,
for our continued cooperation.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: It is an honour to once again have an
opportunity to address the Security Council in this
meeting on behalf of the High Representative of the
European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, in his capacity
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
My first expression of gratitude goes to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and to the Secretariat for
their work related to the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), in particular the report on that subject
(S/2023/473) prepared for today’s discussion, as well
as the briefing we just heard from Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo. I want to thank Ambassador Frazier
in her role as Facilitator of resolution 2231 (2015) and
for the work done to keep members informed of the
current state of play. I would also like to underscore
the important role of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) as the sole, impartial and independent
international organization mandated by the Security
Council to monitor and verify the implementation

23-196235/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

of the nuclear non-proliferation commitments under
the JCPOA.
One year ago, in July 2022, intense international
diplomatic efforts to restore the implementation of
the JCPOA were nearing completion. In early August,
the EU High Representative was able to put forward a
compromise text laying down the necessary steps for
the United States to return to the JCPOA and for Iran
to resume the full implementation of its commitments.
Regrettably, it was not possible to reach a deal at that
time, and since then an environment conducive to
restoring the agreement has unfortunately been lacking.
That compromise text is still on the table as a potential
point of departure for any renewed efforts to bring the
JCPOA back on track.
Since the discussion on the previous report of
the Secretariat (S/2022/912) on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the IAEA has documented the
continued acceleration of Iran’s nuclear programme
in a serious departure from its JCPOA commitments.
The production rates of high-enriched uranium have
continued to increase and have reached unprecedented
levels. As of May, the stockpile of uranium at up to
60 per cent uranium-235 was 116.1 kilogrammes, which
is 26.6 kilos more than at the beginning of the year.
Iran’s uranium-enrichment capacity, in terms of number
and type of centrifuges, is still not commensurate with
the JCPOA limits. Moreover, its cooperation with the
IAEA is piecemeal, leaving the Agency with several
pending questions. That is why we acknowledged the
joint statement that was concluded in March between the
IAEA and the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran. We
welcomed the start of the implementation of that joint
statement, specifically the installation of surveillance
cameras at one location and of monitoring equipment
at two declared enrichment facilities. We urge Iran to
continue in that direction without delay with a view to
restoring the IAEA’s surveillance capabilities.
We continue to recognize that Iran has continued
to face very serious negative economic consequences
following the United States’ withdrawal from the
JCPOA and its reimposition of previously lifted
unilateral sanctions. The United States has also
imposed additional sanctions linked to Iran’s nuclear
programme. For its part, the EU lifted all its nuclearrelated economic and financial sanctions on the first
day of the JCPOA implementation, and that remains the
case. We reaffirm that restoring the JCPOA remains the
only way that Iran can reap its full benefits and reach
6/25

06/07/2023

its full economic potential, since that restoration would
result in a comprehensive lifting of the sanctions that
would encourage the entire international community
to increase its cooperation with Iran. The European
Council’s conclusions of December 2022 provide
the framework for EU engagement towards Iran.
Through those conclusions, the EU reaffirmed its
commitment and continued support to the full and
effective implementation of a restored JCPOA and
called on all countries to support the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). The High Representative sees
no better alternative for restricting the Iranian nuclear
programme and ensuring related sanctions lifting.
Let me recall that the JCPOA also considerably
increased the IAEA’s capacities in terms of monitoring.
For instance, the Additional Protocol to Iran’s
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement was made
applicable only under a fully implemented JCPOA.
Restoring its implementation is a matter of urgency.
The procurement channel, another benefit of the
JCPOA, continues to be available. It was designed as
a transparency and confidence-building mechanism to
give assurances that transfers of nuclear and dual-use
goods and services are fully in line with resolution
2231 (2015) and the JCPOA.
We are extremely worried about Iran’s military
support to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine,
including through deliveries of drones. That has not
stopped but has rather expanded. The EU calls on the
Government of Iran to end that military cooperation
with a country that is violating every principle of the
Charter of the United Nations. The EU will continue
to respond to that as necessary. As has already been
stated, any transfer of certain combat drones to or from
Iran without prior permission by the Security Council is
in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). Moreover, since
the previous meeting in this format (see S/PV.9225),
Iran has unveiled new ballistic missiles, while
resolution 2231 (2015) calls on it not to undertake any
activity related to ballistic missiles that are designed
to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including
launches using such ballistic technology.
On the nuclear front, some perspective has opened
up as a result of the joint statement in March between
the IAEA and its Iranian counterpart. We call on Iran
to make further progress in the implementation of the
joint statement, including on cooperation with the
IAEA, and to refrain from taking any more steps away
from its JCPOA commitments, as a first and minimum
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

measure. We also call on all the remaining parties to
the JCPOA and the United States to sustain dialogue
on the matter. De-escalation steps on the nuclear front,
if concrete and acknowledged by all the parties to the
agreement and the United States, will help to restore
trust. They could recreate an environment conducive
to a resumption of negotiations, possibly leading
ultimately to a fully effective JCPOA.
Drawing on the continued support from the 27 EU
countries, the High Representative continues to be in
close contact with all the JCPOA participants and the
United States in working to find a diplomatic solution
with regard to Iran’s nuclear programme. He encourages
all the parties to intensify their diplomatic efforts to
that end in the weeks and months to come.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Frazier.
Mrs Frazier (Malta): I speak in my capacity as
the Security Council’s appointed Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
The fifteenth report (see S/2023/488) of the
Facilitator was approved by Council members on
30 June. I would like to thank all Council members
for their cooperation and constructive engagement in
this process and for their spirit of compromise and
flexibility. As this is Malta’s first report as Facilitator, I
am especially grateful for everyone’s kind support. The
report provides a factual account of the activities that
took place in the 2231 format of the Security Council,
covering the period from 13 December to 30 June.
It includes six subsections, namely, the summary
of activities, monitoring the implementation of the
resolution, relevant communications, key aspects of the
workings of the procurement channel and transparency,
outreach and guidance.
Members may refer to the report for details, but I
would like to mention the following key aspects.
First, one meeting of the Council in the 2231 format
was held during the reporting period. The meeting was
held on 30 June, and representatives of the Security
Council discussed the findings and recommendations
contained in the fifteenth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), prior to its public release. Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo already referred to some of those
points in her statement.

S/PV.9367

Secondly, during the reporting period, a total of
17 notes were circulated within the 2231 format. In
addition, a total of 11 official communications was
sent to Member States and the Coordinator of the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission,
and a total of 11 communications from Member States
and the Coordinator were received.
Among the communications circulated were
the two regular quarterly reports issued by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in
February and May 2023, as well as one update. The
IAEA plays an important role in the verification and
monitoring of nuclear activities in the Islamic Republic
of Iran, as requested under resolution 2231 (2015). The
IAEA’s work provides confidence for the international
community that the nuclear programme of the Islamic
Republic of Iran is for exclusively peaceful purposes.
The reports of the Director General play a significant
role in that regard.
Thirdly, I report that no new proposals were
submitted to the Security Council through the
procurement channel during the reporting period.
The channel represents a key transparency and
confidence-building mechanism under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). It remains
operational, and the Procurement Working Group
stands ready to review proposals. I echo the SecretaryGeneral in encouraging all participants to the JCPOA,
Member States and the private sector to fully support
and utilize the channel.
As Under-Secretary-General Di Carlo just stated,
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, as endorsed by
the Council through resolution 2231 (2015), is the best
available option for achieving the objectives of nuclear
non-proliferation and regional security. Through
multilateralism and dialogue, we can work together in
ensuring the Plan’s most effective implementation and
in ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme, while enhancing mutual trust and
cooperation. I echo the other briefers here today in
stating that it is essential that all parties to the agreement
uphold it both in letter and spirit, avoid actions that
undermine the implementation of commitments and
work on resolving all outstanding issues so that the
Plan can achieve its goals for the benefit of all.
Finally, I would like to state that, as Facilitator,
I will do my utmost to support the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, which it

23-196237/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

underpins. My team and I will work closely with all
Council members in an impartial and transparent
manner to meet our shared responsibility. I look
forward to continuing and strengthening our dialogue
and cooperation for the remainder of the year.
The President: I thank Ambassador Frazier for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for the Secretariat’s
work on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/473)
and for her briefing to the Security Council today. I
also thank Ambassador Frazier for her facilitation of
the report. I also wish to thank Ambassador Skoog for
his briefing.
The United States remains gravely concerned
about Russia’s use of Iranian drones against Ukrainian
cities and civilian infrastructure in its unprovoked
war against Ukraine. Both Iran and Russia have
violated their obligations under resolution 2231 (2015)
by participating in those transfers without obtaining
advance approval from the Security Council. Just last
weekend, public reports indicate that Russia used eight
Iranian-made Shahed-136 drones to terrorize Kyiv. The
Ukrainian Air Force said it destroyed those drones,
but three buildings were damaged by debris and one
man was reportedly injured. That incident, together
with several others, must be investigated, as it clearly
constitutes a violation of resolution 2231 (2015), annex
B, paragraph 4.
We urge the United Nations to address those
violations and, consistent with the mandate in
resolution 2231 (2015), to report on the implementation
of the provisions of the resolution. Specifically, the
Secretariat should, without any further delay, send
a team of investigators to Kyiv to examine the debris
from the weapons used by Russia against Ukraine.
Moreover, the Secretariat should send, without any
further delay, a team of investigators to review materiel
recovered by the United Kingdom. The mandate is clear
and requires no less. Security Council resolutions are
not optional, and they must be upheld. It is no secret
that Iran’s development and proliferation of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) pose a global threat. That is
why the transfer of those items was prohibited under
resolution 2231 (2015).
8/25

06/07/2023

Russia’s acquisition of hundreds of Iranian drones
and current production of those drones on its own
territory, however, dramatically change the equation.
That is a flagrant violation of resolution 2231 (2015). We
should not be shy about condemning that destabilizing
and dangerous behaviour. We have seen evidence
submitted to the Council and to the Secretary-General
extensively detailing components of Iranian UAVs
recovered on the battlefield in Ukraine. Despite proof
of Iran’s complete disregard for its obligations under
resolution 2231 (2015), Tehran continues to deny its
role in the damage caused by its weaponry in Ukraine.
In the face of such clear photographic evidence,
those denials suggest that even Iran’s leaders are
uncomfortable with Russia’s brutal use of the weapons
against civilian targets.
Also deeply troubling are Russia’s attempts to
undermine publicly available and verified information
confirming Russia’s use of Iranian UAVs in its war
against Ukraine. Moscow even goes so far as to
characterize evidence submitted to the Council by
London and Kyiv as false and has rebuffed requests by
Council members for the Secretary-General to examine
the seized components, which falls under its reporting
mandate. In fact, were expert investigators to examine
the components, the United States believes that it would
find that they appear to have design characteristics and
markings similar to components previously recovered
from the debris of ballistic missiles launched by the
Houthis towards the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates.
The Council must address any and all violations
of resolution 2231 (2015), given the implications for
not only peace and security in the Middle East, but
also in Ukraine and the rest of the world. As such, we
reiterate our previous calls for the Secretary-General to
update the Council on his assessment of Iranian-made
UAVs recovered in Ukraine within the next 30 days.
I would say to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo that
there should be no higher priority for the Secretariat.
The failure to act will lead only to further attacks on
civilian infrastructure in Ukraine and potentially the
loss of civilian lives. It is our responsibility in the
Council to do whatever we can to avert those outcomes,
even if it means confronting one of our own members
over their violations.
In addition, in May, Iranian State media announced
the test of a medium-range ballistic missile. That
launch was inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex B,
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

which calls upon Iran not to undertake any activity
involving ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons, including launches using
such ballistic missile technology. Iran’s continued
development and proliferation of such missiles pose
serious threats to regional and international security.
And the Council should view those actions with the
seriousness that they deserve.
Iran’s ballistic missile activity — especially in the
light of Tehran’s nuclear ambitions and its threatening
rhetoric — is an enduring threat to regional and
international peace and stability. Even after certain
restrictions in resolution 2231 (2015) terminate, the
United States will continue to take vigorous measures
to counter that threat and block the proliferation of
sensitive ballistic-missile technology to and from
Iran. We will also continue to sanction companies and
traders contributing to that threat. In addition, Iran
has continued to expand its nuclear programme and
escalate tensions. Iran should take actions that build
international confidence and de-escalate tensions,
not continue nuclear provocations that pose grave
proliferation risks. Meanwhile, Member States must
fully implement the relevant measures in annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015). Iran has continued to flagrantly
carry out activities related to ballistic missiles designed
to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons, in defiance
of paragraph 3 of annex B. The Security Council
must be clear and united in condemning that activity.
When Iran defies the Security Council repeatedly
without consequences, it undermines the fundamental
credibility of the Council itself.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
Brazil has been actively seeking constructive
diplomatic solutions to the issues presented by this
file for more than a decade now. We have been willing
to work on creative solutions with a range of partners
in order to dial down tensions, preserve the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and ensure that all parties
see any agreement as legitimate and durable. It was in
that spirit that we supported and continue to support
the agreement that eventually emerged in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA
was imperfect, as many agreements are, especially in
the field of disarmament, but it represented a major
breakthrough for diplomacy, laying out a path towards
a comprehensive and definitive solution to the so-called
Iranian nuclear dossier.

S/PV.9367

Like many of the arms-control agreements of the
Cold War, however, the JCPOA has been increasingly
undermined as part of a worrisome trend in arms
control in which the perfect has been allowed to become
the enemy of the good. We regretted the decision of
the United States to leave the agreement in 2018, just
as we regret the recent Iranian actions in response to
that decision, which have progressively undermined the
letter and the spirit of the Plan of Action. Most of all, we
regret the loss of confidence on both sides, which has
made it harder to organize a return to the agreement’s
provisions by all parties. It is now incumbent on all
stakeholders to shore up that confidence. We believe
that three things are necessary to rebuild trust and open
a window of opportunity for restoring the JCPOA.
The first step in creating a pathway back to
compliance with the JCPOA is by refraining from
taking any actions that might aggravate the trust deficit
or make a return to the agreement even harder. All
the parties should refrain from escalatory rhetoric and
from taking actions that might further degrade trust in
the negotiating process. That includes being extremely
cautious before triggering the snapback provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015), which would represent a point
of no return and lead to a very perilous path.
Secondly, we must focus on what is achievable. The
JCPOA had a very specific and well-defined mandate,
which was ensuring that Iran’s nuclear programme
remained exclusively peaceful. While geopolitical and
military concerns abounded in 2015, the JCPOA was
able to focus on the nuclear issue and find common
ground around a limited but crucial topic. We must be
able to focus on that limited but crucial issue of ensuring
sustained confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme if we are to have any hope
of restoring the most significant non-proliferation
agreement of our time. Arms transfers, the use of
conventional weapons and even the evolution of missile
technology are serious issues that should be discussed,
but they should not hamper the full implementation of
the JCPOA as originally intended.
Finally, we must redouble our support to the efforts
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
regarding the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). The IAEA has continued to play a vital role in
interfacing with Iran, defusing tensions and finding
ways to preserve dialogue and continue the verification
of Iran’s nuclear programme. Director General Grossi’s
statement to the IAEA Board of Governors on 31 May

23-196239/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

indicates progress in the relationship with Iran. While
gaps remain, cooperation between Iran and the IAEA
remains the best pathway to ensuring transparency
around Iran’s nuclear programme and is essential to
rebuilding trust in any revived agreement. We must be
vocal in our support to those efforts.
While we understand the concerns of many here in
this Chamber, we are also alarmed at the prospect of a
complete breakdown of the JCPOA, with no appropriate
and effective alternatives to replace it. Isolating Iran
and cutting off avenues to dialogue can create a selffulfilling prophecy, leading to exactly the outcomes that
all of us here are seeking to avoid. We in the Council
never tire of repeating that engagement is not a reward
and that diplomacy, not isolation, is the only way to
bring these files to a positive conclusion. Resolution
2231 (2015) acknowledges that when it emphasizes the
importance of political and diplomatic efforts to finding
a negotiated solution guaranteeing that Iran’s nuclear
programme is exclusively for peaceful purposes.
Furthermore, the recent agreement signed in May
between Saudi Arabia and Iran signals willingness to
reach a peaceful solution to regional challenges and to
resort to dialogue as a means to promoting stability in
the Middle East. Let us seize that momentum and find
the political will to do more through diplomacy while
there is still time.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ambassador Frazier and Ambassador Skoog for
their briefings.
Eight years ago, we were pleased to welcome the
news of the agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme.
The conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) was rightly seen as an achievement
for diplomacy in the service of non-proliferation and
regional political détente. In that respect, we were
delighted to have been able to host critical stages of the
negotiations in Switzerland. Today the implementation
of the JCPOA is faltering and the situation is more
perilous than ever before. Switzerland has repeatedly
expressed its deep concern about the withdrawal of
the United States from the JCPOA and the various
measures taken by Iran, which are incompatible with
its nuclear commitments. In particular, Switzerland
deplores the fact that despite the willingness shown
by a majority of the parties to negotiate a rapid return
to the Plan, no progress has been made in the past six
months. The JCPOA is an important element of the
10/25

06/07/2023

international nuclear non-proliferation regime and
of international security. Consequently, the swift and
full implementation by all parties of their obligations
is essential.
A revitalization of the JCPOA depends on
three aspects.
First, the latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) shows progress has been made
in overcoming outstanding issues concerning nuclear
safeguards, as well as monitoring equipment at certain
sites. That is a step in the right direction. However, in
order to assure the international community that Iran’s
nuclear programme is indeed peaceful, the Iranian
authorities must cooperate rigorously, transparently and
unequivocally with the IAEA. Otherwise, the Agency’s
ability to provide guarantees on the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme remains
compromised. That is why the commitments made under
the JCPOA and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons must be fully respected by Iran.
Secondly, we regret Iran’s development and testing
of ballistic missiles — actions that are incompatible
with resolution 2231 (2015). We are also concerned by
allegations of transfers from Iran of ballistic missiles and
unmanned aerial vehicles to third countries. We stress
that any transfer of items, materials, equipment, goods
and technology listed in the 2015 Missile Technology
Control Regime is a violation of resolution 2231 (2015)
if it has not received the prior approval of the Council.
In that regard, we encourage the Secretariat to make
full use of its flexibility to independently review the
information provided and to respond to invitations for
an on-site review.
Finally, the current state of the JCPOA serves as a
reminder that urgent diplomatic efforts are needed to
avoid its total unravelling. As such, we are encouraged
by the efforts to hold dialogue, both in the region and
beyond. We hope that those talks will enable the parties
involved to recall our collective interest in resolving the
Iranian nuclear issue. In order to be sustainable, political
détente must be accompanied by a return to compliance
with the obligations and spirit of the JCPOA.
The Council must give the issue its full
attention. Switzerland stands ready, as it has done
in the past by hosting negotiations, to facilitate any
diplomatic solution aimed at maintaining the nuclear
non-proliferation regime.
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo, Ambassador Frazier and Ambassador
Skoog for their informative briefings.
Japan reiterates its continued support for the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which
strengthens the international non-proliferation regime
and contributes to the peace and stability of the
Middle East.
The exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme must be ensured through the full
implementation of the JCPOA and the International
Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA) verification and
monitoring activities. The Agency’s safeguards are a
fundamental component of the nuclear non-proliferation
regime under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. Every Member State, including Iran,
must act in a manner that preserves the integrity of the
safeguards system in cooperation with the Agency.
Japan is deeply concerned about the expansion
of Iran’s nuclear activities beyond the limits of
its commitments under the JCPOA following the
regrettable withdrawal of the United States from the
JCPOA. That includes enhanced uranium enrichment
up to 60 per cent uranium-235 and its storage and the
expansion of advanced centrifuges, as well as Iran’s
suspension of its voluntary application of the Additional
Protocol. We strongly hope for the immediate return
to full compliance with the commitments under the
JCPOA by all relevant countries.
While taking note of the start of the implementation
of the joint statement between the IAEA and Iran of
March 2023, Japan calls on Iran to fully cooperate
with the Agency in the full and unconditional
implementation of the joint statement without delay to
address its nuclear issues, including the outstanding
safeguards issues.
The restoration of the JCPOA will require a process
of sincere confidence-building among the relevant
countries, particularly between the United States and
Iran. Diplomacy remains the only viable solution, and
Japan will proactively contribute towards facilitating
dialogue among the relevant countries to resolve
the issue.
With regard to other non-proliferation issues related
to Iran, it is important for Iran to seriously address
the concerns raised by JCPOA participants and other

S/PV.9367

United Nations Member States in relation to annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015).
Japan is deeply concerned about a series of
allegations related to Iran’s possible proliferation
activities, including the transfer of missiles, unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) and related technologies from
Iran to recipients within and beyond the Middle East
region. We urge all Member States, including Iran,
to abide by resolution 2231 (2015), particularly annex
B, paragraph 4. In that regard, we must once again
strongly condemn the transfer of UAVs from Iran to
Russia. Even if that transfer took place prior to Russia’s
war of aggression against Ukraine, as claimed by Iran,
prior permission from the Security Council would have
been necessary. Any transfer without permission would
constitute a violation of resolution 2231 (2015). We
would therefore support efforts by the Secretariat to
investigate Russia’s potential use of Iranian drones in
its war of aggression.
Finally, Japan believes that only dialogue and
cooperation can ease tensions in the Middle East.
Therefore, we welcome the normalization agreement
between Iran and Saudi Arabia. Japan is also committed
to continuing its diplomatic efforts to ease tensions
based on our friendly and constructive relations with
countries in the region, including Iran.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I appreciate the briefings by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary Di-Carlo, and by Ambassador Olof
Skoog. I also acknowledge the work of the Permanent
Representative of Malta, Ambassador Vanessa Frazier,
in her capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
We regret the current situation of the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) as
a result of unilateral actions outside of the agreement,
endorsed by the Security Council in July 2015 through
resolution 2231 (2015). We recognize the efforts of
those seeking to keep the JCPOA in force.
We had hoped that the negotiations for a new JCPOA
would bear fruit. While a new framework has not been
achieved, for Ecuador, dialogue under the existing
agreement remains the best option for dealing with
the Iranian nuclear issue, as stated by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2023/473). We therefore call
for the restoration of the actions envisaged within the

23-1962311/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

context of the JCPOA and encourage all the parties
concerned to renew their efforts to resume the full
and effective implementation of the Plan and resolve
outstanding issues.
The findings of report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) concerning highly enriched
uranium particles, which are inconsistent with Iran’s
declared level of enrichment, is of deep concern. My
delegation therefore calls on the Islamic Republic of
Iran to comply fully with its obligations under resolution
2231 (2015), including its annex B. In that context, we
join others in rejecting any transfer of unmanned aerial
vehicles or other types of weapons that could constitute
a flagrant violation of the agreement.
Ecuador defends the multilateral non-proliferation
regime, whose cornerstone is the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In
keeping with the provisions of that instrument, we
recognize the right of States to develop and use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes, without discrimination,
and we reiterate the obligation of States to comply with
the provisions of the Treaty.
Likewise, Ecuador supports the IAEA’s role and
tasks of cooperation, verification and monitoring, which
are essential actions in the context of the JCPOA. We
therefore welcome the high-level meetings held between
the IAEA and the Islamic Republic of Iran in March
2023 and take note of the joint statement expressing
Iran’s willingness to allow the IAEA to carry out further
appropriate verification and monitoring activities. We
reiterate Iran’s responsibility to cooperate fully with the
IAEA in all aspects of its obligations under the JCPOA
and the NPT. The Agency’s monitoring to ensure the
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme is vital.
In conclusion, for Ecuador, lasting peace and
security for all States are based on dialogue and
cooperation. I therefore call on all parties to the
JCPOA to redouble efforts to advance the search for
negotiated solutions.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I will now deliver a statement
in my national capacity.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Ambassador Skoog for their briefings. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s fifteenth report (S/2023/473) on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), as well
as the Report of the Joint Commission to the Security
Council on the status of the Procurement Working
12/25

06/07/2023

Group’s decisions and on any implementation issues
(S/2023/479). We have taken due note of both reports.
At the outset, let me underline that Malta remains
strongly committed to the restoration of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and its full
implementation. The JCPOA and its endorsement,
in resolution 2231 (2015), remain vital for regional
and global non-proliferation. Malta concurs with the
Secretary-General’s view that the JCPOA is the best
available option for ensuring the peaceful nature of
the Iranian nuclear programme. We hope that the
parties will renew dialogue and engagement in order
to reach an agreement. A diplomatic solution remains
possible, and we should strive for the full and effective
implementation of commitments under the JCPOA by
all sides. Time is of the essence, and we need to seize
all available opportunities.
We welcome the cooperation between the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
Iran during the past six months, including high-level
meetings and the joint statement issued in March. We
also took note of the steps taken to install surveillance
cameras at workshops where centrifuge parts are
manufactured. Iran’s timely and full cooperation with
the IAEA remains key.
However, a number of questions remain
unanswered, including the IAEA’s inability to verify
Iran’s total stockpile of enriched uranium. We encourage
further and enhanced cooperation between the IAEA
and Iran in order to improve information-sharing,
including by providing access to camera data that it is
presently withholding, as well as addressing the gaps
in recordings. We also urge Iran to resolve outstanding
issues and to address concerns related to the expansion
of its nuclear enrichment capacity and the production of
highly enriched uranium.
Malta believes that a revived JCPOA should succeed
in providing the necessary assurances regarding Iran’s
non-proliferation goals and promote regional stability.
In that vein, we call on all parties to take steps to
return to full implementation of the agreement and
of resolution 2231 (2015). We also join the SecretaryGeneral’s call to instil a greater sense of urgency in
renewing dialogue and engagement.
Finally, we once again call upon the Council to
ensure the implementation and efficacy of resolution
2231 (2015).
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo; Mr. Skoog,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union (EU)
to the United Nations; and Mrs. Frazier, Permanent
Representative of Malta, for their briefings.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
is an important achievement of multilateral diplomacy
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolutions and
is a key pillar for maintaining the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and peace and stability in the
Middle East. The previous United States Administration
unilaterally withdrew from the JCPOA and exerted
extreme pressure on Iran, which triggered the Iranian
nuclear crisis.
Since April 2021, the parties, with the coordination
of the European Union, have conducted multiple rounds
of pragmatic negotiations and, at one point, were only
one step away from resuming the implementation of
the JCPOA. Regrettably, the negotiations have stalled
since August. The situation on the Iranian nuclear
issue has been experiencing ups and downs, and the
future prospects have been uncertain. We call on all
parties concerned to cherish the hard-won results of the
negotiations, demonstrate political wisdom, eliminate
key obstacles and reach consensus on restoring the
integrity of the JCPOA and ensuring its effective
implementation as soon as possible.
I would like to make four points in that regard.
First, it is imperative for all parties to make greater
efforts to start the process of resuming talks as soon as
possible. In March, Iran and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) issued a joint statement on
outstanding safeguards issues. Recently, they have
also achieved substantial progress in advancing the
resumption of the Agency’s verification process,
addressing compliance concerns and other issues. The
United States and other relevant parties should seize
the positive momentum, adopt a pragmatic approach,
move in the same direction as Iran and put the JCPOA
back on track at an early date. As the Coordinator
of the JCPOA, the EU should play a more active and
constructive role.
Secondly, China supports all efforts to help ease the
situation on the Iranian nuclear issue and believes that
relevant efforts should maintain the consensus reached
in previous negotiations, address the legitimate and
reasonable concerns of all parties in a balanced manner
and safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of all

S/PV.9367

parties. Otherwise, no effort will likely bear fruit and,
even if it did, it would not likely be sustainable. China
calls on the United States to lift all unilateral sanctions
and long-arm jurisdiction measures against Iran and any
third party, to stop the erroneous practice of threatening
to use force and to create favourable conditions for an
early and full resumption of implementation.
Thirdly, the current Iranian nuclear situation is at a
critical juncture. All parties should maintain a rational
attitude, treat the Iranian nuclear issue separately
from other issues and avoid any negative actions that
could escalate the situation and undermine a political
and diplomatic solution. That explains why China just
now voted against the proposal in the procedural vote.
We hope that similar situations that would further
complicate the Iranian nuclear issue will not happen
again. At the same time, China calls on the Security
Council to play a constructive role on the Iranian
nuclear issue. Some of the restrictive measures in
resolution 2231 (2015) will expire in October and the
farce surrounding the snap-back mechanism in 2020
should not be repeated.
Fourthly, Chinese President Xi Jinping has
proposed a global security initiative advocating a
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security concept, which provides useful inspiration for
addressing security issues in the Middle East. Not long
ago, the historic resumption of diplomatic relations
between Iran and Saudi Arabia, through the Beijing
dialogue, boosted momentum and hope for a political
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue and other hotspot
issues in the Middle East, including comprehensive
reconciliation in the region. China stands ready to
work with all parties to uphold true multilateralism,
implement the global security initiative, share a
common security path and join hands in building a
new security architecture in the Middle East to achieve
long-term peace and security in the Middle East.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a participant in the JCPOA, China has always been
committed to maintaining the effectiveness of the Plan
and the authority of the Council’s resolutions and has
always participated in the political and diplomatic
solution of the Iranian nuclear issue in a constructive
manner. We are ready to keep up close contacts with
all parties to push the JCPOA back onto the right track
at an early date and maintain the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and peace and stability in the
Middle East.

23-1962313/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

06/07/2023

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like also to begin by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Di Carlo and Ambassador Skoog for their
comprehensive briefings. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Frazier for her work and for her briefing
today in her capacity as Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

also to an alarming escalation. As we heard from
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Iran’s estimated
total enriched uranium stockpile is now more than 20
times the allowable amount under the JCPOA. Iran’s
enrichment programme has advanced to a level and a
scale that is unjustifiable for civilian purposes and far
exceeds the limits set out in the JCPOA.

We took note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/473), and we share his hope that the
recent positive regional developments will facilitate
the progress needed on the Iran nuclear issue and more
broadly facilitate greater regional stability. The United
Arab Emirates is fully committed to that goal. Today I
want to make three points to that effect.

The IAEA’s difficulties in performing its important
verification activities for over two years has led to a
significant degree of uncertainty and loss of confidence.
It also poses substantial challenges in establishing a
new baseline for these activities.

First, we continue to call for dialogue and diplomacy
to ensure that nuclear programmes are exclusively
peaceful. The United Arab Emirates has consistently
championed peaceful and diplomatic solutions for these
regional and international challenges. We continue
to advocate de-escalation of tensions, improved
diplomatic relations and greater economic cooperation
within our region to underpin that objective of greater
regional stability.
We recognize that diplomatic engagement is also
crucial to addressing the concerns surrounding Iran’s
nuclear programme and for paving the way towards
a resolution that builds the required confidence and
ensures all nuclear activities in Iran are exclusively
peaceful. We also welcome the resumption of diplomatic
relations between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
Iran as a positive step in this direction.
Secondly, two elements are key for ensuring
regional and global nuclear security: the strict and
timely compliance with international obligations,
including nuclear-related commitments set forth in the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), and the
full cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). We commend the IAEA for its diligent
efforts in monitoring and verifying Iran’s nuclearrelated activities. Its detailed reporting is invaluable,
and we take note of the recent developments outlined in
the IAEA Director General’s 31 May report.
However, we remain concerned about Iran’s
step-by-step cessation since May 2019 of nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA. This has led
not only to a complete halt in the implementation of
those commitments, including transparency measures
and the compliance with the additional protocol, but
14/25

We take note of the joint statement between
the IAEA and Iran reached in March 2023 and the
subsequent installation by the Agency of a limited
number of surveillance cameras and monitoring
equipment. The process of implementing the activities
set out in the joint statement needs to be sustained and
uninterrupted in order for all of the commitments to
be fulfilled.
Iran’s return to full compliance of its nuclear
commitments, including the safeguards agreement in
connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, and complete cooperation with the
IAEA, is crucial. Not only will it foster confidence, but
it would also contribute significantly to progress on
addressing the concerns of the international community
in relation to Iran’s nuclear programme.
Finally, the report’s discussion of the seizure of
ballistic-missile components in the Gulf of Oman
by the British Royal Navy is of particular concern
to the United Arab Emirates. The United Kingdom’s
assessment that these components are of Iranian origin
and have been transferred in a manner inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015) is deeply troubling.
The suggestion has been made that some of these
components bear design characteristics and markings
similar to those previously found in the debris of
ballistic missiles launched against Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates by the Houthis in Yemen. This
has severe implications for regional security and is of
grave concern to my country.
We call on all parties to abide by their obligations
and commit to the full implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), including full compliance around ballisticmissile-technology testing. We are convinced that
cooperation and adherence to international law will
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

help build trust and ensure nuclear non-proliferation
and regional security. It will also support the
tangible economic benefits that are so needed for the
Iranian people.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and European Union Ambassador
Skoog for their updates, as well as Ambassador Frazier
for her work as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
The fifteenth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2023/473)
paints a disturbing picture of the advancement of the
illicit Iranian nuclear programme. It is beyond any
doubt that Iranian nuclear proliferation activities
supersede and fail to comply with the provisions of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
The findings in the report cast doubt on the so-called
peaceful purposes of such activities.
It is regrettable to note that Iran has not taken any
meaningful steps toward the fulfilment of its obligations
under the safeguards agreement of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) related to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and its
additional protocol, despite recent communications
between the IAEA and the Iranian Government. The
opaque practices of Iran undermine the ability of the
IAEA to ensure full verification and monitoring.
A closer look at the steps taken by Iran seem
worrisomely and increasingly to indicate a determination
to advance towards building nuclear weapons in the
near future, rather than a genuine effort in good faith
to implement the JCPOA through diplomacy and in
transparency. The facts are there: Iran has expanded its
stockpile of enriched uranium, put more centrifuges in
operation and enhanced their efficiency, increased the
number of enrichment sites, dangerously experimented
with enriching to high levels in a single step, and
obstructed nuclear inspectors.
That is utterly worrisome, but there is more:
in clear violation of the paragraph 3 of annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015), Iran continues to conduct
ballistic-missile-related activities capable of delivering
nuclear weapons, including launches using ballisticmissile technology. The test flight of the QAEM100 space launch vehicle, the testing of the Khaibar
ballistic missile and the recent unveiling of the new
Fattah ballistic missile are deplorable violations of the
restrictions set forth in the JCPOA.

S/PV.9367

The destructive activities of Iran spread across
the region and beyond, and they are a cause for great
concern. By illegally transferring weapons without the
approval of the Security Council, in flagrant violation
of the arms embargo in Yemen under resolution 2216
(2015), Iran continues to empower the Houthi, including
in their war of terror against neighbouring countries.
As we had suspected, the preliminary findings
by the Secretariat confirm similarities between the
ballistic-missile components seized by the British navy
in the international waters of the Gulf of Oman and the
debris of the ballistic missiles used by the Houthis in
their attacks directed at Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates. We await the full and timely assessment
of the Secretariat on this matter.
Furthermore, the illicit transfer of hundreds of
Iranian Mohajer- and Shahed-series unmanned aerial
vehicles to Russia, in clear violation of resolution 2231
(2015), is tantamount to supplying death to Ukrainian
civilians. Residential areas in Ukraine and critical
civilian infrastructure continue to be under unrelenting
attack by Iranian drones. We reiterate our call to the
Secretariat to provide full clarity on this issue.
In the last year, the international community has
dealt patiently and reasonably with Iran, pursuing
a diplomatic path to find a solution, which is always
possible. We regret that Tehran persists in rejecting
all efforts to resume full and effective implementation
of the JCPOA. As a consequence, we fear now that its
nuclear programme is more advanced than ever and that
the threat it poses is growing accordingly.
Let me conclude with a very sincere call. Iran
should stop testing the resolve of peace-loving countries
and actors by dangerously throwing itself and the entire
region into uncertainty by seeking nuclear weapons.
It should stop supporting terror and destabilization
policies through proxies. And it should stop using
cyberattacks against other countries. What is needed
are deeds, and not just empty words that are betrayed
by Iran’s actions. Only that will bring the credibility
that is lacking and the assurances that are missing.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her presentation of the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2023/473) on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). I also thank Ambassador Vanessa Frazier,
in her capacity as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), and Ambassador Olof Skoog,

23-1962315/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

representing the Coordinator of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) Joint Commission, for
their briefings.
Ghana has always asserted that the JCPOA
represents the best opportunity and most pragmatic
approach for addressing the Iranian nuclear programme,
as it facilitates a balanced compromise that allows Iran
to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
while simultaneously upholding the crucial principles
of non-proliferation. While it was our expectation
that the termination of some of the sanctions outlined
in annex B to resolution 2231 (2015) would occur
against a backdrop of cooperation, communication,
transparency and verification, the situation today is
different. There is a high level of distrust among the
parties to the JCPOA, and the commitment to defining
the steps necessary to restore the Plan’s implementation
has failed to gain traction.
Ghana reaffirms that the global instruments
pertaining to nuclear disarmament and the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons are fundamental
safeguards against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons. We therefore recognize the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015) as critical multilateral initiatives
that facilitate universal adherence to the relevant
instruments of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons that have anchored the global
efforts for international peace and security. In forging
ahead, we believe that it would be useful for the key
stakeholders to develop a practical road map of steps
to return to full compliance with the JCPOA and the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). That would
require rebuilding trust and coordinating efforts
towards a shared understanding of the existing text and
the requirements it outlines.
Ghana again echoes the call for the parties to
exhibit the necessary flexibility and political will to
reach a compromise on the outstanding issues in order
to restore the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
and the JCPOA. We also urge all the parties to adhere
to their commitments under the JCPOA, including by
lifting the unilateral sanctions imposed on the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Such measures have a negative impact
on the people of Iran and create a misunderstanding that
there might be political motives to consider beyond the
objectives of non-proliferation and regional security.
At the same time, we strongly urge the Islamic
Republic of Iran to fulfil all its commitments under
16/25

06/07/2023

the deal, including reversing any actions that are not
consistent with its obligations. It is essential for Iran
to uphold its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
and implement voluntary transparency measures with
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as
specified in the Plan. In that regard, we believe that the
meeting between the IAEA Director General and the
Government of Iran in March, as well as the subsequent
restoration of the surveillance cameras in workshops
where centrifuge parts are manufactured, are positive
developments that must be sustained. We reaffirm our
support for the efforts of the IAEA in maintaining the
Agency’s monitoring and verification activities of Iran’s
nuclear programme. We believe that the Agency plays
a critical role in restoring trust and confidence within
the international community and among the countries
of the region through the assurances it can provide that
Iran’s nuclear programme is exclusively for peaceful
purposes. We reiterate that the right to peaceful uses
must be exercised in conformity with the obligations
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and other nuclear-related commitments,
including the Additional Protocol, and in compliance
with the agreed standards of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
In conclusion, Ghana continues to affirm its strong
support for the global treaties against the development,
production, use and stockpiling of nuclear weapons,
as such agreements and instruments are the only
means we have to ensure a comprehensive, verifiable,
irreversible, non-discriminatory, transparent and
time-bound approach to nuclear disarmament.
Finally, we recognize that achieving the JCPOA
took determined diplomacy and tact, and that restoring
its implementation will require exceptional diplomatic
efforts and patience. Accordingly, we urge all the
parties to work constructively towards a full return
to the terms of the deal, bearing in mind the ongoing
threats to global security and the time constraints. We
must keep to the path of diplomacy.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General, the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations for their briefings.
We are at a particularly grave moment in history.
Iran has been engaged in a continuing nuclear
escalation for four years, documented by successive
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

reports of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). Never before — and I mean never — has Iran’s
nuclear programme been so advanced. Its enricheduranium stockpile has reached considerable levels,
more than 20 times higher than those defined in
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
During an unannounced inspection in January, IAEA
inspectors discovered particles of uranium with an
enrichment level as high as 83.7% — close to military
levels. Iran has continued increasing its enricheduranium production capacity relentlessly, rendering
the limits defined by the JCPOA meaningless. Such
activities are unprecedented and have no credible
civilian justification. They cast serious doubt on Iran’s
intentions at a time when its cooperation with the IAEA
remains inadequate. That has detrimental implications
for the Agency’s verification activities under the JCPOA
and undermines its ability to guarantee the peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
France regrets that over the course of 2022 Iran
refused several opportunities to return to the JCPOA,
maintaining demands that it knew to be unacceptable,
and Iran bears full responsibility for that. We remain
firmly committed to finding a negotiated solution in
order to reverse the current trajectory. To achieve that,
it will be crucial for Iran to immediately take concrete
and verifiable de-escalation measures, including by
fully and immediately implementing its commitments
made to the IAEA on 4 March.
Iran has also continued to develop its ballisticmissile capabilities by firing ballistic missiles and
developing space-launch vehicles. The continued
development of those systems, which are capable
of delivering nuclear weapons, paints a particularly
worrisome picture in the context of the ongoing
nuclear escalation. In addition, Iran continues to
violate resolution 2231 (2015) by transferring missiles
and drones without the authorization of the Security
Council. The repeated interceptions of those missiles
and drones indicate transfers to actors contributing to
the destabilization of the Gulf region, in violation of
several other Council resolutions. Those transfers must
stop. And since last summer, Iran has chosen, in violation
of resolution 2231 (2015), to supply Russia with combat
drones used in its war of aggression against Ukraine.
Since then, Iran has continued those transfers despite
the fact that they are being deliberately used against
civilian infrastructure and the Ukrainian people. All of
that has been documented. France continues to call on

S/PV.9367

the United Nations to investigate those violations and
on Iran to stop supporting Russia’s war of aggression.
As we approach the month of October and the lifting
of several important provisions of resolution 2231
(2015), it is clear that the initial path envisioned in 2015
with the aim of inspiring trust in the peaceful nature of
Iran’s programme and ensuring its renunciation of its
destabilizing ballistic activities has not materialized.
On the contrary, Iran is further away from that than
ever. In that regard, we are committed to ensuring that
Iran does not acquire nuclear weapons. In the immediate
future, Iran must demonstrate its willingness to reverse
an extremely serious trend through de-escalation
gestures and full cooperation with the IAEA. We call on
Iran to make the gestures needed and halt its headlong
rush. For our part, together with our partners, we stand
ready to find a diplomatic resolution to the situation.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation was at the
forefront of the negotiation process that led to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) — a
unique achievement in multilateral diplomacy. We are
extremely concerned about its future. We regret that, at
this critical juncture for the fate of the Plan, the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council is abusing
its authority to promote its own political agenda,
instead of impartially fulfilling its duties, thereby
running the risk of undermining the already-fraught
discussion around the JCPOA. Inviting Ukraine, which
is not party to the nuclear deal, to participate in today’s
meeting, in violation of long-standing, established
practice, is a politically provocative move aimed at
undermining any constructive discussion of resolution
2231 (2015) in the Security Council. This is yet another
stain on London’s reputation in its role as President of
the Security Council.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing.
We were taken aback by the briefing by Olof Skoog,
Head of Delegation of the European Union (EU). His
politicized statements, which included assessments not
directly related to the subject of today’s meeting, are
puzzling. That is not the Coordinator’s role. The EU
representative appears to have forgotten that he is acting
as the Coordinator of the JCPOA Joint Commission, not
as Brussels representative. We regret the fact that, for
the sake of its political agenda, the EU has essentially

23-1962317/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

ended its reputed former role as an honest broker in the
JCPOA processes.
We thank Mrs. Vanessa Frazier, Permanent
Representative of Malta, in her capacity as Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), whom we congratulate on her appointment
to the position. We wish her every success in her
important role steering the work in the 2231 format.
The consensus adoption by the Council last week of the
Facilitator’s six-month report (see S/2023/488) seems to
represent a successful beginning for the work of our
Maltese colleagues in their new role.
At the same time, we note that, in her statement, the
new Facilitator, like her predecessor (see S/PV.9225),
failed to mention the well-known root cause of the
problems surrounding the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, namely, the unilateral
withdrawal of the United States from the deal in 2018
and the imposition of unilateral sanctions against
Iran. Rather, she merely called on the parties, which
do not include Washington, to the deal to support the
agreement. We regret that the Secretary-General also
continues to prefer to overlook that objective fact in
his six-month reports. Furthermore, we recall that the
type of waivers for United States sanctions mentioned
in the text of the report (S/2023/473) is insufficient. We
must talk about the complete, permanent and verifiable
repeal of illegal discriminatory measures imposed by
Washington against Tehran in violation of resolution
2231 (2015).
At the same time, we see that the SecretaryGeneral’s report correctly emphasizes the order
of priorities: the call on the United States to adopt
measures to review its unilateral restrictions precedes
the call on Iran to refrain from taking further steps
away from full implementation of the Plan. No one,
including the leadership of the Secretariat, has any
illusions as to who bears the main responsibility for the
failure to implement the resolution. It is also difficult to
ignore the fact that all the steps taken by Tehran were a
reaction to the actions of the United States.
Moreover, it is extremely puzzling that the text
of the Secretary-General’s report once again contains
references to the alleged investigation of available
information by the Secretariat and the intention to
provide the Security Council with certain so-called
findings regarding so-called violations of resolution
2231 (2015), annex B, paragraphs 3 and 4. We are
18/25

06/07/2023

compelled once again to stress that the 2231 cell lacks
the authority to take such actions and that the functions
of the Secretariat related to the resolution are of a purely
administrative and technical nature. They are clearly
set out in the provisions of the note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document S/2016/44,
of 16 January 2016.
My country has already provided the Council with
a detailed legal analysis in that regard. We urge the
representatives of the Secretariat to strictly comply
with their obligations and refrain from the practice of
non-consensual visits and unauthorized investigations,
based on the so-called invitations by certain States, in
violation of Article 100 of the Charter of the United
Nations. We will consider any such non-consensual
actions not only as a violation of the Charter, but also
as a deliberate provocation aimed at undermining the
implementation of Security Council decisions. The
Secretary-General is well aware of our position in
that regard.
At the same time, we are pleased to note that the
Secretary-General continues to regard the JCPOA as
the best way to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature
of the Iranian nuclear programme. We welcome the
mention of the constructive cooperation between Iran
and the IAEA, with a focus on the implementation
of the March joint statement and the resolution of
outstanding issues.
We believe more than ever that it is important to
recall that almost eight years ago the conclusion of the
JCPOA was a real breakthrough in global diplomacy.
The political will and pragmatic efforts of the
Member States in the process ensured unprecedented
transparency vis-à-vis Iran’s nuclear activities and
addressed all of the IAEA’s questions concerning
Tehran. Unfortunately, one former participant in the
process, the United States, attempted to nullify our
shared achievement by unilaterally withdrawing from
the JCPOA in 2018. Since then, we have not seen any
meaningful steps towards Washington’s return to the
deal. I wonder if the representative of the United States,
who dedicated his entire statement exclusively to the
topic of drones and missiles, has anything to say about
the purpose of this meeting. The party responsible for
problems with the JCPOA was mute on the subject
of JCPOA itself, for example, on whether the United
States will return to the deal that it attempted to
dismantle in 2018. Apparently, the pathos and fervour
of the American representative was intended, inter
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

alia, to draw attention away from the endless stream of
weapons supplied by Washington to the Kyiv regime.
Despite the fact that the draft comprehensive
decision of the JCPOA Joint Commission, which was
intended to reinvigorate the Plan in a relatively short
period of time, was completed long ago and that Tehran
officially and as early as in December 2022 declared
its readiness to conclude a new restorative agreement
based on this draft, the actions of the United States
and European JCPOA participants led to an impasse in
negotiations under the Vienna platform. Moreover, the
same States began to openly sabotage the process in
their attempt to create the illusion of Iran’s responsibility
for the situation. That has been seen, in particular, in
attempts by some of them to cite facts out of context in
order to advance their political agenda, which we saw
in the distortion of the situation concerning cooperation
between Iran and the IAEA.
Our Western colleagues continue to speculate on
the discovery of highly enriched uranium particles
containing up to 83.7 per cent uranium-235 at one of
Iran’s facilities, while deliberately omitting the fact that
the issue has already been resolved, as reflected in the
reports of the Secretary-General, the 2231 Facilitator
and the IAEA Director General. We categorically reject
such attempts to manipulate objective information and
to cast doubt on Iran’s right to explore and develop
peaceful uses of the atom under the Agency’s oversight.
It is in our interest that relations between Tehran and
the IAEA continue to develop smoothly, based on
mutual trust.
All factual information related to the actual status
of the Iranian nuclear programme are transmitted to
the international community via the reports of the
Agency’s Director General. As soon as the JCPOA
is fully re-implemented, the Additional Protocol to
Iran’s Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement will once
again become operational. All responsible States must
facilitate the process, not obstruct it.
An even more appalling example of supercharging
the media space with misinformation is the continuous
attempts to accuse Iran of violations of resolution
2231 (2015), annex B, paragraphs 3 and 4. Both Iran
and Russia have repeatedly responded to numerous
letters with identical content circulated in the Council.
No irrefutable evidence has been provided by their
authors to substantiate those allegations. All we see are
certain “suspicions” and vague “assessments” based on

S/PV.9367

“open-source information”. That is particularly well
illustrated by insinuations about so-called “Iranian
drones” allegedly being used in Ukraine. Some of the
“photographic evidence” is even comical in nature. An
image of Zelenskyy allegedly carrying a Shahed drone
has been widely disseminated in the media. The drone
is three metres long, with a wingspan of two metres,
suggesting that the President of Ukraine must be
roughly 2.5 metres tall. The photo is fake and has been
laughed out of court on the Internet long ago.
The other so-called material evidence provided
consists of indecipherable photographs of some sort of
debris with nothing that points to their Iranian origin.
But what is there to talk about when judging by the
letters and the materials, the authors themselves were
uncertain about the basis for their conclusions? Their
language is specifically chosen to absolve London of
the responsibility for ensuring that the information
presented to the Security Council is reliable. That is
clearly the reason for the references to so-called initial
assessments, meaning that the British did not even finish
the so-called examination of the alleged drones. In the
absence of objective facts, the reason for spreading
these fabrications is clearly to put a negative spin on
the reports of the Secretary-General and the Facilitator
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and
to distract attention from the violations of resolution
2231 (2015) committed by the Western members of the
JCPOA and the United States.
We are particularly concerned about the fact that in
their escalatory rhetoric some Western States not only
show no interest in negotiating to restore the JCPOA,
but they also make obvious attempts to blackmail
Tehran with threats of taking anti-Iranian steps in the
Security Council. One clear example is the reference
to the possibility of reinstating provisions of previous
Security Council resolutions with regard to Iran, the
so-called snapback clause. We want to underscore that
there are no legal or procedural grounds for that. We
are warning our Western colleagues — who should
first take some measures themselves to ensure the
full implementation of the JCPOA — against taking
dangerous steps that run counter to the position of
the Secretary-General and the majority of Council
members about the importance of preserving the deal.
We are equally concerned about the discussions
in the Western press that Great Britain and the two
European States might be planning to reconsider the
expiration planned for October of the so-called missile

23-1962319/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

restrictions imposed on Iran in accordance with
paragraphs 3 and 4 of annex B. We urge our colleagues
to be reasonable and strictly comply with their
international obligations, as required by Article 25 of
the Charter of the United Nations. The illegal national
decisions of various countries dictated by purely
opportunistic considerations cannot knowingly trigger
legal consequences for other States. We resolutely
condemn the nefarious practice of the extraterritorial
application of unilateral sanctions, one of the clearest
manifestations of the so-called rules-based order and
one that has nothing to do with international law.
In conclusion, I want to once again emphasize our
principled position. Russia firmly believes that there
is no alternative to the JCPOA, and that its speedy
resumption is the only right way to respond to both
regional and global security interests. We are all well
aware whose court the ball is in now. Tehran is genuinely
interested in revitalizing the JCPOA, but so far we see
no evidence that the Western countries are ready to
move in the same direction. It would be a great pity if a
chance to revive the deal were wasted because of them.
We hope that the Secretary-General will send a clear
signal to the United States and the European parties to
the JCPOA about the need to reach a final agreement on
a recovery package and a pathway to its implementation
in practice. The Russian Federation is ready to continue
joint efforts to that end. We hope that the leadership of
the Secretariat recognizes the importance of keeping its
published reports balanced and objective. Its statements
and actions should be considered, thoroughly verified,
impartial and supportive of the multilateral efforts
aimed at restoring the JCPOA.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ambassador Olof Skoog of the European Union
and Ambassador Vanessa Frazier of Malta for their
comprehensive briefings.
It is with deep concern that we note that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), concluded
after a protracted negotiation process on a very
sensitive matter, has still not been fully implemented.
That is clearly indicated in the fifteenth report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2023/473).
The proliferation of nuclear weapons is a grave and
unparalleled, if not existential, threat to humankind. It
is vitally important to eliminate them completely. That
20/25

06/07/2023

responsibility falls on all of us. We must ensure that
it remains a crucial component of our shared security
architecture. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons remains the cornerstone of our
collective agenda to prevent the spread of nuclear
weapons, advance the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
facilitate nuclear disarmament and ultimately promote
complete and universal disarmament. It is against
that backdrop, and guided by our Constitution, that
Mozambique supports all efforts towards a world
free of nuclear weapons. Indeed, Mozambique is a
State party to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
Treaty, commonly known as the Treaty of Pelindaba,
and other international arrangements. In recognizing
the possibility of an accidental or unintentional nuclear
crisis or one based on miscalculation, it is therefore
our collective duty to take all necessary measures to
prevent such catastrophic scenarios.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
concluded in 2015, is a product of a prolonged
and arduous negotiation process on the Iranian
nuclear-non-proliferation issue. Resolution 2231 (2015)
reaffirmed that the full implementation of the JCPOA
is essential to building confidence in the peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme and facilitating the
normalization of economic and trade contacts with the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
We note with concern that the fifteenth report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) indicates “the continued lack
of progress toward a return to the full and effective
implementation of the Plan and the resolution”
(S/2023/473, para.2). In view of that, we must take full
advantage of the fact that the parties to the JCPOA have
committed to a diplomatic solution. It is imperative
to ensure that this positive standpoint is exploited
to its fullest potential. In that regard, Mozambique
echoes the Secretary-General’s call urging all parties
concerned to demonstrate a greater sense of urgency,
renew dialogue and engagement and strive to reach an
agreement on outstanding issues. We must make every
effort to achieve that noble goal, while emphasizing the
importance of conducting a diplomatic, constructive
and results-oriented dialogue on the matter during the
process. We believe that approach will contribute to
reducing tensions, building trust and paving the way
for the full implementation of the JCPOA.
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
disarmament is the only viable option for ensuring
sustainable international peace and security.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and Head
of the Delegation of the European Union Olof Skoog
for their briefings on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). I also thank Ambassador Vanessa Frazier,
Permanent Representative of Malta, in her capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
The fifteenth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2023/473)
and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
underscores our belief in the continuing relevance of the
Plan as the best diplomatic option for guaranteeing the
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. The
lack of progress with regard to the comprehensive and
effective implementation of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) remains a concern for the international
disarmament architecture generally and for nuclear
non-proliferation in particular. The worrisome
developments mentioned in the report and corroborated
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
draw attention to the need to ensure international
peace and security and to guard against nuclear war.
That is an overriding objective for which the Council
is responsible.
The JCPOA represents a significant step forward
in the common desire to make the world safer and
free of nuclear weapons. The Council must do more to
preserve that achievement and avoid any backsliding,
which would only increase the uncertainty surrounding
our collective security. We therefore call on all parties
to return to the negotiating table and to engage in
good faith, with a focus on dialogue and cooperation,
with a view to returning to the full implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and achieving the objectives of
nuclear non-proliferation that would guarantee lasting
peace in the region and the world.
It is important for each party to show commitment
and flexibility. We welcome the visit in March by
Director General Rafael Grossi, as well as the joint
declaration between the IAEA and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, which are encouraging signals on the road to
appeasement and dialogue. We also echo the SecretaryGeneral’s encouragement of the JCPOA participants

S/PV.9367

and the United States to remain determined to find a
diplomatic solution.
It is important to restore trust among the parties and
to refrain from any politicization of the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). In that respect, the
rapprochement between the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Saudi Arabia, as well as the indirect talks held in
mid-June in Oman between Iran and the United States,
are steps in the right direction.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the
importance my country attaches to the multilateral
nuclear non-proliferation regime, with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as its
central pillar, while reiterating our wish to see the
implementation of the agreement return to a positive
dynamic for all parties.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo, as well as the Secretariat for its
role in supporting implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). I also thank Ambassador Skoog for his briefing
and Ambassador Frazier for her briefing and work
as Facilitator.
After months of negotiations, viable texts were put
forward last year that provided Iran with the chance
to return all parties to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). Iran refused that opportunity and
has instead continued its nuclear escalation, thereby
threatening international peace and security and
demonstrating disregard for resolution 2231 (2015).
Iran’s enriched uranium stockpile currently exceeds
JCPOA limits by more than 21 times. Its enrichment
capabilities have expanded to over 2,500 powerful
advanced centrifuges suitable for nuclear weapons
purposes. Building that capacity has given Iran
irreversible gains in technical knowledge, which the
JCPOA sought to limit. Iran is also launching missiles
that could be capable of delivering nuclear weapons and
testing technologies directly applicable to intermediateand intercontinental-range ballistic missiles.
There is overwhelming evidence that Iran continues
to provide material support to Russia’s war of aggression
in Ukraine, supplying unmanned aerial vehicles
with a range of over 300 kilometres. It does so in the
knowledge that Russia uses them to target civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Iran has also continued to supply

23-1962321/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

increasingly complex weapons systems to the Houthis
in Yemen, in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). That
jeopardizes regional security and undermines regional
stability and prosperity.
The restrictions in resolution 2231 (2015) were
intended to build confidence in Iran as a responsible
international actor. transition day sunsets are due in
October, and it is clear that the trajectory envisioned
back in 2015 has not materialized. Iran will need to take
substantial steps to reverse its escalatory approach if it
is to start to rebuild that confidence.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Ambassador Skoog for their
briefings, as well as the Secretariat for its important
role in supporting the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) and, in particular, the fifteenth report of
the Secretary-General on the subject prepared for
today’s discussion (S/2023/473). I would also like to
thank Ambassador Frazier and her team for the briefing
and work as Facilitator.
We are extremely alarmed by the findings of the
Secretary-General’s latest report on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), in particular the violation by
Iran and Russia of the resolution’s annex B, paragraph
4. Those unlawful activities are not limited to the
region. Right now, those actions are directly affecting
peace and security in Europe. Since September 2022,
the Russian Federation has massively used the Iranian
Shahed-131, Shahed-136 and Mohajer-6 unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) in its full-scale war of
aggression against Ukraine, in particular as an element
of its terror strategy against the civilian population and
critical infrastructure.
As of today, more than 1,000 launches by the
Russian Federation of Iranian UAVs over the territory
of Ukraine have been recorded. All types of Iranian
UAVs that struck or were shot down over the territory
of Ukraine, as well as their debris, were thoroughly
disassembled and studied. According to the results of
those studies, Ukrainian investigators and independent
international experts identified evidence confirming
22/25

06/07/2023

the Iranian origin of the UAVs used by the Russian
Federation against Ukraine. The Armed Forces of
Ukraine also intercepted UAVs marked as Geran-1
and Geran-2. After detailed technical examination,
those UAVs appeared to be Shahed-131 and Shahed-136
respectively — capable of delivering payloads to a
range greater than 300 kilometres. They were simply
renamed with the Russian names Geran-1 and Geran-2.
Despite numerous official denials and statements,
Iran continues its transfers of UAVs to the Russian
Federation. They are then used by Putin’s regime not
only as a weapon on the battlefield, but as a method
of warfare against highly populated areas and critical
infrastructure in Ukraine. Moreover, the competent
authorities of Ukraine possess still more alarming
information about the intention of the Russian
Federation to continue further attacks on Ukraine
with more advanced Iranian ballistic missiles and
UAV systems.
The Government of Ukraine assesses that the
transfer of UAVs from Iran to the Russian Federation
constitutes a flagrant violation of the resolution 2231
(2015), in particular annex B, paragraph 4, of that
document. In line with the mandate of resolution 2231
(2015), Ukraine has asked multiple times on a bilateral
level, as well as in correspondence with the Office of the
Secretary-General, for United Nations experts to visit
Ukraine to inspect recovered UAVs of Iranian origin
in order to facilitate the resolution’s implementation.
Any further delay to the Organization’s comprehensive
consideration of the facts regarding violations of
Council resolutions by Iran and the Russian Federation
will undermine, if not discredit, the credibility
of the Council, as well as its ability to ensure the
implementation of its own resolutions.
Since, on 9 June, the United Nations team had not
visited Ukraine, we shared a document (S/2023/418)
containing the relevant evidence of the supply of the
Iranian-origin UAVs to the Russian Federation, which is
prohibited under resolution 2231 (2015). We once again
reaffirm our readiness to facilitate the respective visits
of the United Nations experts to Ukraine at the earliest
possible opportunity to study samples of the recovered
Iranian-origin UAVs that the Russian Federation uses
in their ongoing war against Ukraine. We also urge the
international community to reinforce the joint efforts
aimed at combating the uncontrolled transfer of those
items, which are prohibited under Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015).
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

Finally, if Russia insists that the photos with Iranian
drones are fake, why does it so resolutely oppose United
Nations inspections to corroborate its statements?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Geisler (Germany): I would like to express
my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Ambassador Frazier and Ambassador Skoog for their
briefings and their efforts to support and monitor the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
For the past four years, Iran’s violations of its
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) have undermined global peace and
security. The speed with which Iran has escalated
its nuclear programme is alarming. The discovery
of particles containing up to 83.7 per cent enriched
uranium in Fordow in January represents yet another
escalatory development that brings Iran dangerously
close to engaging in weapons-related activities. With
over 2,500 powerful advanced centrifuges, Iran has
expanded its stockpile of enriched uranium to more
than 21 times the JCPOA limit. Put differently, Iran
now possesses almost three times the amount of nuclear
material required for a nuclear explosive device.
Against that backdrop, it is imperative that the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is in a
position to promptly report any further such escalation.
Yet, for over two years, the Iranian denial of access
has blindsided the Agency and, with it, the whole
international community. Iran’s proclaimed efforts
to increase cooperation with the IAEA have fallen
markedly short of expectations. As emphasized by the
Director General in his most recent report, Iran must
promptly return to full and effective cooperation with
the IAEA.
Iran’s nuclear activities also warrant particular
scrutiny of its ongoing advances in space-launchvehicle technology and the testing of ballistic missiles.
Despite the restrictions under resolution 2231 (2015),
Iran continues to carry out launches using missiles
that could be capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
In a further blatant violation of resolution 2231 (2015),
Iran continues to transfer missiles and unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) to partners and proxies in the
region and beyond. With the transfer of such vehicles
to Russia and plans to establish a production facility
within Russia, Iran’s violations have reached a new
level of severity.

S/PV.9367

Iran can no longer deny full knowledge that
Russia has been using these UAVs against densely
populated areas in Ukraine to target cities and critical
infrastructure in order to terrorize the Ukrainian
population. We call upon Iran to halt immediately any
support of Russia’s war of aggression and recall that
indiscriminate attacks on civilians constitute a war
crime. We welcome the prospect of a visit by United
Nations experts to Ukraine, in line with the Government
of Ukraine’s request and past practice.
Germany regrets Iran’s consistent refusal to seize
multiple diplomatic opportunities to restore and fully
implement the JCPOA, the last of which was Iran’s
refusal to accept a proposal it had negotiated for weeks
in Vienna in August. Concrete and verifiable measures
are urgently required to de-escalate the situation and
pave the way for further steps. We call on Iran to
immediately re-establish full cooperation with the
IAEA and to live up to its commitments, as set out in
the joint statement of 4 March. We call on all States
to work together to address this critical situation and
safeguard international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the outset,
we would like to state our position clearly and on the
record regarding the participation of the representative
of the Republic of Ukraine in today’s meeting, under
the agenda item of non-proliferation, and focusing on
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA).
We strongly object to the presidency of the Council
extending an invitation to a Member State that has no
direct or indirect relevance to the agenda item of the
meeting. We perceive that action as neither constructive
nor in good faith. Instead, it appears to be a cynical
attempt to divert attention from the pressing matter
at hand — the implementation of the JCPOA — and
the failure of certain Western parties to fulfil their
obligations under the agreement.
Let me make it clear — this meeting and resolution
2231 (2015) have absolutely no connection to the
conflict in Ukraine. The invitation extended to the
representative of Ukraine for this meeting represents
an abuse of the process and a misuse of the Council’s
presidency, serving the political agendas of certain
States. Moreover, this action flagrantly contradicts
established practices of the Council and its provisional

23-1962323/25

S/PV.9367

Non-proliferation

rules of procedure and runs counter to the principles
outlined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Iran categorically rejects the unfounded allegations
made by Ukraine and maintains its impartial stance
on the Ukrainian conflict. We have patiently awaited
the alleged evidence from Ukraine, following the
preliminary meeting between Iranian and Ukrainian
experts. If the intention is truly to address and resolve
the issue at hand, it is crucial to refrain from employing
illegal and politically motivated measures. Instead,
Iran’s request should be acknowledged and earnestly
addressed in a constructive manner.
The use of the so-called “documents”, entailing
inconsistent photos and questionable open-source
information and abusing United Nations procedures
to release them as evidence of alleged violations,
as Ukraine and the United Kingdom have done, is
unprofessional, deceptive and unconstructive.
I must reiterate once again that the repeated
request to the Secretariat to conduct the so-called
“investigation” lacks a legal basis. Neither resolution
2231 (2015) nor the relevant note by the President of
the Security Council (S/2016/44) authorizes such an
unlawful mandate. Any finding or conclusion by the
Secretariat based on such illegal activities is null
and void.
It is quite evident that certain Council members are
deliberately attempting to divert international attention
away from the root causes of the current situation
concerning the implementation of the JCPOA and the
ongoing material violations of resolution 2231 (2015)
by the United States since its illegitimate withdrawal
from the agreement in 2018.
Consequently, we firmly declare that we do not
recognize the presence of Ukraine in this meeting,
and we have no intention of addressing the baseless
allegations put forth by the representative of Ukraine
or certain Member States against my country during
this meeting regarding the ongoing conflict in Ukraine.
Having clarified our position on the matter, I would
now like to address the substantive issue pertaining
to the agenda item, namely, the implementation of
the JCPOA.
We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Ambassador Frazier of Malta for their briefings.
I would like to begin with a phrase by the SecretaryGeneral, contained in his report (S/2023/473), describing
24/25

06/07/2023

the JCPOA as the best available option. Indeed, it is.
That is why today Council members unwaveringly
reaffirmed their resolute support for the restoration of
the JCPOA and called for its full implementation by
all sides as the only viable course of action. We hold
the view that, while the JCPOA might not have been
flawless and impeccable, it was undoubtedly the most
viable option at the time given the circumstances, and it
continues to be the optimal and valuable choice among
the available options.
Regrettably, certain members of the Council,
notably, the United States, have chosen to turn a blind
eye to reality and overlook the root causes contributing
to the challenges associated with the JCPOA. In
hypocritical behaviour, they blame and accuse Iran
without considering their own failures to uphold their
obligations. If any party should be blamed for the
JCPOA’s current situation, it is the United States for
its 2018 illegal unilateral withdrawal therefrom and the
re-imposition of all its sanctions against Iran based on
its notorious and yet failed “maximum pressure policy”.
Likewise, the European Union must also be blamed
for significant non-performance with their explicit
legal obligations under the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015). Since then, the United States has expressly and
aggressively forced all other United Nations States
Members to either violate resolution 2231 (2015) or
face severe punishment. That bullying, conduct by a
permanent member of the Council, is unprecedented.
In response to those instances of significant
non-compliance, Iran had no option other than to take
certain remedial measures in exercising its rights under
paragraphs 26 and 36 of the JCPOA. Iran’s objective
was simply to restore the delicate balance in reciprocal
commitments under the agreement. Today certain
Council members attempted to reverse the place of the
victim and the culprits and referred to Iran’s remedial
measures as if Iran were the party that withdrew from
the JCPOA. Taking remedial measures is our explicit
right and, unlike the United States illegal actions,
which have irreversible consequences, all our measures
are reversible as soon as the sanctions are lifted in a
verifiable manner. In addition, the Vienna talks are
stalled not because of Iran, but due to the lack of
political will by the United States and the E3, including
for its internal political considerations. We are still
prepared for the resumption of the negotiations, should
the other sides be ready to do the same.
23-19623

06/07/2023

Non-proliferation

While Iran is fully committed to its obligations under
the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and its Safeguards Agreement with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and continues its
cooperation with the Agency, certain claims against
Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme — obviously
based on disinformation disseminated by the Israeli
regime — serve no purpose other than putting
political pressure on Iran, which will lead nowhere.
In exercising its inalienable rights and committed to
its international obligations, Iran is fully determined
to vigorously pursue its peaceful nuclear activities,
including enrichment at various levels required, under
the monitoring and verification of the IAEA. Iran’s
nuclear programme has continuously been scrutinized
by the IAEA’s most robust monitoring and verification,
as repeatedly declared by different Directors Genera of
the Agency.
Our recent voluntary measures, in implementation
of the Iran-IAEA joint statement of 4 March 2023,
to ensure the continuity of the Agency’s knowledge
through installing surveillance cameras at centrifuge
manufacturing workshops is indeed a testament to our
continued constructive cooperation with the IAEA and
our commitment to transparency.
In addition, the IAEA recently found Iran’s
explanation regarding highly enriched uranium of a few
particles containing up to 83.7 per cent uranium-235
detected at one location to be satisfactory, with no
further questions on the matter. As such, significant
progress has been made on safeguards issues and, as
the IAEA recently confirmed, the concerns regarding
depleted uranium particles in one location have been
effectively addressed and resolved.
Instead of parrot-like repeating disinformation of
the Israeli regime on Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme
by certain Council members, they had been expected to
be courageous enough today to duly acknowledge the
positive outcomes of our constructive cooperation with
the Agency.
Given the purview and competence of resolution
2231 (2015) and the fact that the resolution has nothing
to do with regional subjects, referring to such issues is
an abuse of process. Iran is committed to preserving
regional peace and security through the active
involvement of all States of the region based on full
respect for international law, mutual respect, goodneighbourliness, cooperation and dialogue. Obviously,

S/PV.9367

the raising of regional issues by some Council members
is aimed only at diverting attention away from their
own massive military build-up in the region, as well
as the unbridled transfer of their highly sophisticated
weaponry to certain States of the region, and above all
to cover up the crimes and destabilizing practices of
the Israeli regime, whose clandestine weapons of mass
destruction programmes and military adventurism
continue to threaten the peace and security of our
region and beyond.
While our full observations on the SecretaryGeneral’s report on resolution 2231 (2015) are contained
in my letter to him dated 3 July 2023, I would like to
make a few comments.
The report once again fails to address the root
causes of the current situation regarding the JCPOA,
namely, the United States withdrawal therefrom. It
also remains silent on the United States and European
Union systematic material breach of their explicit
legal obligations under resolution 2231 (2015). The
Secretariat’s engagement in the so-called investigation
to allegedly examine the alleged violation of the
resolution is clearly beyond the mandate entrusted to
it by the Council through resolution 2231 (2015) and
note S/2016/44 by the Council’s President. According
to those two documents, the Secretariat has no mandate
whatsoever on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), other than providing administrative support
for the Security Council’s work. Therefore, those ultra
vires activities by the Secretariat are unacceptable and
shall be avoided.
I must again reiterate our consistent position that
Iran’s space and missile programmes fall outside the
purview or competence of resolution 2231 (2015).
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that pressure,
intimidation and confrontation are ineffective. If the
United States and the E3 demonstrate genuine political
will, tackling the current challenges of the JCPOA
is well within reach. For our part, we are prepared
to resume negotiations at the earliest opportunity to
restore the JCPOA and ensure its full implementation
by all.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

23-1962325/25
