A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/5
23 October 1995

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 36
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.3 and Corr.1 and Add.1)]
50/5. Commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the
end of the Second World War
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/25 of 2 December 1994,
Having considered item 36 of the agenda of its fiftieth session entitled
"Commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Second World
War",
Approves the Declaration in Commemoration of the Fiftieth Anniversary of
the End of the Second World War, the text of which is annexed to the present
resolution.
33rd plenary meeting
18 October 1995

ANNEX
Declaration in Commemoration of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the End of
the Second World War
1.
We, the representatives of the States Members of the United Nations,
have gathered at a solemn meeting of the fiftieth anniversary session of the
United Nations General Assembly to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the
end of the Second World War, which brought untold suffering and ravages to
humankind.

95-25652

/...

A/RES/50/5
Page 2

2.
In this World Year of Peoples’ Commemoration of the Victims of the
Second World War, we bow our heads before the tens of millions who perished in
their towns and villages or on the battlefields, or became victims of genocide
in the death camps, and remember with gratitude those who fought against
dictatorship, oppression, racism and aggression.
3.
We note that one of the most remarkable results of the end of the Second
World War was the establishment of a community based on new principles - the
United Nations, whose task is to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. We reaffirm the resolve of our States to adhere strictly to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 1/
4.
We note with satisfaction that today, now that many ideological barriers
have fallen and the "cold war" has ended, new opportunities are emerging for
building a non-violent world and a system of genuine global security with the
United Nations as the central element.
5.
We recall the tragedy of the Second World War and the unprecedented
suffering it inflicted upon various peoples and upon all of humanity. We are
fully aware of the vital necessity of making all possible efforts to put an
end to existing armed conflicts, to avert such conflicts in the future and to
overcome the remaining legacies of the Second World War as well as the
manifestations of political, economic and social inequality, and we call upon
the States of the world:
To reaffirm the commitment to refrain from the use or threat of
(a)
use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations;
(b)
To redouble their efforts to put an end to all conflicts and to
save future generations from the scourge of new wars, inter alia, by drawing
the lessons that emerge from the history of past conflicts;
To promote democracy and human rights and to support universal
(c)
access to culture;
(d)
To focus their efforts on the objective of creating conditions for
the general progress of humankind in larger freedom.
6.
The fulfilment of these commitments will be the best way to pay tribute
to those who fought for peace, freedom, democracy and human dignity and to
honour the memory of the victims of the Second World War. Only in this way
can we prevent new tragedies and ensure that all nations become a single
community living in peace, stability, cooperation and prosperity.

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).
