General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
R-1Julon
No.

Tltl•

Report of the United Nations Commission on Intemational
Trade Law (A/10420) ............................. .
3495 (XXX) R.eport of the Intemational Law Commission (A/10393) ... .
3496 (XXX) Succession of Sta.tes in rcspect of treaties (A/10462) ....... .
3497 (XXX) Question of diplomatic asylum (A/10384) ............... .
3498 (XXX) Report of the Committee on Relat:ions with the Host Country
(A/10429) ........................................ .
3499 (XXX) Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
on the Strengtheaing of the Role of the Organization
(A/10459) ........................................ .
3500 (XXX) Relpect for human righta in armed conflicta (A/10463) ..... .
3501 (XXX) Implementation by States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 and measures to
increase the number of parties to the Convention (A/10464)
3502 (XXX) United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
S~dy, Dissemination and Widtr Appreciation of Intemational Law (A/10421) ............................. .
Ollaer cleclelou
Measures to prevent intemational terrorism which endangers or takes innocent
human Mves or jeopardiz.es fundamental freedoms, and study of the underlYÚII causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of violence which lie in
misery, frustration, srievance and despair an• which cause some people
to sacriftce human lives, including their own, in an attempt to effect radical
c:han¡ea ............... ·········································
Resolutions adopted by the United Nations Confetence on the Representation
of States in Their Relations with Intemational Orgamzadons:
(a) R.esolu1ion relating to the observer status of national liberation movementa recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or by the
League of Arab States;
(b) R~l~tion i:eJ.ating .to the •PJ?li~tion of the Convention in future
acüviües of mtemat1onal organ1zaüons ......................... .

ltem

Date o/
aaoptlon

110
108
109
111

1S December 1975
15 December 1975
15 December 1975
15 December 1975

149
150

112

1S December 1975

151

113 and 29
114 and 70

15 December 1975
15 December 1975

152
153

115

15 December 1975

154

117

15 December 1975

154

116

15 December 1975

155

118

15 December 1975

155

3494 (XXX)

151
151

Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,

Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of intemational trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
intemational trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among ali States on a
basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in intemational trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of all peoples,
H aving regard for the need to take into account the
different legal systems in harmonizing the rules of international trade law,
Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board of the United Nations Conferenc:e on Trade
and Development, at its fifteenth session, took note with
appreciation 2 of the report of the United Nations Commission on Intemational Trade Law,

1 01/iclal Record, of the General Anembly, Thirtleth Sesslon, Supplemenl No.11 (A/10017).

para. 226.

3494 (XXX). Report of the United Nations
Commiuion on Intemational Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its eighth session, 1
Recalling its resolution 220S (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on Intemational Trade Law a,:id defined
the object and tenns of reference of the Commission,
and its previous resolutions conceming the reports of
the Commission on the work of its annual sessions,

2 lbld.,

149

Supplement No. 15 (A/10015/llev.1), part three,

ISO

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on lntemational Trade
Law on the work of its eighth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction that a draft convention
on the carriage of goods by sea has been prepared by a
working group of the United Nations Comrnission on
Intemational Trade Law and that this draft convention
has been transmitted to Governments and interested
intemational organizations for their comments;
4. Further notes with satisfaction that work on uniform rules governing the international sale of goods is
nearing completion and that in the near future a draft
convention on the intemational sale of goods will be
transmitted to Governments and interested intemational
organizations for their comments;
5. · Approves the decision of the United Nations
Commission on lntemational Trade Law to maintain
on its agenda the item conceming multinational enterprises and to keep that subject under review pending the
identification by the Commission on Transnational Corporations of specific legal issues that would be susceptible of action by the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for the international symposium on the teaching of intemational
trade law, held in connexion with its eighth session;
7. Recommends that the United Nations Comrnission on Intemational Trade Law should:
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention to
the topics to which it had decided to give priority,
namely, the intemational sale of goods, intemational
payments, intemational commercial arbitration and
intemational legislation on shipping;
( b) Continue to consider the advisability of preparing uniform rules governing the liability for damage
caused by products intended for or involved in international trade, in accordance with the decisions thereon
adopted by the Commission at its eighth session;
(e) Continue its work on training and assistance in
the field of intemational trade Iaw, taking into account
the special interests of the developing countries;
(d) Maintain close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
continue to collaborate with initemational organizations
active in the field of intemational trade law;
(e) Maintain liaison with the Commission on Transnational Corporatións with regard to the consideration
of legal problems that would be susceptible of action
by it;
(f) Continue to give specia\ consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(g) Keep its programme of work and working methods under review with the aim of further increasing thc
effectiveness of its work;
8. Calls upon the United Naitions Commission on
International Trade Law to take account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the sixth and seventh special sessions of the General Assembly that laid
down the foundatjons of the new international economic

order, bearing in mind the need for United Nations
organs to participate in the implementation of those
resolutions;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on Intemational Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its eighth session.
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3495 (XXX). Report of the lnternational
Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the lnitemational
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-seventh
session, 3
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective meaos of implementing the
purposes and principies set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of
the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principies of lnternational Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States,4 and
to give increa~ importance to its role in relations
among States,
Taking note with appreciation of the draft articles
prepared by the International Law Commission on State
responsibility, succession of States in respect of matters
other than treaties, the most-favoured-naition clause
and treaties concluded between States and intemational
organiza•tions or between international organizations,
Noting with satisfaction that the adoption by tbe
lntemational Law Commission of general goals towards which its efforts should be directed in the years
to come is a means of rationalizing further the organization and methods of work of the Commission,
l. Takes note of the report of the Intemational Law
Commission on the work of its twenty-seventh session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Intemational
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the lnternational Law Comrnission for 1976;
4. Recommends tha-t the Intemational Law Commission, in the light of the observations on its plan of
work made at the present session of the General Assembly, should:
(a) Complete at its twenty-eighth session the fust
reading of draft articles on the most-favoured-nation
clause;
( b) Continue on a high priority basis its work on
State responsibility, taking into account relevant General Assembly resolutions adopted at previous sessions,
with a view to completing the preparation of a first set
of draft articles on responsibility of States for intemationally wrongful acts at the earliest possible time and
take up, as soon as appropriate, the separate topic of
international liability for injurious consequences arising
out of acts not prohibited by intemational law;
(e) Proceed with the preparation on a priority basis
of draft articles on succession of States in respect of
matters other than treaties;
3 /bid., Supplement No. JO (A/10010/Rev.1 ).
4

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
