S/2019/262

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 March 2019
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2423 (2018), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2019 and requested me to report every three months on
its implementation, focusing on progress in taking forward the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali (S/2015/364 and S/2015/364/Add.1) and the efforts of
MINUSMA to support it. The present report contains updates on major developments
in Mali since my previous progress report (S/2018/1174) and my report of 4 March
2019 (S/2019/207) on the implementation of the measures referenced in paragraph 4
of resolution 2423 (2018).

II. Major political developments
2.
As noted in my previous report (S/2019/207), in recent months, the Government
of Mali and signatory armed groups have displayed a renewed commitment to
implementing the Agreement signed in 2015. The resumption of the constitutional
review process marked the most important development during the period under
review amid criticisms by the political opposition and disapproval by prominent
religious leaders of the Government.

A.

Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali
3.
The Agreement Monitoring Committee held three sessions during the period
under review. At its thirtieth session, on 17 December 2018, the Committee
acknowledged progress in the implementation of the Agreement, including with
respect to the operationalization of the interim authorities and the implementation of
the accelerated disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and integration process.
The Government reported that approximately $2.9 million had been allocated to the
operationalization of the interim authorities. The Government announced the
resumption of the constitutional review process, while initiating consultations with
human rights organizations and civil society on the projet de loi d’entente nationale.
The Committee also endorsed recommendations by the Malian parties to renew the

19-04201 (E)

270319

*1904201*

S/2019/262

mandate of the Carter Center as independent observer for the peace process and
established a working group, led by MINUSMA and the European Union, to identify
options to increase the participation of women in the peace process.
4.
The thirty-first session of the Agreement Monitoring Committee was held on
14 January, following the listing by the sanctions committee of one of its members,
Mohamed Ousmane Ag Mohamedoun, leader of the Coalition pour le peuple de
l’Azawad. The Committee reiterated its commitment to the full implementation of the
sanctions regime. Regarding the operationalization of interim authorities at the
district level, the parties reported that an additional $1. 6 million had been disbursed
to 21 of the 24 councils established, for administration and logistics.
5.
During the thirty-second session of the Agreement Monitoring Committee, on
18 February, the Government announced that both legislative elections and the
constitutional referendum were scheduled to be held on 9 June, followed by the
second round of legislative elections, on 30 June. The Committee condemned the
regulations and measures announced on 31 January by the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad in Kidal, including a ban on alcohol and the reinforcement
of the power of Islamic judges, which were regarded as a violation of the Agreement.
In response, the Coordination issued a press release in which it argued that its actions
had been misunderstood and reaffirmed its commitment to the Agreement.
6.
During the same meeting, the independent observer presented its third report on
the implementation of the Agreement, in which progress in 2018 was highlighted,
including a complete cessation of hostilities that enabled the holding of a peaceful
presidential election, the identification of 33,000 combatants eligible for the national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, the launch of the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and integration process and the creation
of a dedicated ministry to coordinate the implementation of the Agreement. It was
noted in the report, however, that the progress achieved had not yet translated into an
improvement in the living conditions of the populations in northern Mali. It was also
stressed that the constitutional review process was the cornerstone of the Agreement,
given that the implementation of key provisions would depend on it.
7.
Throughout the period under review, my Special Representative continued to
use his good offices and worked closely with the parties and other key stakeholders
to ensure that they remained committed to the process and continued efforts to
accelerate the implementation of the Agreement.
Other political developments
8.
Discussions on the review of the Constitution dominated political debates. The
Government established a committee of experts on constitutional reform on
14 January and a national consultation framework – a forum comprising
representatives of the Government, political parties, civil society and signatory
movements – on 17 January, following a request made by the President, Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, on 20 December 2018 to launch the constitutional review process in
a consensual and inclusive manner.
9.
On 4 February, President Keita met members of the committee of experts, in the
presence of the Prime Minister, Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, and reiterated the need
for an inclusive and consultative process. Two days later, at a press conference in
Bamako, the committee announced plans to hold consultations with all stakeholders
and populations throughout the country before submitting its proposals to the Prime
Minister on 1 April. The committee has since met the President of the Constitutional
Court and the President of the Supreme Court, members of parliament, the Haut
conseil des collectivités and representatives of political parties, among other
stakeholders. On 5 March, in Bamako, the committee launched a series of citizen
2/16

19-04201

S/2019/262

forums on the constitutional reform, followed by similar events in regions. The events
were attended by representatives of civil society, youth and women groups, political
parties and traditional and religious authorities.
10. Members of the national consultation framework have held several meetings
since its creation in January. Most of the major political parties, including the
opposition party Union pour la république et la démocratie, led by Soumaïla Cissé,
attended the first meeting, on 30 January, but boycotted the subsequent meetings.
Parties belonging to the ruling party coalition continued to attend the meetings. In a
statement issued on 1 February, the Union called for the holding of a high -level
political dialogue with the participation of a wide array of stakeholders on n umerous
institutional, political and electoral issues. Other opposition parties close to the Union
questioned the legitimacy of the framework, claiming that it was insufficiently
inclusive.
11. In response to criticism, on 28 February, the Prime Minister s igned another
decree to include all 197 political parties in the national consultation framework. In
addition, it is stipulated in the decree that the framework will be consulted on
questions related to the draft laws on the creation of administrative dist ricts and
territorial collectivities, revisions to the electoral law, draft laws on the number of
members of parliament, the calendar for elections and the constitutional referendum
and all questions regarding elections and the referendum.
12. The leader of the presidential majority, Bokary Tréta, held a series of meetings
with political party and platform leaders, including from the opposition, notably the
Front pour la sauvegarde de la démocratie, a coalition of opposition parties also led
by Mr. Cissé, on 12 February, and with the Coalition des forces patriotiques, on
19 February, as well as representatives of civil society groups, to garner support for
the constitutional review process.
13. On 14 February, President Keita and Mr. Cissé had a telephone co nversation,
followed by a series of meetings at the presidential palace on 26 February and in early
March, putting an end to months of a strained relationship. Both men agreed to tackle
the most pressing challenges facing Mali. President Keita has since co ntinued to hold
meetings with other opposition leaders, including Tiébilé Dramé, a close ally of
Mr. Cissé and the president of the Parti pour la renaissance nationale, on 6 March,
and Cheick Modibo Diarra, president of the Rassemblement pour le développem ent
du Mali, on 11 March.
14. My Special Representative intensified his engagement with the Government and
leaders across the political spectrum to ensure the constructive participation of all
actors in the political process and to help the parties to addr ess differences through
dialogue. MINUSMA provided technical support to the work of the committee of
experts.
15. On 10 February, Mahmoud Dicko, the President of Mali’s High Islamic Council,
and Bouye Haidara, leader of a Muslim community based in Nioro in Western Mali,
organized a rally in Bamako. An estimated 60,000 people, including some
representatives of the political opposition, participated. In their address, the religious
leaders called for the resignation of the Prime Minister.
Institutional measures
16. Since my previous progress report, there has been a decrease in the percentage
of civil administrators present at their duty stations in northern and central Mali, from
34 to 29 per cent, due mainly to security concerns. The Governors of Mopti, Gao,
Timbuktu, Kidal and Ménaka were present in their localities, while the Governor of
Taoudenni continued to operate from Timbuktu. Five district -level interim
19-04201

3/16

S/2019/262

administrations were installed in the regions of Kidal and Taoudenni, bringing the
total number to 21.
17. A modest increase, by 2.1 per cent, in the number of appointed judicial and
prison officials deployed in northern and central Mali was recorded, although
insecurity continued to cause absenteeism and the relocation of some staff.
18. On 20 February, the magistrates’ unions denounced the Government’s inability
to improve security conditions in parts of the country and called upon magistrates
throughout Mali who feel unsafe to relocate to Bamako or to more secured
jurisdictions. This followed the confirmation on 19 February by the Ministry of
Justice of the death of the President of the Niono Court (Ségou region), who was
abducted by unidentified armed men on 16 November 2017.
19. On 21 February, with MINUSMA logistical and technical support, a mo bile
court was held in Bourem, Gao region, marking a significant step in the effective
return of the justice sector in the region. Since 2012, actors in the formal justice
system have been absent in Bourem, rendering justice from Gao.
Defence and security measures
20. As outlined in my previous report (S/2019/207), 1,423 ex-combatants of
signatory armed groups, along with ex-combatants from non-signatory but compliant
armed movements, were registered for integration into the national army within the
framework of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
As a next step, they will undergo a three-month training in Koutiala, Séguéla and
Markala in southern Mali by the Malian defence and security forces, with the support
of MINUSMA and the European Union. Following completion of the training, these
former combatants will form part of the Malian army tasked with providing security
to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration operations and camps. Some
417 combatants of the Operational Coordination Mechanism are also scheduled to
participate in an additional phase of the accelerated, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.
21. On 23 December 2018, during a visit to Mopti region, the Prime Minister
announced the launch of disarmament initiatives for the Centre. On 5 February, the
National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission announced
that, as part of these programmes, it had pre-registered 5,000 combatants, including
members of self-defence groups, militias and repentant jihadists. As a first step, the
Commission indicated that it intended to support the reinsertion of 300 combatants
into civilian life and the integration of 300 combatants into the Malian defence and
security forces.
22. From 26 to 30 January, the Government invited members of the defence and
security forces who had deserted in 2012 to register at military facilities throughout
the country. In total, 494 former military personnel were registered. By 26 February,
453 military personnel had been transferred to three training centres, in Bamako,
Markala and Séguéla.
23. On 8 March, President Keita signed a decree announcing a military operation to
stop terrorist activities in parts of central and northern Mali. On the same day, the
Minister of Defence signed a decree establishing a battalion of special units. In
protest, on 15 March, the Coordination des mouvements de l ’Azawad announced that
it was suspending its participation in the national consultation framework and the
consultation framework of the signatory parties, a discussion forum of signatories to
the Agreement. The Coordination argued that the Government’s actions were contrary
to the spirit and letter of the Agreement.

4/16

19-04201

S/2019/262

B.

Extension of State authority and support for Malian defence and
security institutions
24. Since 15 December, the number of Malian defence and security forces deployed
to the Mopti region has increased from 1,178 to 1,316. The Mission provided training
to 103 personnel of the Malian defence and security forces, including 14 women, on
post-blast crime scene management, human trafficking, illegal migration and
transnational organized crime, strengthening their skills in countering terrorism and
serious organized crimes.
25. Coordinated patrols between MINUSMA and the national security forces
continued in northern Mali, although some did not materialize owing to the
insufficient deployment of Malian defence and security forces and the lack of fuel.
26. In keeping with the memorandum of understanding between MINUSMA and the
Government, the Mission continued to provide medical evacuation support to
members of the Malian armed forces.
27. On 18 December, 10 terrorism-related trials were completed. Eleven accused
persons were found guilty of terrorism-related crimes. Ten were given sentences
ranging from three years to life imprisonment, and one was acquitted. This brings to
20 the number of terrorism-related cases tried since the Specialized Judicial Unit to
Combat Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime became operational in 2017.
To date, 34 individuals have been tried, resulting in 30 convictions and 4 acquittals.
28. MINUSMA renewed its partnership agreement with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to support the Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat
Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime. Within this framework, the Mission
and UNODC mentored 6 investigating magistrates and 42 investigators, and trained
magistrates, clerks and investigators on case management and terrorism
investigations.
29. On 1 March, the Mission supported the adoption of an integrated security plan
and the organization of a simulation exercise in Koulikoro prison, which hosts high risk prisoners, including terrorist suspects. This was the first session in a series of
exercises to be replicated in Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions.

C.

Regional developments
30. As highlighted in my previous report (S/2019/207), the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel has resumed its operations in Mali. Since 15 January, it has led
three operations in its Sectors West, Centre and East, while continuing preparations
for the establishment of its temporary headquarters in Bamako. On 21 January,
following the meeting of its Defence and Security Committee, the Group of Five
established a technical commission to draft a status-of-forces agreement among its
member States.
31. On 5 February, the Group of Five for the Sahel held its fifth o rdinary session of
the Heads of State conference, in Ouagadougou, following which Burkina Faso
assumed the presidency. In a communiqué, the Group reiterated its commitment to
further mobilizing its own resources, while calling upon the international commun ity
to respect the commitments made during the donor conference for the Sahel, held in
Brussels on 23 February 2018, and at the conference to support the Group of Five ’s
priority investment programme, held in Nouakchott on 6 October 2018. Lastly, the
Group of Five called upon the Security Council to consider placing the Joint Force
under Chapter VII operation and for closer cooperation with the United Nations.

19-04201

5/16

S/2019/262

III. Major security developments
32. The security situation in northern Mali remained complex, while it continued to
deteriorate in the Centre, and in Koulikoro region in the West. Attacks by terrorist
groups continued to target Malian defence and security forces, MINUSMA and
international forces. Many of these attacks, including the attack on 20 Ja nuary against
a MINUSMA base in Aguelhok, during which 11 peacekeepers were killed and 26
were wounded, were claimed by the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims.

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
33. While northern Mali recorded the most significant asymmetric attacks by
terrorist groups, 37 of a total of 61 took place in the Centre and four in Koulikoro, in
the West, including the complex attack on 24 February against the camp of the Malian
armed forces, which houses the capacity-building programme of the European Union
military mission to contribute to the training of the Malian armed forces.
34. In the North, MINUSMA continued to be among the primary targets of such
attacks. On 21 December 2018, five rockets were launched at the MINUSMA camp
in Ménaka. Four landed inside the camp, resulting in minor injuries to 12 formed
police unit officers. One United Nations helicopter was damaged.
35. On 20 January, heavily armed elements aboard a dozen vehicles attacked the
Mission’s base in Aguelhok, Kidal region. Assailants sabotaged the
telecommunications networks, exploded a suicide vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device, opened fire and launched mortar bombs. Three of the bombs struck
the camp. The peacekeepers’ response was robust: they repelled the attack, pursued
the assailants and protected civilians in the area. A total of 10 peacekeepers were
killed and 26 wounded, 14 of them seriously. One of them later succumbed to his
injuries. Three assailants were killed and one suspect was captured. On the same day,
the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims claimed responsibility for the attack,
stating that it was carried out in retaliation for the visit of the Prime Minister of Israel
to Chad on the same day and the resumption of diplomatic relations between Israel
and Chad.
36. On 4 February, the MINUSMA camp in Ménaka came under indirect fire from
unidentified assailants. Two rockets exploded inside the camp, causing no damage.
This was the third attack carried out against the camp since Sept ember 2018.
37. The highest number of asymmetric attacks was recorded in the Centre of Mali.
Twenty-eight attacks took place in the Mopti region and four in the Ségou region.
Four attacks were reported in the Koulikoro region, in western Mali. Most of the
attacks in the Centre targeted the Malian defence and security forces, including 22 in
Mopti and 4 in Ségou.
38. Three attacks were recorded in the West, in Koulikoro, including one, on
24 February, against a camp of the Malian armed forces that hosts the European Union
military mission programme. Two vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices
exploded outside the camp after the attackers had been prevented from breaching its
perimeter. On 26 February, the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims claimed
responsibility for the attack.
39. Overall, Malian defence and security forces remained the primary victims of
asymmetric attacks (36). A total of 49 of their soldiers were killed and 49 were
injured, compared with 28 killed and 47 injured in the previous period. The Group
for the Support of Islam and Muslims claimed 18 asymmetric attacks during the
reporting period, including 11 against Malian defence and security forces, 4 against

6/16

19-04201

S/2019/262

MINUSMA, 1 against the European Union military mission and 2 against signat ory
and non-signatory armed groups.
40. In response, Malian armed forces launched several operations in the Centre to
disarm militias and enhance security. On 5 January, Malian armed forces and
international forces conducted a joint operation in Douentza d istrict, Mopti region,
resulting in approximately 20 presumed terrorists killed and 5 others arrested. On
10 January, Malian armed forces conducted a counter-terrorist operation in Mopti
district, killing 20 presumed terrorists.
41. On 21 February, the French operation Barkhane reported the death of the
terrorist commander, Yahia Abu Hammam, during an operation conducted in the
Timbuktu region. Yahia Abu Hammam, also known as Djamel Okacha, was one of
the founding members of the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims.
42. On 22 February, three peacekeepers were killed and one other injured after being
stopped at a checkpoint near Sibi, some 50 km south of Bamako, as they travelled in
a hired vehicle, bringing to 17 the number of peacekeepers killed durin g the reporting
period. A total 46 peacekeepers were injured during the same period, a significant
increase over the 2 peacekeepers killed and 42 injured in the previous reporting
period. No MINUSMA contractors were killed or injured, compared with three
contractors killed and nine injured during the last reporting period.
43. The planting of improvised explosive devices, in particular along the main
communication axes, continued to constitute a major security threat. In the Centre,
the frequency of improvised explosive device incidents more than tripled, from 29 in
2017 to 97 in 2018, while the North continued to be affected by such incidents (101
in 2017 and 116 in 2018).
44. Although the Malian defence and security forces and MINUSMA continue to be
the main target of asymmetric attacks, in 2018, civilians were the most affected,
registering 234 victims (39 per cent) of a total of nearly 600, almost three times as
many as in the whole of 2017.

B.

Protection of civilians
45. Civilians continued to be victims of targeted and indirect violence, in particular
in the Centre. In this part of the country, activities of violent extremist groups and the
increase in intercommunal violence constituted the two main threats to civilians.
Intercommunal violence occurred primarily between the Dogon and Fulani
communities in Koro and Bankass districts and between the Fulani and Bambara
communities in Djenne district. There were 267 incidents, resulting in the deaths of
225 civilians and injuries to 149 others, as well as 130 reported abductions of
civilians, compared with the previous period, which registered 109 incidents,
108 civilian fatalities, including 1 child, and 43 injuries, including 5 children and
1 woman.
46. One of the deadliest incidents occurred on 1 January in Koulogon-Peul village,
in the Bankass district of Mopti region, where 37 Fulani civilians, including 1 woman
and 4 children, were killed. National judicial authorities investigated the incident and
have begun the prosecution of the identified suspects, with MINUSMA support. This
is the first time that judicial authorities have thoroughly investigated an
intercommunal conflict of this magnitude in a remote area, demonstrating the
commitment of the Malian judicial system to bringing to justice those r esponsible for
crimes related to an intercommunal conflict.

19-04201

7/16

S/2019/262

47. In the North, an increase in incidents affecting civilians was recorded in Ménaka
region. A total of 49 civilians were killed and 4 injured in eight incidents, compared
with 41 killed and 19 injured during the previous reporting period.
48. In Ménaka and Gao regions, in particular Ansongo district, presumed members
of the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara attacked villages and markets and clashed
with signatory and dissident armed groups, including the Groupe d’autodéfense des
Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés and the Mouvement pour le salut de l ’Azawad. On
19 December, radical armed elements killed six Dawsahak civilians at the market of
Abougoulou, Menaka district. A confrontation ensued from that attack between
Mouvement and Groupe combatants in the village of Tigezifi. On 15 January, an
ambush against Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad-Dawsahak in Inékar West and
Taghatert resulted in 26 civilian deaths. On the same day, radical armed elemen ts
stormed Amaloulaou village, Ansongo district, before engaging in clashes with
Groupe fighters based in the village. One Dawsahak child died during the attack. On
1 February, a Dawsahak camp in Ti-n-azir, Ansongo district, was attacked by radical
armed elements. Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad combatants fought back the
assailants. Eight civilians were killed during the attack.
49. In response to the deteriorating security situation in the Centre, and as requested
by the Security Council, from 1 February to 15 March, a MINUSMA team comprising
civilian, military and police components launched a campaign to protect civilians,
interacted with communities throughout the region and facilitated meetings of
traditional judicial authorities to begin the reconciliation process between the Dogon
and Fulani communities.
50. In the second half of December 2018, the first 32 municipal reconciliation
committees were established in the northern and central regions. These bodies are
part of the national reconciliation structure of the Ministry of Social Cohesion, Peace
and National Reconciliation and will fall under the purview of the regional
reconciliation teams, in support of local conflict management efforts.
51. In the North, MINUSMA supported the implementation of a series of
community dialogues in the regions of Kidal, Timbuktu, Taoudenni, Gao and Ménaka
to address ongoing conflicts. The local dialogues were aimed at strengthening the
capacities of the communities concerned in conflict analysis and conflict r esolution.
A total of 26 of 60 dialogues have been conducted to date, benefiting 814 participants,
including 148 women.
52. MINUSMA continued its reconciliation efforts in northern Mali, including
through support for the rehabilitation of the country’s cultural heritage. In this regard,
the Mission supported the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) in the installation, in February 2019, of the Monument of
Al-Farouk in the Square of Independence of Timbuktu. Bringing back the statue of
Timbuktu’s patron and protector, which was destroyed in 2012, has a strong symbolic
value for communities, strengthening resilience and contributing to national
reconciliation and consolidating a culture of peace.
53. As part of MINUSMA activities to protect civilians from explosive hazards, a
total of 9,579 community members, including 4,561 women, participated in education
and awareness-raising sessions on the risks of explosives in Mopti, Ségou, Gao,
Timbuktu and Kidal regions. In January, the Mission coordinated with the Mine
Action Service to launch a radio campaign to prevent risks associated with explosive
devices in Gao and Timbuktu regions.

8/16

19-04201

S/2019/262

C.

Mine action, weapons and small arms
54. In an effort to enhance the national capacity to mitigate explosive threats,
MINUSMA trained 27 Malian military engineers in explosive search and detection
activities and 58 Malian police personnel on explosive risk awareness ahead of their
deployment to secure national borders. In addition, 11 personnel from the Malian
defence and security forces were trained as instructors on improvised explosive
device threat awareness. Malian instructors previously trained by MINUSMA
delivered the first decentralized training in weapons and ammunition management to
18 Malian defence and security personnel, with limited mentoring support, in Sévaré,
Mopti region.

IV. Human rights situation
55. MINUSMA continued to document instances of serious human rights violations
and abuses, most of which were recorded in the Centre and along the border with
Burkina Faso and the Niger. Overall, there were 79 cases of serious human rights
violations and abuses involving at least 422 victims, including at least 24 women and
11 children, compared with the 90 cases and 163 victims reported during the previous
period. A total of 54 cases occurred in Mopti region, 10 in Timbuktu region, 4 each
in Gao, Segou and Ménaka regions, and 1 each in Kidal, Kayes and Koulikoro
regions.
56. Community self-defence groups were responsible for the highest number of
cases (35) of human rights abuses, including 17 abuses of the right to life and 7 cases
of forced displacement, 6 cases of abduction, 3 abuses of the right to physical
integrity, 1 abuse of the right to food and 1 abuse of the right to pro perty. The Group
for the Support of Islam and Muslims and other terrorist groups were responsible for
31 cases, including 12 abuses of the right to life, 11 cases of abduction, 5 abuses of
the right to education, 2 abuses of the right to physical integrity and 1 case of forced
displacement. Signatory armed groups were responsible for six abuses, including two
abuses of the right to life, two abuses of the right to physical integrity, one abduction
and one abuse of the right to property.
57. The Malian defence and security forces were responsible for seven human rights
violations, including one case of extrajudicial execution, four cases of torture or ill treatment and one case of unlawful arrest and detention.
58. MINUSMA continued to support the efforts of the Government in the efforts to
combat impunity. On 15 January, the Mission presented the conclusions of its human
rights fact-finding mission in Koulogon-Habé commune to the Minister of Justice,
who reported on the arrest of 14 suspects and the opening o f a criminal investigation
before the Tribunal de grande instance in Mopti. MINUSMA and the Ministry agreed
upon a criminal investigation support framework for this incident. The Mission also
provided technical support to the criminal chain entities in Mop ti on issues specific
to intercommunal conflicts to address the increasing number of criminal proceedings
in the Mopti region, notably in remote areas with limited access to judicial authorities.
Criminal investigations are yet to be opened in the Ménaka region, where violent
extremist groups and non-signatory armed groups have killed at least 80 civilians
since 12 December 2018.
59. The Mission also investigated cases of contemporary forms of slavery and
associated human rights abuses in Kayes region. Following MINUSMA advocacy, the
Malian authorities issued a communiqué on 15 January condemning the practice, and
judicial authorities opened criminal investigations.

19-04201

9/16

S/2019/262

60. On 20 December, the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission opened its
regional antenna in Kidal. As at 22 February, it had received 119 testimonies. The
Commission’s national investigations team became operational on 19 March and will
process the 11,396 testimonies received by 7 February.
61. The Independent Expert on the situation of hu man rights in Mali conducted his
third visit to the country between 3 and 9 February, including to Bamako and Mopti
region. Commissioners of the International Commission of Inquiry conducted a
second visit to Mali between 25 February and 12 March. They travelled to Gao, Kidal,
Mopti and Timbuktu regions.
62. MINUSMA provided training on human rights for 676 members (62 women) of
the Malian defence and security forces, 654 members (239 women) of civil society
organizations, 46 members, including 2 women, of the Malian justice system, and 14
staff members of the Truth, Justice, and Reconciliation Commission. From 11 to
16 February, the Mission, together with the International Institute of Human Rights René Cassin Foundation and the Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom,
organized the sixth edition of its annual training session on international criminal law,
international human rights law and refugee law. The session benefited nearly 102
persons from various countries and various academic and professional ba ckgrounds,
including 35 participants (7 women) from Mali. More than 684 participants, including
some 300 Malians, have already benefited of the training since 2014.
63. The national task force on monitoring and reporting verified 25 grave violations
against children. Nine were killed and four maimed in Mopti, Timbuktu and Kidal
regions, and eight were separated from armed groups in Mopti, Gao and Timbuktu
regions and are now following reintegration programmes in Bamako and Gao. There
was one case of denial of humanitarian access and three of attacks against schools
and hospitals.
64. Between 15 and 18 January, in partnership with the Malian Human Rights
Association, the Mission trained 15 judges on national and international protection
mechanisms in relation to gender-based and conflict-related sexual violence.
65. From 25 February to 1 March, my Special Representative for Sexual Violence
in Conflict visited Mali, where she met President Keita, the Minister of Women,
Children and Family Welfare, the Minister of Justice and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. She also engaged with survivors of sexual violence to deepen her
understanding of their plight, and with community and religious leaders. During the
visit, she shared with authorities the preliminary findings of her assessment of the
judicial response to conflict-related sexual violence committed in 2012–2013. The
visit culminated in the signing of a joint communiqué on the prevention of and
response to conflict-related sexual violence in Mali.

V. Humanitarian situation
66. The humanitarian situation remained alarming during the reporting period. As
of February, 2.4 million people needed food assistance and 7.2 million people, mostly
in the North and Centre, remained highly vulnerable to shocks, in partic ular conflict
and climate-induced factors such as land degradation and extreme rainfall patterns.
Pastoral and agropastoral communities, whose livelihoods have deteriorated
following years of drought, remain especially vulnerable to food insecurity.
67. As of February, 123,000 people were displaced inside Mali, compared with
40,000 at the same period in 2018. Intercommunal conflict and rising insecurity in
the North, in particular in the Centre, increased the numbers significantly, leading to

10/16

19-04201

S/2019/262

a loss of traditional livelihoods, heightened vulnerability and strained resources of
host communities.
68. Prevailing insecurity continues to hamper the deployment of personnel
delivering essential social services such as health care and education services. In
addition, the destruction of health infrastructure in conflict-affected areas has
restricted the population’s access to health, including vaccinations and maternal
health care. There are currently only 3.14 health workers per 10,000 people in the
northern and central regions, well below the World Health Organization (WHO)
standards of 23 health workers per 10,000 people and even below the national average
of 10 health workers per 10,000 people.
69. A total of 827 schools remained closed in Mali, including 513 in Mopti, 77 in
Timbuktu, 74 in Gao, 77 in Ménaka, 36 in Kidal, 30 in Ségou and 20 in Koulikoro,
leaving approximately 244,000 children out of school and with no access to
education, compared with 716 closed schools, affecting 213,800 children, in the
previous reporting period. School closures were linked mainly to insecurity and direct
threats by extremist armed groups imposing religious practices, triggering the
withdrawal of teachers and negatively affecting children’s access to education.

VI. Economic development
70. On 27 December 2018, as part of its efforts to implement the Agreement, the
Government operationalized its sustainable development fund, with a $72 million
endowment provided for in the 2018 national budget.
71. MINUSMA approved 38 quick-impact projects for basic public services,
livelihoods and employment generation, and small infrastructure construction, in
support of efforts to strengthen national institutions and communities. The Mission
also approved three projects proposed by UNESCO intended to strengthen social
cohesion and peacebuilding.
72. Through its trust fund in support of peace and security in Mali, MINUSMA
allocated $750,000 to three community security projects in Timbuktu, Gao and
Ménaka. Another $670,000 was allocated to three projects in Mopti, two of which are
aimed at improving access to information and one, entitled “Health as a vector for
peace” and implemented by WHO, which is linked to the broader goals of
strengthening social cohesion and reconciliation. Implemented i n partnership with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a total of $295,989, two projects
aimed at improving water access in support of the returning refugee population in
Goundam and Niafunké districts in Timbuktu region were handed over to the
authorities. The Mission also approved two projects from its programmatic funding
to strengthen decentralized and interim authorities in the North and Centre on
31 December 2018.
73. The Peacebuilding Fund launched two cross-border projects (Mali-Burkina Faso
and Mali-the Niger) to promote the political participation of and employment for
young people. The two projects promote conflict prevention and management in local
communities and the participation of young people in decision -making mechanisms
and support trust-building measures between local communities, the defence and
security forces and actors of the penal chain by integrating human rights into their
operations.

19-04201

11/16

S/2019/262

VII. United Nations strategic frameworks and integration plans
74. As I noted in my previous report (S/2019/207), under the guidance of my Special
Representative and in collaboration with the United Nations country team in Mali,
the United Nations Integrated Strategic Framework has been finalized and endorsed.
It sets out the United Nations overall vision and joint priorities in Mali, while
supporting strengthened coordination and promoting integration among all United
Nations actors. Following its finalization and endorsement, these act ors are now
taking steps to align their strategies and activities to the Framework.

VIII. Assessment of the performance of Mission troops
75. As requested in resolution 2423 (2018), MINUSMA continued to monitor the
performance of its personnel. Since November 2017, the leadership of the MINUSMA
force has submitted 33 assessments of units against a set of criteria, including support
for mandate implementation, training and discipline and the sustai nability of
logistical support. On average, assessed units were found to perform satisfactorily.
76. During the reporting period, three units assessed were found to perform below
satisfactory levels. The primary area requiring improvement is related to the lack of
required equipment and spare parts for equipment, including armoured personal
carriers and mine-protected vehicles. Nevertheless, since February, some contingents
have acquired the needed equipment, including armoured personnel carriers, which
has improved their operational capacity. MINUSMA and the Secretariat continue to
engage with troop-contributing countries and other partners to overcome persistent
shortfalls.

IX. Capacities of the Mission
Military
77. As at 11 March, 13,167 military personnel, including 38 military observers, 441
staff officers and 12,688 contingent personnel, were deployed of an authorized 13,289
personnel, including 40 military observers, 486 staff officers and 12,763 contingent
personnel. Women accounted for 3.2 per cent of military personnel.
78. MINUSMA is taking steps to implement the recommendations of the military
capabilities study conducted from 22 October to 2 November 2018, including the
establishment of a new military sector in Mopti, in line with the request of the
Security Council for the Mission to help to address the security situation in the Centre
of Mali.
79. While the MINUSMA force is approaching full operational capabilities, the
Mission continues to lack military aviation assets, namely, round -the-clock casualty
evacuation, utility and tactical helicopters. In the Centre, MINUSMA has deployed a
commercial round-the-clock casualty evacuation helicopter to Mopti as a substitute.
In addition, as stated above, the Mission also lacks contingent -owned armoured
personnel carriers, including mine-protected vehicles, which limits the operational
reach of some Mission patrols, thereby slowing the pace of mandate implementation.
Police
80. As at 11 March, 1,744 police personnel were deployed, including 312 individual
police officers, of whom 14.5 per cent were women, and 1,432 formed police unit
personnel, of whom 9.97 per cent were women, of an authorized 1,920 police

12/16

19-04201

S/2019/262

personnel comprising 345 individual police officers and 1,575 formed police unit
personnel. The MINUSMA police force continues to require specialized expertise,
through the deployment of individual police officers, in the areas of strategic
planning, project management, forensics, investigations, community-oriented
policing, security sector reform, counter-terrorism and serious organized crime. In
line with the system-wide strategy on gender parity and the uniformed gender parity
strategy 2018–2028, there is a need for greater female representation in the
MINUSMA police component.
Civilian personnel
81. As at 1 February, 86 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been deployed,
including 90 per cent of international staff, 79 per cent of United Nations Volunteers
and 84 per cent of national staff. Women held 26 per cent of the international posts,
34 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions and 19 per cent of national staff
posts.
Camp construction and securing supply routes
82. Two combat convoy companies were deployed in Mopti and Gao, in addition to
the two companies already deployed, to provide enhanced escort capability of
logistical convoys for all the Mission’s main supply routes.
83. MINUSMA continued to maintain all its installations and camps. Construction
in all regions progressed. All civilians and 95 per cent of troops are accommodated in
prefabricated buildings. Camps in Mopti are being expanded to accommodate
additional personnel. Frequent attacks against the Mission required regular
renovations to damaged premises, services and amenities.
Environment
84. MINUSMA continued its efforts to minimize its environmental impact by
improving wastewater treatment. During the reporting period, the Mission installed a
total of 10 wastewater treatment plants in Bamako, Mopti, Ménaka and Gao. These
plants have the capacity to recycle 300,000 litres of wastewater per day, which
significantly reduces the Mission’s consumption of potable water.

X. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
85. Efforts continued to improve the safety and security of MINUSMA personnel,
including through enhancements to the protection of the Mission’s camps. Uniformed
personnel continued to receive training on improvised explosive device threat
mitigation. Over the past year, the ability of MINUSMA troops to detect improvised
explosive devices has continued to improve, with more than 50 per cent of items
found and cleared in 2018, nearly double of the 23.5 per cent from 2017.
86. The review of the standard operating procedures for medical and casualty
evacuation was completed during the reporting period, incorporating best practices
and lessons learned, while decentralizing the approval procedures for evacuations
during pre-planned military operations.
87. In its efforts to deter potential attacks by prosecuting perpetrators, the Mission
provided logistical, technical and liaison support to the Specialized Judicial Unit to
Combat Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime towards the investigation of
the attack against the MINUSMA camp in Aguelhok on 20 January. The Mission
initiated the development of standard operating procedures to enhance the collection
of relevant evidence and their transmission to the Specialized Judicial Unit.
19-04201

13/16

S/2019/262

88. A total of 122 MINUSMA personnel have died as a result of malicious acts since
the establishment of the Mission in 2013.

XI. Conduct and discipline
89. No allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded during the
reporting period. The Mission continued to implement the three-pronged strategy to
assist victims and prevent exploitation and abuse, including enforcement measures,
training and outreach activities to inform personnel and the local population about the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. Efforts
continue to broaden the awareness of local population regarding sexual exploitation
and abuse through community-based networks and engagement with national actors.

XII. Observations
90. The efforts made by President Keita and his Cabinet to prioritize the
constitutional review process attest to the renewed commitment of and added focus
by the Malian parties to the implementation of the Agreement since the presidential
elections of 2018. The constitutional review is an indispensable step towards passing
critical political and institutional reforms envisaged in the Agreement. These reforms
will lay the groundwork for a unified nation and a more peaceful and stable Mali. In
this regard, I welcome the resumption of dialogue between President Keita and
Mr. Cissé. Only joint efforts will overcome the acute challenges currently facing
Mali.
91. The committee of experts and the national consultation framework established
by the Government earlier in 2019 will play an essential role in formulating concrete
and meaningful reform proposals, in line with the Agreement and taking into account
the views of the people and communities of Mali. I reiterate my call upon all Malian
political and civil society leaders to actively participate in and contribute
constructively to these important deliberations. I encourage the Government to
continue to build on lessons from previous unsuccessful constitutional reform
attempts, while ensuring an inclusive and transparent constitutional review process.
My Special Representative will continue to work with all sides to ensure that
differences are addressed through dialogue.
92. I remain concerned about the security situation in Mali and the complex threat
environment in which MINUSMA continues to operate. These challenges
notwithstanding, I am convinced that MINUSMA continues to play a critical role in
support of the Government and the parties to implement their commitments under the
Agreement, while providing essential support to national authorities in addressing
daunting challenges and preventing extremist armed groups from taking control of
areas in northern Mali, where there is little or no State authority. I am proud of the
MINUSMA peacekeepers who continue to implement the Mission’s mandate under
extremely difficult circumstances and at great sacrifice and personal risk. I condemn
in the strongest terms continued attacks targeting innocent civilians, United Nations
peacekeepers, Malian defence and security forces and international partners.
93. I am deeply saddened by the death of 18 peacekeepers from Chad, Guinea and
Sri Lanka who lost their lives in 2019 as a result of malicious acts. I express my
heartfelt condolences to the families of the bereaved, their Governme nts and the
people of their countries. Acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable. I call upon
the international community to redouble its efforts to assist the Government of Mali,
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the French arm y in efforts to
combat terrorism. I also call upon all parties to reject and combat acts of terrorism,
14/16

19-04201

S/2019/262

regardless of their motivation. In line with its commitments, the Secretariat continues
to do its utmost, under the framework of my Action for Peacekeepi ng initiative, to
improve the safety and security of personnel and the protection of peacekeepers in
this challenging operating environment, and to support the Malian judicial authorities
in the investigation and prosecution of those crimes. I reiterate my call upon troopcontributing and police-contributing countries to adhere to their obligations and to
ensure that their contingents who deploy to Mali are adequately equipped and
protected. I also reiterate my call upon the signatory armed groups in northe rn Mali
to step up efforts to prevent attacks against civilians, the Malian defence and security
forces, MINUSMA peacekeepers and its partners.
94. I am particularly concerned about the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in central Mali and the alarming increase in the number of civilians killed.
The increasing presence of and attacks by extremist armed groups and the increase in
community violence and self-defence groups affiliated with different communities
provide for an explosive situation, with civilians bearing the brunt of violence. The
violence has reached unprecedented levels, overtaking in large part the capacity of
century-old dispute resolution mechanisms. I call upon the Government to intensify
efforts to address the situation in the Centre with the support of the international
community, including through implementing its integrated security plan for the
Centre.
95. Longer-term solutions to stem the violence in the Centre, however, are political
in nature and must be accompanied by initiatives furthering justice and reconciliation.
I therefore call upon the Government to step up efforts to bring to justice the
perpetrators of violence. I commend the efforts of the Government aimed at launching
peaceful disarmament initiatives in central Mali. At the same time, it will be important
to ensure that such geographically targeted initiatives be clearly distinguished from
the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, the
parameters of which were determined under the Agreement. Communicating this
distinction would help to manage expectations and avoid confusion among the
population. I encourage the Government to consider approaches to reduce community
violence, including programming to prevent the recruitment into vi olent extremist
groups and on weapons and ammunition management, which MINUSMA stands
ready to support.
96. The human rights and humanitarian situations remain worrisome. I welcome the
determination of the Government to bring the perpetrators of the massac re in
Koulogon-Peul on 1 January, where 37 civilians were killed, to justice, resulting in
14 arrests. A similar response must follow the many cases of human rights abuses
documented in the Centre, in Ménaka region, and in the Gourma area. In these
locations, self-defence and groups and violent extremist armed groups have
committed several serious human rights abuses. It will be equally important to step
up efforts to address the humanitarian situation. At least 123,000 people remain
displaced in Mali. This is three times more than in 2018, while more than 1 million
people have limited or no access to basic services, owing to security constraints,
among other factors.
97. Lastly, I wish to commend my Special Representative, Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
for his outstanding leadership and express my appreciation to the civilian and
uniformed personnel of the United Nations system in Mali for their tireless efforts
and sacrifices in one of the most challenging environments. My gratitude also goes to
Algeria, as a lead mediator, the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union and other regional organizations, multilateral and
bilateral partners, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
non-governmental organizations and all other partners for their steadfast commitment
to and invaluable support for peace in Mali.
19-04201

15/16

S/2019/262

Map
16/16

Annex

19-04201
