S/PRST/2015/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 March 2015
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7411th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 March 2015, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions 2014 (2011), 2051 (2012),
2140 (2014), 2201 (2015), and 2204 (2015) and presidential statements of
15 February 2013 and 29 August 2014.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen, and its
commitment to stand by the people of Yemen.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the efforts of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and commends its engagement in assisting the political
transition in Yemen.
“The Security Council supports the legitimacy of the President of Yemen,
Abdo Rabbo Mansour Hadi, and calls upon all parties and Member States to
refrain from taking any actions that undermine the unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen, and the legitimacy of the
President of Yemen.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for, and commitment to,
the efforts of the Special Advisor of the Secretary-General on Yemen,
Mr. Jamal Benomar, and to the UN-brokered negotiations.
“The Security Council condemns the ongoing unilateral actions taken by
the Houthis, which undermine the political transition process in Yemen, and
jeopardize the security, stability, sovereignty and unity of Yemen and expresses
deep concern by the insufficient implementation of resolution 2201 (2015).
“The Security Council deplores that the Houthis have not implemented
its demands in resolution 2201 (2015) to withdraw their forces from
government institutions, including in the capital Sana’a, and normalize the
security situation in the capital and other provinces, and relinquish
government and security institutions.
“The Security Council expresses serious concern over continued
arbitrary detention, by all parties, in particular by Houthis, contrary to
resolution 2201 (2015), and reiterates its demand for the unconditional and
safe release of all persons arbitrarily detained.
15-04593 (E)

230315

*1504593*

S/PRST/2015/8

“The Security Council welcomes that the Prime Minister Khalid Bahah
and other members of the Cabinet are no longer under the house arrest
imposed by the Houthis.
“The Security Council urges non-state actors to withdraw from
government institutions, including in the south of Yemen, an d to refrain from
any attempt to take over such institutions.
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the airstrikes
against the Presidential Palace in Aden and attacks at Aden International
airport. The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the horrific
20 March bomb attacks at the two mosques in Sana’a and in Saada, Yemen,
which killed at least 126 and injured many more. The Security Council urges
all sides to refrain from any further use of military force, any offensive
military actions and other uses of violence.
“The Security Council reiterates its call urging all parties to agree upon
and announce publicly dates for completing the constitutional consultation
process, to hold a referendum on the constitution, and to conduct elections
under the new electoral law pursuant to the new constitution and in this regard
demands that the parties take all actions conducive to this process, including
by the full implementation of resolution 2201 (2015).
“The Security Council reiterates its concern at the ability of Al-Qaida in
the Arabian Peninsula to benefit from the deterioration of the political and
security situation in Yemen, mindful that any acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable regardless of their motivation, whenever, wherever and by
whomsoever committed.
“The Security Council reiterates that the solution to the situation in
Yemen is through a peaceful, inclusive, orderly and Yemeni -led political
transition process that meets the legitimate demands and aspirations o f the
Yemeni people for peaceful change and meaningful political, economic and
social reform, as set out in the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive National
Dialogue Conference, the Peace and National Partnership Agreement and its
security annex.
“The Security Council strongly calls upon all parties, in particular the
Houthis, to abide by the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive National
Dialogue conference, and the Peace and National Partnership Agreement and
its security annex and the relevant Security Council resolutions and to
accelerate inclusive United Nations-brokered negotiations, including on issues
relating to governance, to continue the political transition in order to reach a
consensus solution and stresses the importance of full implementation of
agreements reached and commitments made towards that goal.
“The Security Council emphasizes its call for all parties in Yemen,
including the Houthis, government officials, leaders of political parties and
movements, and members of so-called “popular committees”, to adhere to
resolving their differences through dialogue and consultation, reject acts of
violence to achieve political goals, and refrain from provocation and all
unilateral actions to undermine the political transition. The Security Council

2/3

15-04593

S/PRST/2015/8

stresses that all parties should take concrete steps to agree and implement a
consensus-based political solution to Yemen’s crisis in accordance with the
Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue conference, and the Peace
and National Partnership Agreement and its security annex.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention of the President of Yemen,
Abdo Rabbo Mansour Hadi, to engage in good faith in the UN -brokered
negotiations.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Gulf Cooperation
Council to convene a conference in Riyadh, upon the request of the President
of Yemen, with the participation of all Yemeni parties to further support the
political transition in Yemen, and to complement and support the UN -brokered
negotiations.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of all parties allowing all
Yemenis to assemble peacefully without fear of attack, injury, arrest, or
retaliation.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to comply with their
obligations under international law, including applicable international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
“The Security Council reiterates its demand that all parties in Yemen
cease all armed hostilities against the people and the legitimate authorities of
Yemen and relinquish the arms seized from Yemen’s military and security
institutions, in accordance with the Peace and National Partnership Agreement
and its security annex.
“The Security Council also urges all parties to facilitate safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian actors to reach people in need of
humanitarian assistance. It also reaffirms the need for all parties to ensure the
safety of civilians, including those receiving assistance as well as the need to
ensure the security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its
associated personnel.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation the work of the Special
Advisor of the Secretary-General on Yemen, Jamal Benomar and stresses the
importance of the United Nations’ close co-ordination with international
partners, including the Gulf Cooperation Council, Group of Ambassadors in
Sana’a, and other actors, in order to contribute to the successful transition.
“The Security Council calls on all member States to refrain from external
interference which seeks to foment conflict and instability and instead to
support the political transition.
“The Security Council demands that all parties fully implement all
Council resolutions on Yemen, including resolution 2201 (2015).
“The Security Council reaffirms its readiness to take further measures
against any party in case of non-implementation of its resolutions on Yemen,
in particular its resolution 2201 (2015).”

15-04593

3/3
