112

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

effective control over their natural and all other resources,
wealth and economic activities,
Bearing in mind the relevant principles of international
law and the provisions of the international conventions and
regulations, in particular Convention IV of the Hague of
1907, 4 and the fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August
1949, 5 concerning the obligations and responsibilities of the
occupying Power,
Bearing in mind also the pertinent provisions of its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Regretting that the report of the Secretary-General on
permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, requested in
General Assembly resolution 36/173, was not submitted,
l. Condemns Israel for its exploitation of the national
resources of the occupied Palestinian and other Arab
territories;
2. Emphasizes the right of the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples whose territories are under Israeli occupation
to full and effective permanent sovereignty and control over
their natural and all other resources, wealth and economic
activities;
3. Reaffirms that all measures undertaken by Israel to
exploit the human, natural and all other resources, wealth
and economic activities in the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories are illegal and calls upon Israel to desist
immediately from such measures;
4. Further reaffirms the right of the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples subjected to Israeli aggression and occupation to the restitution of and full compensation for the
exploitation, depletion and loss of and damages to their
natural, human and all other resources, wealth and economic
activities, and calls upon Israel to meet their just claims;
5. Calls upon all States to support the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples in the exercise of their above-mentioned
rights;
6. Calls upon all States, international organizations,
specialized agencies, business corporations and all other
institutions not to recognize, or co-operate with or assist in
any manner in, any measures undertaken by Israel to exploit
the national resources of the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories or to effect any changes in the demographic
composition, the character and form of use of their natural
resources or the institutional structure of those territories;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, the two reports requested
in Assembly resolution 36/173.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/136.

Population activities in the regional commissions

The General Assembly,
l. Takes note of decision 80/44 of 27 June 1980 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Pro-

• Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Conventions
and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford University Press),
1915, p. 100.
'United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

gramme on agency support costs 6 and of section I, paragraph
3, of decision 82/20 of 18 June 1982, 7 in which the Council
endorsed the guidelines for the approval of new and continuing intercountry projects that, inter alia, called for the
discontinuation by the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities of infrastructural support to its project-executing
agencies, including the regional commissions; 8
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the executive secretaries of the regional commissions, to
consider the inclusion in the draft programme budget for
the biennium 1984-1985 of proposals on modalities for the
continuation of activities in the field of population at the
regional level.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/137.

Protection against products harmful to health
and the environment

The General Assembly,
Aware of the damage to health and the environment that
the continued production and export of products that have
been banned and/or permanently withdrawn on grounds of
human health and safety from domestic markets is causing
in the importing countries,
Aware that some products, although they present a certain
usefulness in specific cases and/or under certain conditions,
have been severely restricted in their consumption and/or
sale owing to their toxic effects on health and the
environment,
Aware of the harm to health being caused in importing
countries by the export of pharmaceutical products ultimately intended also for consumption and/or sale in the
home market of the exporting country, but which have not
yet been approved there,
Considering that many developing countries lack the necessary information and expertise to keep up with developments in this field,
Considering the need for countries that have been exporting the above-mentioned products to make available the
necessary information and assistance to enable the importing
countries to protect themselves adequately,
Cognizant of the fact that almost all of these products are
at present manufactured and exported from a limited number
of countries,
Taking into account that the primary responsibility for
consumer protection rests with each State,
Recalling its resolution 36/ 166 of 16 December 1981 and
the report on transnational corporations in the pharmaceutical industry of developing countries, 9 and acting in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /62
of 23 July 1981,
Bearing in mind in this context the work of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Health Organization, the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Environment Programme, the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the United Nations Centre
on Transnational Corporations and other relevant intergovernmental organizations,

6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1980, Supplement No. 12 (E/1980/42/Rev. l), chap. XI.
7
Ibid., 1982. Supplement No. 6 (E/1982/16/Rev. l ), annex I.
• See DP/1982/29 and Add. I.
0
EiC. 10/85.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

l. Agrees that products that have been banned from
domestic consumption and/or sale because they have been
judged to endanger health and the environment should be
sold abroad by companies, corporations or individuals only
when a request for such products is received from an importing country or when the consumption of such products
is officially permitted in the importing country;
2. Agrees that all countries that have severely restricted
or have not approved the domestic consumption and/or sale
of specific products, in particular pharmaceuticals and pesticides, should make available full information on these
products with a view to safeguarding the health and environment of the importing country, including clear labelling
in a language acceptable to the importing country;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure
the provision of the necessary information and assistance
by the United Nations system in order to strengthen the
national capacities of developing countries to protect themselves from the consumption and/or sale of banned, withdrawn, severely restricted or, in the case of pharmaceuticals,
non-approved products;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, based upon the work
already being done within the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organisation, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade, the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and other relevant intergovernmental
organizations, to the maximum extent possible within existing resources, to prepare and regularly update a consolidated list of products whose consumption and/or sale have
been banned, withdrawn, severely restricted or, in the case
of pharmaceuticals, not approved by Governments, and to
make this list available as early as possible and, in any case,
not later than December 1983;
5. Agrees that the consolidated list referred to in paragraph 4 above should be easy to read and understand and
should contain both generic/chemical and brand names in
alphabetical order, as well as the names of all manufacturers
and a short reference to the grounds and the decisions taken
by Governments that have led to the banning, withdrawal
or severe restriction of such products;
6. Decides, on the basis of the above-agreed criteria,
to keep under review the format of the consolidated list
with a view to its possible improvement;
7. Requests Governments and the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to
provide all the information and assistance necessary for the
prompt and effective fulfilment of the task entrusted to the
Secretary· General.
109th plenary meeting
I 7 December I 982

37/138.

Financing of the Multinational Programming
and Operational Centres of the Economic
Commission for Africa on an established basis

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/197 of 20 December I 977
and 33/202 of 29 January 1979 on the restructuring of the
economic and social sectors of the United Nations system,
in paiticular the designation therein of the regional commissions as, inter alia, the main general economic and social
development centres within the United Nations system for
their respective regions, having responsibility for the promotion of ~ubregional and regional co-operation,

113

Bearing in mind resolution 311 (XIII) adopted on l March
1977 by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa, 10 by which the Conference established
the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres to
foster sectoral and subregional integration,
Recognizing the prominent role given to subregional and
regional economic integration in the Lagos Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the
Economic Development of Africa 11 as a means towards
achieving the establishment of an African economic community by the year 2000,
Recognizing also that the Multinational Programming and
Operational Centres constitute an integral part of the Economic Commission for Africa, through which the Commission effectively carries out aspects of its mandate, as set
forth in its terms of reference, 12 and that they serve as the
principal mechanism of the Commission for fostering economic and technical co-operation at the subregional level
in Africa,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/64 of 5 December 1980
and 36/ 180 of 17 December 1981 on special measures for
the social and economic development of Africa in the 1980s,
Recalling further its resolution 36/ 178 of 17 December
1981, in which it invited the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the financing of Multinational Programming and
Operational Centres on an established basis and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1982/62 of 30 July 1982 on
the same subject,
Taking into account the views expressed by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa
in its resolution 450 (XVII) of 30 April 1982 13 on the need
to correct the present situation regarding the inadequacy of
the human and financial resources available to the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres for regular
budget and operational activities, as a result of which ~heir
very existence is threatened,
Bearing in mind the action already taken by the Executive
Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to improve the resource situation of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres of the Economic Commission for Africa
on an established basis, 14 prepared pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 36/178, and having examined, in particular, paragraphs 47 to 49 of that report,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the financing of the Multinational
Programming and Operational Centres of the Economic
Commission for Africa on an established basis;
2. Welcomes the decision adopted by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme at
its twenty-ninth session, in which the Council requested the
Administrator of the Programme to continue to provide financial support to the five Multinational Programming and
Operational Centres during the whole of the third programming cycle, 1982-1986; 15

10
See Official Recordl· of the Economic and Social Council, Sixty-third
Session, Supplement No. 7, vol. I (E/5941 ). part III.
11
NS-11/14, annex I.
12
E/CN.14/111/Rev.8.
11
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1982,
Supplement No. JI (E/1982/21), chap. V.
14
E/1982/70 and Corr. I.
"See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1982.
Supplement No. 6 (E/1982/16/Rev I), annex I, decision 82/4 A. sect. IV.
