United Nations
Tuesday,

FlFTH

EMERGENCY

SPECIAL

Page

President: Mr. Abdul Rahman PAZHWAK

7. However, out of all those draft resolutions, the
one produced by the Latin American group [A/L.523
and Add.1 and 21 appears to my delegation to provide
an appropriate
and reasonable basis, though not a
perfect one, for operation. In my delegation’s view,
it brings out most forcibly one great principle of the
Charter, namely, that negotiation remains the ultimate and principal means of peaceful change,
8. Also, since peace Can never be the product of
inhumanity,
my delegation will support the Swedish
draft resolution
[A/L.526 and Add.l-31, whose objective is humanitarian.

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kabanda
(Rwanda), Vice-President, to&c the Chafr.
ITEM’S

Letter dated
13 June 1967 from the
Foreign
Affairs
of the Union of Soviet
publics (A/6717)
(continued)

Minister
Socialist

YORK

6. Many draft resolutions have been brought before
this Assembly. My delegation is grateful to those who
1
have sponsored those draft resolutions-all
of them.
The principal aim is to achieve a solutionto the com* plex problems facing us in the’ area.

(Afghanistan).

AGENDA

NEW

purely by sentiments and emotions per se and looks
for a workable solution that would bring along with
it stability and lasting peace in the Middle East,

CONTENTS
Agenda item 5:
Letter dated 13 June 1967 from the MWs ter
for EGreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (A/671 7) (continued) o ., .

SESSION

4 July 1967,
4.00 p.m.

for
Re-

1. Mr. COLE (Sierra Leone): My delegation is
making its first statement on the Middle East only
now, not because of its inability to assess the trends
of events in that area, not because it considers as unimportant another chapter of belligerency just written
in the history,of the Middle East, but because it feels
that it must speak in an atmosphere recipient to objectivity and relative calmness when viewing a very
grave situation.
2. The Middle East is the “Times Square” of the
world, From the Middle East have radiated through
the spokes of the world civilizations which have been
blessings to humanity, If peace should reign supreme
in that area, constituting the hub of the world, untold
benefits would accrue to all humanity. If war, on the
other hand, with its attendant miseries, should bestride
relentlessly the confines of that area, then the scourges
of war, however slight, may become the lot of all of US.

9. Finally, because the spirit, temperament
and objectivity of the Pakistan draft resolution are not discordant with those of the Latin American and Swedish
draft resolutions, my delegation will also support that
draft resolution [A/L.S2’7/Rev.I].
10. Mr. GURINOVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): During the general discussion the Byelorussiandelegationhas
already
spoken in favour of a decisive condemnation of Israel
aggression against the United Arab Republic, Syria
and Jordan, and has also demanded the unconditional
,
and immediate withdrawal of Israel’s troops from the
territories
which they occupy and complete reparation by Israel for the damage caused to the neighbouring Arab States and their citizens. My delegationis in
favour of protecting the legal rights of the Arab States,
eliminating
the hotbed of war in the Middle East and
restoring peace in this region. These are the objectives
of the USSR draft resolution [A/L,519], for which we
once again declare our full support.

3. It is for this very reason that we are all here; and
it is for this very reason that it is of the utmost importance that considerations
of statesmanship
and
imagination should take precedence over considerations of power politics in dealing with the Middle East
situation.

11. The delegations of many, countries have quite
correctly pointed out that the presence of the aggressor’s troops on lands which they have seized from
neighbouring
States may at any time lead to fresh
conflicts. The frequent renewal in recent days by
Israel of aggressive acts in the Sinai Peninsula IUS
entirely confirmed this assessment made by mydeleg&ion
and by many other representatives
Of States
Members of the United Nations. There can be no peace
in the‘ Middle East until the aggressor leaVeS
the
territories
it has usurped and until an end is put to
its hegemony on alien Soil.

4. My Government has always had excellent relations
both with the Arab world and with the State of Israel.
The reward of peaceful coexistence is blessing, that
of war or the threat of war is misery.
5. My delegation does not believe that accusations
and condemnations will achieve much in the Middle
East, My delegation strongly disapproves of the acquisition of territorial
gains through conquest; but
at the same time it is desirous of seeking reasonable,
peaceful and just solutions to the dispute. Therefore,
my delegation is quite unprepared to be governed
1

A/W.1548
/

2

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

12. The discussion here has shown that there is a
stern condemnation of the aggressive actions of Israel,
which are a flagrant violation of the United Nations
Charter and generally accepted rules of international
law. The clumsy attempts of the Israel Minister for
Foreign Affairs somehow to justify and even substantiate the ne$d for the piratical attacks carried out by
Israel troops have completely failed. The representatives of the overwhelming majority of Member States
have censured the reckless course of action embarked
upon by over-ambitious
Israel politicians
and their
patrons and have condemned the attempt of Israel and
the imperialist
forces to enjoy the fruits of their
treacherous armed aggression against the Arab States
in pursuit of their criminal designs.
13. We cannot fail to see a co-ordination
of action
between Israel militarists
and the politioal
circles
and diplomats
of the countries which are trying in
every way to prevent the adoption of a resolution
calling for the immediate withdrawal of Israel forces
from the territory of the Arab States,
14. The entire world knows that Israel started an
aggressive war. The United States of America and
its allies have not even mildly reprimanded
Israel
for this, but, in an attempt to support the Israel militarists in their annexation designs, have been telling
us at length that peace, if you please, would be endangered if Israel troops were sent back to the posi?
tions they occupied before 5 June and if they left the
Arab lands they now occupy. These allegations are
nothing less than absurd.
16. The United States and other Western countries
have spared no words to support their claim that they
are in favour of putting an end to the arms race in the
Middle East; but their story is made up out of whole
cloth, We can see only too well that their real aim is
to put Israel in an advantageous position and to secure
for the aggressor what it has gained by means of a
sudden attack on the Arab States,
16. The representatives
of those countries have
spoken at length. about the Holy Places in Jerusalem
and about aocess to them, playing on the religious
feelings of believers.
But why do not the Western
countries condemn Israel which, by its aggression,
has created this problem and which, to the accompaniment of their utterances, has already enacted “laws”
providing for the annexation of Jerusalem7 Furthermore, the representatives
of the Western countries applaud the Israel Minister for Foreign Affairs, who has
been cynically defending the annexation of Jerusalem,
17. The question has also been raised here of the
care of refugees and the collection of funds throughout
the world to support them and to improve their situation; but the representatives
of the Western countries
have said not a word about who it was that created
the refugee problem and deprived more than 1 million
people of their homes, their land, and their livelihood,
Is it not well known that this situation was created
and has now been aggravated by Israel aggression? A
genuine solution of the refugee problem was outlined
by the United Nations General Assembly as early as
1948, and Israel must now be required to implement
resolution 194 (III).
18. We are in favour of aid for thevictims
of the aggression, we are in favour of humanitarian
treatment

Special Session - Plenary Meetings

-

of prisoners of war and the peaceful population of the
occupied areas, but we must make it plain that the
adoption of resolutions on these questions cannot be
interpreted as legalizing the usurpation of foreign
territory.
We reject the hypocritical
assurances we
heard today from the representative of the aggressor
that it supports humanitarian
principles,
There is
incontrovertible
evidence of the crimes committed
by the Israel military, at whose hands thousands upon
thousands of Arabs have ,suffered, All the consequences of aggression must be wiped out.
19. The, General Assembly has before it a number of
draft resolutions, and it must scrupulously weigh their
respective merits, All those who really strive for
peace in the Middle East and who have a realistic
view of’ the danger to peace in that region should
frustrate all attempts to foist on the Arab States conditions which would infringe their legal rights and
interests, If we do not forcefully rebuff the pretensions of Israel and its patrons today, new aggressors
may appear tomorrow who will count on going unpunished if they attempt to seize the territories
of
other peace-loving States.
20. Our joint duty is to reject the draft resolutions
presented by the United States [A/L.5201 andthe Latin
American countries [A/L.523 and Add.1 and 21 as
unprincipled attempts to be of service to the aggressor while supposedly promoting a “general settlement
programme”.
21. The provisions of the draft resolution presented
by the non-aligned countries [A/L.522/Rev.3]
serve
the interests of peace and security in the Middle
East. No delegation which is guided by the lofty principles of the Charter and by a desire to remove as
quickly as possible the vestiges of aggression can fail
to support this draft resolution. There can be no doubt
that an immediate
withdrawal of the aggressor’s
troops from the seized Arab territories
will lead to
a relaxation of tension in the Middle East and create
conditions in which it will be possible to take up the
consideration
of other questions in the interests of
the countries in the region. The Arab States, which
have been the victims of aggression, are fully entitled
to demand an immediate
and complete restitution
of
their rights and interests, their sovereignty and territorial integrity, and the draft resolution of the nonaligned countries is designed to satisfy these legitimate demands. The adoption of this draft resolution
would enhance the role and the prestige of the United
Nations, which Israel and its patrons are so anxious
to undermine.
22. In the light of what I have said; my delegation
will vote for the USSR draft resolution and also for
the draft resolution presented by the non-aligned
countries. We also support the proposal made by
Pakistan and a number of other countries [A/L.627/
R,ev.l] demanding the annulment of all the illegal
measures adopted by Israel with a view to the annexation of Jerusalem.
23. ln conclusion, I should like to remind the Assembly of the following remark made at this session
by Mr. Kiselev, the Chairman of the Councilof Ministers of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic:
“The declarations of States that they are dedicated
to the cause of peace, and have faith in the United

1548th &eeting
Nations,
and also their ability to take a just and
high-minded
position,
ignoring imperialist
blackmail and pressure,
are today being put to the test.”
[1533rd,meeting,
para. 84.1
24. We call upon all other delegations to support
the draft resolutions
which provide for the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal
of the armed forces of
Israel
from the territories
belonging to the United
Arab Republic,
Syria and Jordan, In so doing, we
would all be demonstrating
that we are deeply concerned with the preservation
of peace and that we desire to restore and strengthen international security,
25. Mr. ENAHORO (Nigeria): When I spoke from this
rostrum
on 27 June [1537th meeting] I presented for
the consideration
of the General Assembly my delegation’s six-point
peace plan for establishing some degree of tranquillity
in the Middle East. Youmay recall,
Mr, President,
that our plan envisaged, among other
things, withdrawal
by Israeli forces from the territories overrun and occupied by them, the establishment of demilitarized
buffer zones and an effective
United Nations presence in them; a new refugee resettlement
scheme; the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral
of a representative
with clearly
defined
functions,
including that of making recommendations
for a durable settlement,
and the promotion by the
United Nations itself of a Middle East peace treaty,
Our plan was based on this appraisal of the situation:
that we were here confronted not by a sudden aberration or a sudden spark of esranoy, but by an episode
in a drama that is at least older than the United Nations
itself. Therefore,
we endeavoured to present a view
which would at once secure observance of the spirit
and the letter of our Charterandprovidefor
a foundation on which a viable settlement of the problems of
the area might be constructed.
26, We have felt encouraged by the reaction to our
plan by a number of delegations, and we fully appreciate why, in the nature of things, that reaction could
not at this stage be translated into a response in the
deliberations
at this Assembly, My delegation regrets
that it has not proved possible for a resolution to
emerge which might go as far towards bringing tranquillity into the situation as we consider essential to
eventual peace in the Middle East,
2’7. In the circumstances,
it has become our duty to
examine the draft resolutions now before the Assembly
with a view to deciding which of them might approximate our proposals
or at least create an opening for
our proposals.
In this study we have given much attention to the draft resolution of the twenty Latin American
.countries
[A/L.523 and Add.I. and 21 and the draft reso’ lution of the seventeen non-aligned nations [A/L.522/
Rev.3 and Corr.11. We had hopes that thefurther
consultations
of the last few days andhours might produce
a compromise
resolution, for there is obviously much
common ground in the two draft resolutions, However,
faced as we are with them as alternatives, we are unable to support proposals in the Latin American draft
resolution
which would promote a change of sovereignty
by force of arms. Mydelegationproposes,
therefore, to
support
the draft resolution
of the seventeen nonaligned nations, although we wouldhave much preferred
that it go further than it has gone towards meeting our
position,
particularly
in regard to an effective United
Nations presence in the area.
..

- 4 July 1967

3

28. My delegation wishes to explain that in doing so it’
is our understanding,
first, that the Security Council
will address itself to the entire question of peace and
stability in the Middle East; second, that the SecretaryGeneral’s
representative
will not be precluded from
undertaking
the tasks suggested in our six-point peace
plan at the instance of the Secretary-General;
and,
third, that operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution
means exactly what it says, namely, that States are “to
render every assistance to the Secretary-General,
, .n;
in other words,
that. the initiative in this matter will
rest unequivocally
with the Secretary-General.
On that
understanding
my delegation supports the draft resolution of the seventeen non-aligned nations,
29. U SCE TIN (Burma): At this late stage of the debate I do not propose to make a lengthy explanation of
how and why the delegation of Burma will vote on the
various draft resolutions
now before the General Assembly; I shall be very brief.
30. Dedicated as we are to the ideals of peaceful and
friendly relations between States, particularly
between
neighbouring States, the delegation of Burma is sensible of the vast complications
which have led to and
been attendant on the outbreak of hostilities
between
neighbouring States in the Middle East, We have therefore closely and attentively followed the deliberations
in the Assembly,
and have considered with particular
care the two draft resolutions
submitted respectively
by the Latin Americans
[A/L.523 and Add.1 and 21 and
by the Afro-Asian
nations and Yugoslavia [A/L,522/
Rev,3 and CorrJ].
31. I would like to say that we subscribe to the affirmation
in the second operative paragraph
of the
Latin American
draft “that no stable international
order can be based on the threat or use of force,
and . . . the validity of the occupation or acquisition of
territories
brought about by such means should notbe
recognized, U The delegation of Burma would desire, in
line with the foregoing affirmation,
that the forces
engaged in hostilities
and thereafter
in occupation
of foreign territories
should be withdrawn
unconditionally, It is not clear to us whether this is called
for in the Latin American draft resolution.
We would
not wish that territorial
gains acquired as a result of
hostilities
between States should ever be permitted
to be utilized for bargaining to the advantage of one of
the parties to the hostilities.
32. On the other hand, the Afro-Asian-Yugoslavdraft
resolution
specifically
includes the essential call for
the withdrawal
of forces, without attaching conditions
to their withdrawal,
Moreover,
we share the view of
many delegations here dedicated to peace in the Middle
East as we are that the mere withdrawal
of forces is
not an end in itself, The delegation of Burma is deeply
.aware of the need for a patient and highly motivated
search for ways and means peacefully to resolve the
complex problems which afflict the Middle East today.
We are convinced that the spirit and motivation which
is necessary
for such a search for a peaceful solution
of the problem is manifest in operative paragraph 6 of
the eighteen-nation
Afro-Asian-Yugoslav
draft resolution, which calls for the solution of all problems
“guided by the principles
of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular
those contained in Articles
2
and 33.” It is the firm belief of the delegation of Burma

4

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

that consideration by the Security COUnCil of all aspects
of the situation in the Middle East with a view to’ seeking peaceful ways and means for the solution of all
problems, legal, political and humanitarian, mentioned
in operative paragraph 6, will lead to effective solutions which will ensure a stable and durable peace in
the region.
33. As regards the Latin American draft resolution,
while we generally subscribe to the principles enunciated therein, the provisions
of operative paragraph 1
under which the withdrawal
of troops is made conditional on some other contingencies,
are not acceptable
to us. We cannot, therefore, lend our support to that
draft resolution.
34. The delegation of Burma accordingly will vote for
the eighteen-nation Afro-Asian-Yugoslav
draft resolution and abstain from voting on the Latin American
draft resolution.
35. Mr. PARDO (Malta): On various occasions in the
past we have been alone, or almost alone, in emphasizing, that it is useless, indeed damaging, for the
General Assembly to adopt resolutions formulating
declarations or principles, however lofty, that have
little prospect of being implemented in the foreseeable
future, or to demand action which is unlikely to be
forthcoming. In our view, a resolution which is almost
certain to be disregarded does not strengthen the
United Nations, The graver and more important the
matter, the more damaging to the United Nations is
a resolution which remains a dead letter.
36. In the present case, any draft resolution which
we may adopt is unlikely to be implemented unless it
is either acceptable or at least tolerable to all the
parties most directly concerned in the recent conflict,
or acceptable to the major Powers which through the
use of moral suasion might obtain the free and willing
co-operation of the parties most directly involved, A
third possibility might be a draft resolution which secured the near unani’mity of the Assembly. Such a draft
resolution, as the unequivocal expression of international opinion, perhaps mrght also have sufficient
moral influence to secure compliance with its
provisions.
37. We note, however, that neither the draft resolution
contatned in document A/L.522/Rev.3
and Corr.1 nor
that contained in document A/L.523 and Add.1 and 2
fulfils )at the present time any one of the conditions
that wc$ld ensure a reasonable prospect of being implement?d. Accordingly, we will abstain from voting
on both !of these draft resolutions. On the other hand,
we will vote in favour of the draft resolution contained
in document A/L.526 and Add.l-3, the,objective of
J,
which is purely humanitariah.
38. In view of the sharp divergence of opinion in the
General Assembly which makes it difficult to adopt a
-meaningful resolution--that ‘ is to say, a resolution
which is likely to be implemented-and to facilitate
agreement between the parties most directly concerned, perhaps it may be wise for us not to recommend any particular course of action. This may have
the advantage of facilitating the free use of those means
for the pacific settlement of disputes mentioned in
Chapter VI of the Charter that may appear most appropriate in the present case.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

39. Mr. KAMIL (Indonesia): As a‘co-sponsor of the
Afro-Asian and non-aligned draft resolution contained
in document A/L.522/Rev.3
and Corr.1 my delegation’s attitude towards the various draft resolutions
and amendments is as follows.
40. My delegation is no less imbued than many other
delegations with the desire that a permanent and just
settlement in the Middle East be reached. However,it
strongly believes that any measures to establish this
peace cannot be based on a reality which has been
brought about by flouting the United Nations Charter.
Measures to promote peace between the Arab nations
and Israel should have as their basis the immediate
withdrawal of Israeli troops from the Arab areas they
are occupying. Only in this way will a climate be
created conducive to any meaningful, fruitful, and
sincere action by organs of the United Nations leading
toward a permanent solution. By not insisting Onimmediate withdrawal, the Assembly, under whatever
pretext or excuse, would in fact condone or accept,
however temporarily,
the illegal occupation of the
territory of Member countries.
41. In this context, the ForeignMinister of Indonesia,
in Ms statement on 23 June last, declared:
“Neither the norms of established internatianal law
nor the precepts of international justice and morality
will ever condone territorial expansion through acts
of aggression. 0a. This is an axiom governing relationships among all States which brooks no compromise .or clever constructions in interpretation. The
immutable fact which we face today is that Israeli
troops, by force of arms, have occupied and continue
to occupy certain parts of Arab soil, ” [1534thmeeting, para. 97.1
42. My delegation will therefore support the draft
resolutions which honestly and sincerely-I
repeatr
honestly and sincerely-seek
a solution to the problem bg!upholding the principle on which my delegation
stands and which is fully in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations.
43. As to the amendments to the draft resolution of
the Asian, African andnon-aligned delegations-a draft
resolution co-sponsored by my delegation-although
my delegation agrees with all or part of the ideas expressed in them, we shallvote affirmatively
on amenclments which will make the draft resolution of Asian,
African and non-aligned States more acceptable to the
majority of this Assembly.
44. This draft has been the result of intensive discussions and consultations among many delegations
and thereby it has emerged as a draft resolution which
is balanced, morally sound and, at the same time,
forward-looking,
45. Mr. P. V. J. SOLOMON (Trinidad and Tobago):
When the representative of Burundi presented the
third revised text [A/L.522/Rev.3]
of the draft resolution of the non-aligned States he made a plea for
Peace and conciliation [1545th meeting]. Today
the
representative of Ethiopia made a similar plea for
conciliation, understanding and a movement towards
Peace. That plea is accepted and re-echoed by every
*member of the Latin American group, including my
country, Trinidad and Tobago,

-

1548th meeting - 4 July 1967
46. During the last twenty-four
hours I have onthree
occasions delayed speaking from this rostrum.
Three
times I have postponed my address in the hope that
some sort of agreement could be arrived at between
what are now the only two opposing views before the
Assembly:
the views of the non-aligned delegations
and the views of the Latin American delegations, Until
just a few hours ago these discussions
continued, and
we still feel that at this late hour it might yet be possible to arrive at a consensus, But it must be a consensus based on an honest appreciationof
the facts and
an honest desire to bring peace to the Middle East.
47. The proposals
of the non-aligned countries have
been placed before this Assembly and we have examined them. We shall vote against them, not because
we are opposed to the principal recommendationof
the
non-aligned
draft resolution,
but because that draft
resolution
does not go fax enough. It looks at one
side of the picture and completely ignores the realities
of the situation in the Middle East. It asks for complete, unconditional withdrawal
of the Israeli forces
from Arab territory.
That, we wholeheartedly
endorse.
But withdrawal
is not enough. What good will it be to
ask for the withdrawal
of troops without at the same
time asking the parties concerned to renounce the state
of belligerency
which exists? The Arab States have
maintained over the years that there is a state of
belligerency
between themselves
and Israel.
The
United Arab Republic has justified the closing of the
Strait of Tiran and the blockading of theGulf of Aqaba
on the ground that, among other things, a state of
belligerency existed between the United Arab Republic
and Israel ant. that the closing of the Gulf was not,
therefore,
illegal.
48. I do not want to join issue with the representative
of Kuwait over the international laws that govern action between States, but it is enough that a state of
belligerency
does exist and has been recognized to
exist, and that in order that there should be peace it
iS essential-it
is one of the preconditions
of peacethat this state of belligerency
should cease to exist.
If in fact it were agreed that the forces that occupy
foreign soil today should be asked to withdraw,
what
would there be to prevent the further outbreak of
hostilities
the moment either side should determine
that the time was opportune7 What guarant,ee is there,
without a cessation of the state of belligerency,
that
hostilities,
active hostilities,
will not again result’?
49. Let us tsy to put the shoe on the other foot. If,
as a result of this war which started on 5 June 1967,
the Arab States had invaded Israeli
territory
and
occupied Israeli territory,
instead of the reverse, and
the General Assembly had asked the Arab States to
withdraw
their troops unconditionally
from Israeli
soi1
while Israel still maintained that a state of belligerency existed between them, would the Arab States
consider such a withdrawal?
Would they not feel that
this was merely a device to give Israel the opportunity
at the first convenient moment to renew hostilities,
when perhaps it had been adequately rearmed, when
perhaps Israel’s
enemy-shall
we say-for
the time
being, was unaware of what was taking place? No, it
iS unrealistic
and impractical
to ask for the withdrawal of troops and still to maintain firmly and irrevocably that a state of belligerency exists.

5

50. And that is the greatest single difference between
the draft resolution
of the non-aligned States and the
draft resolution
of the Latin American States [A/L.523
and Add.1 and 21. No matter how long we have negotiated-and
we have tried hard-no
matter how often
we have met and tried to exchange views, this steady
refusal to accept the principle of cessation of belligerence is what has kept us divided until now.
51. The Foreign Minister
of Iraq asked yesterday
[1545th meeting] for good faith. We reciprocate
that
call for good faith. And may I tell him that as far
as Trinidad and Tobago is concerned, we havenothing
but goodwill
towards
the Arab peoples, if only because in our country, small though it is, we have almost every nation on earth represented.
We have a
large Syrian and Lebanese community; we have Jews
also. They all enjoy the privileges
of residence,
and
those who are citizens,
of citizenship.
There is no
conflict
between them in Trinidad and Tobago; the
law does not permit it. And we havefriendly
relations
with all their Governments.
We have exchanged diplomatic representation
with the United Arab Republic,
and there never was and never can be between us and
the United Arab Republic any feeling of ill will. We
understand
the problems that torment them and we
sympathize
with them. We should like to help. But we
cannot fly in the face of reality;
we cannot be impractical.
Nor can we blind ourselves
to the tremendous human problem which faces this Assembly
and the nations involved.
52. The Foreign
Minister
of Iraq said yesterday
that in presenting
the Latin American
draft resolution I offered no explanation, I merely said it was objective, Well, he and I are both politicians,
and those
of us who have been through the hurly-burly of
politics
know when to speak and when not to speak. In Trinidad
and Tobago we have been brought up in a very hard
political
school; we have to know, we have to learn
when to speak and when not to speak; we have to know
what to say and what not to say, I had thought that it
would be unwise to bore the Assembly with a repetition
of the reasons behind every clause in this draft resolution--seasons
which have been given by various
representatives
and argued back and forth for the
past two weeks. The draft resolution
speaks for itself,
and I was content to leave it at that, But, lest my
silence be interpreted
to mean that I am not wholeheartedly
behind the draft resolution,
may I take a
little time to point out the significance
of Ihe various
clauses.
53. In the first place, our draft resolution
emphasizes the inescapable obligation of every Member of
this Assembly
to preserve
peace in the world. This
is not an obligation belonging to the Security Council
alone; it is an obligationwhiohweighs
heavily on every
single one of us. And it is because the Security Council has, for one reason or another, not been able to
solve this difficult and dangerous problem that it has
been thrown squarely
into our lap. We emphasiee
that we have an inescapable obligation to preserve
to avoid the use of force
peace, and consequently,
in the international
sphere.
54. I do not have to repeat that every time I come
to this rostrum,
Every Member has said it in one
way or another at one time ox another, but because it
is necessary
to explain, I repeat it.

General

6

Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

55. The Security
Council did one thing important,
with regard to the situation
in the
nevertheless,
Middle East: it did succeed in obtaining a cease-fire.
If there is a wax, if nations have gone beyond the
Charter for one reason or another and have engaged
in hostilities,
contrary
to the provisions
of the Chaxter, the first thing that the Assembly or the Security
Council must do is to obtain a cease-fire,
That was
achieved, and we xecognize this fact as the first step
towards the achievement of a just peace in the Middle
East. That is reflected
in the Latin American draft
resolution.
56. But we maintain that that is not enough. It must
be reinforced
by other measures which the Assembly
may take and which both parties must observe. In
conformity
with that view, we urgently request, first,
that Israel withdraw
all its forces from the territories occupied by them.
57. May I here diverge for a moment to refer to the
very able and eloquent speech made by‘ the representative of Kuwait this morning [1547th meeting], He
was very severe on the Latin Americans.
I can understand that. The emotions that have been generated
throughout this debate and because of this situation
tend to make people severe. But we know how to take
these things; we are not unduly disturbed.
He feels
deeply, and despite the fact that he was sevexe on
his speech a broad
us, I could sense throughout
vein of peaceful intent, a broad vein of sincerity.
I do not agree with all he had to say, but I am nevertheless
satisfied-although
he may not have been
satisfied with us-that
he was sincere in what he had
to say and that he was a very able apologist for the
Arab group.
58. However,
he made one charge against us which I
think is unjust and unfair. He referred to the fact that
we ask for the withdrawal
of Israeli forces from
Jordan, Syria and the United Arab Republic but fail
to mention the Gaza Strip. He concluded from this
that we did not know what we. were doing, or that we
did it in haste, or that we deliberately
meant to exclude the Gaza Strip. May I tell him that we did not
do it in haste, that we did know what we were doing,
and that we did mean the Gaza Strip also. The Gaza
Strip, after all, is under the administrative
control
of the United Arab Republic, But lest there be any
misconception
or misunderstanding
of what we, the
sponsors
of the draft resolution,
mean, may I inform
the Assembly
that it is our intention to introduce a
revision,y
so that operative paragraph
1 &) of the
Latin American draft resolution will read:
~~Israel’ to withdraw
all its forces
territories
occupied by it as a result
conflict. ”

from all the
of the recent

In other words,
we do not now specify Jordan, Syria
d the United Arab Republic; we include all the terri\ tori
which means the Gaza Strip as well. I hope that
will sa
Yrs ’ fy the representative
of Kuwait.
59. NOW wb come back to the crux of the matter,
operative pa &I graph 1 (b_), whioh reads:
“The partiks
in conflict to end the state of belligerency,
to Fndeavour
to establish
conditions of
y

SubsequeMly

dr&lated

as document

A/L.523/Rev.l.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

coexistence
based on good-neighbourliness
and to
have recourse
in all cases to the procedures
for
peaceful settlement indicated in the Charter of the
United Nations;tt.
60. Yestexday the Foreign Minister of Iraq posed
this question: Shall withdrawal
precede settlement,
or is it contingent thereon? Are we going to wait
until all the other things are done before the troops
are withdrawn?
61. Obviously
not. That is not the intention and it
cannot be the intention, But it is certain that unless the
state of belligerency is renounced firmly and emphatically, the other things will not be complied with. How
can you talk of peaceful measures for the settlement
of disputes when you refuse to renounce a state of
belligerency?
We know that the other things will take
time, and the withdrawal
is not contingent on those
various things. The refugee problem, for example, has
been plaguing the nations of the Middle East and the
United Nations for twenty years. Can we expect that
it will be solved in twenty days? Certainly not. There
must be a reference to this in the draft resolution,
but no such reference exists in the draft resolution
of the non-aligned countries,
62. Then we were accused of providing an excuse for
prolonged occupation or annexation, Enshrined in this
document, the draft resolution of the Latin American
group, we find operative paragraph 2, which states
that the Assembly
“Reaffirms
its conviction
that no stable international’ order can be based on the threat or use of
force, and declares that the validity of the occupation ox acquisition of territories
.brought about by
such means should not be reoognized;“.
Clearly, we have rejected any idea of prolongedoccupation or annexation of Arab territory
by Israel. That
is not the intention of the draft resolution,
and it cannot be the intention of the Assembly,
to permit such a
thing to take place.
63. There are four basic problems in this issue which
have to be recognized if there is to be peace in the
Middle East: First of all, there must be wlthdrawal.
Every representative
who has spoken here has insisted
upon that. Secondly, there must be a cessation of
belligerency.
That is essential. Thirdly, there must be
a recognition of the sovereignty and independence of all
the States in the area-1 repeat, all the States in the
area. If we do not agree to accept the sovereignty of
all the States in the area, then there will continue t0
be a state of belligerency
and there will be no peace
in the Middle East. These facts are self-evident,
Fourthly,
there is the humanitarian
problem
of the
refugees. Not enough has been done to deal with this
problem as it ought to have been dealt with, Let US
not make the mistake of believing that the fault belongs to one side alone or to the other side alone. In
this, as in many other problems
that afflict human
beings, there are faults on both sides. But it is time
that this Assembly took a serious look at this problem and a firm hand in its solution.
64. Let .us not wait until the parties concerned alone
decide who will have what and who will do what, We
are concerned with the human problem of refugees in
the Middle East, and it is our bounden duty at this stage

1548th meeting
to take a firm hand in the solution of the problem, We
could have made various detailed suggestions for
solving this problem, But why should we? Some organization must be set up; some machinery must be
set in motion; but these are details that can come
later, We must accept the principle; we must accept
the responsibility, and get on with the job. TO debate
the details here would merely delay a decision, one
which has already been too long delayed,
65. I started off by repeating the plea for peace,
conciliation and understanding that was initiated
yesterday, echoed this morning, and re-echoed this
afternoon, If the Assembly should fail to solve this
problem the future will be bleak indeed, not only for
the Middle East, not merely for the other small States
of the world, but for the world itself.
66. I have been oppressed throughout these last few
weeks, as indeed many other Members have been, by a
heavy feeling of impending disaster, If this problem is
not solved soon, we may findourselves very shortly on
the brink of a third worldwar. Let us not think that we
are scaremongering; let us keep that at the back of
our minds, and let us bend every effort now to arrive
at an agreement that will solve this problem and put
us well on the road to providing peace in the Middle
East,
67. Mr. MALITZA
(Rcmania) (translated from
French): The position of the Socialist Republic of
Romania on the grave events in the Near East which
are the subject of this emergency special session of
the General Assembly was stated by Mr.’ Maurer, the
President of the Council of Ministers of my country,
in his speech to the General Assembly on 23 June
[1533rd meeting],
r
68. AS soon as the conflict started, the Romanian
Government reaffirmed its stand that the disputes and
problems between the States in that region should be
settled otherwise than by force of arms, It emphasized
that the forcible occupation of territories could confer
no legal rights and could only make the problems more
difficult and more acute, It confirmed the necessity of
the withdrawal of the Israel troops from the occupied
territories.
The disquieting and dangerous course of
events since then, which has been brought out more
than once during this debate, has fully confirmed my
Government’s point of view,
69. The Romanian delegation is firmly convinced
that the establishment of peace in the Middle East
demands sustained effort with a view to arriving ay
equitable and constructive solutions which will take
into account the fundamental interests of all the
peoples of the region, their right to an independent
existence, to security and to economic and social
progress, The way which could lead to the realization
of this objective must necessarily start from the strict
observance of the cease-fire, the prohibition of the use
of force, and report exclusively to peaceful means for
the settlement of the matters in dispute, free from all
outside interference,
70. As we see it, it is notpossible to engage in fruitfU1 action whioh can lead to the establishment of peace
aS long as situations created by force are maintained
or accepted, The establishment of a lasting peace demands the purification of the atmosphere through the

- 4 July 1967

7

elimination of the consequences of the use of foxce,
and through the promotion of justice and the spirit
of co-operation,
71. In our view, any attempt to create the conditions .
for a just and lasting peace in the Near East must be
given the support of the United Nations, which, by
virtue of its purposes and principles, is calledupon to
imprint a positive trend upon events, to contribute to
the reinforcement
of mutual confidence between
peoples and to create a solidarity ‘of international
opinion in regard to the supreme interests of the
maintenance of peace and peaceful means of ensuring
that maintenance, means which our Organization
possesses.
72. The draft resolution submitted by the non-aligned
group of States (A/L.522/Rev.3 and Corr.1) emphasizes what we believe constitutes the essential element in a viable settlement, namely the withdrawal of
any troops from foreign territory.
This step will make
it possible to rule out any attempt to impose solutions
or to exploit advantageous military situations to that
end.
73. At the same time, in the opinion of my delegation, the reference in paragraph 6 of thedraft resolution to itthe principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular those contained in Articles 2
and 33”, and the mobilization of the IJnited Nations
political machinery to ensure the implementation of
the terms of the resolution and the consideration of
the problems left pending, are also elements likely
to lead to a peaceful settlement, We therefore consider that this resolution can create the premises
for a settlement, by peaceful means, of the conflict
in the Near East. To us, the provisions of the draft
resolution constitute a first step which will have to
be followed by effective measures to which all States
are called upon to contribute with a view to a rational
and lasting settlement of the situation in the Near East.
74. In the light of these considerations, the Romanian
delegation wli;ll vote in favour of the draft resolution
proposed by the non-aligned group of States.
75. The Romanian delegation’s vote on the otherproposals submitted will be prompted by the same consrderations.
76. Mr. IvIALECELA (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation had not intended to speak, but several
points which have been made from this rostrum make
it necessary for me, on behalf of the non-aligned countries, to make our position very clear.
77. I should like to start by trying to point out the
way in which our draft resolution [A/L,522/Rev,3
and
Corr.11 has been deliberately misrepresented by certain delegations. And when I say *deliberately”, I mean
both by certain delegations and by the United States
Press, which many representatives have undoubtedly
read.
78. In the first place, the draft resolution.has been
depicted by some delegations from this rostrum and
in some of the newspapers as a Yugoslav resolution.
I need not go into details with respect to this. But
when one, looks at the list of countries co-sponsoring i
the draft, including my own country, one sees that the
name of Yugoslavia is next to last. Therefore,for
this

8

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

draft to be called a Yugoslav draft is a deliberate
attempt to try and mislead not only the Members of
the Assembly
but also some members of the international community.
79. If it is being called a Yugoslav draft simply because it was introduced by Yugoslavia, then I submit
that this must be a new trend: to identify a draft with
the delegation which has introduced it. What we do
know is that if a draft resolution is submitted on behalf of the Latin American group, we call it a Latin
American
draft resolution;
if a draft resolution is
presented by the Afro-Asian
group, we call it an
Afro-Asian
draft resolution.
Since the draft resolution has been presented on behalf of the non-aligned
countries, I think it only fair that it should be given the
name it deserves, that of a non-aligned draft resolution,
80. Therefore, for some delegations to have suggested
from this rostrum that the draft resolution is a YugoSlav draft is, I am afraid, a deliberate attempt to try
and mislead certain delegations. I submit that the draft
resolution
is not a Yugoslav draft; it is an honest attempt by certain non-aligned countries
to bring the
problem of the Middle East to a settlement. I know that
certain countries whichhave called the draft resolution
a Yugoslav draft resolution do not adhere to the policy
of non-alignment.
But the draft resolution
has been
presented by seventeen countries,
and I do hope that
this deliberate attempt to call it a Yugoslav draft resolution will not be repeated again.
81, I would like to draw attention to some points
which have been raised at this rostrum.
I join the
representative
of Trinidad and Tobago in appeali:*:
for reason and statesmanship,
in appealing to the
Assembly today to take a decision on the problem of
.peace in the. Middle East, However,
I want to point
out that the non-aligned countries
whioh submitted
this draft resolution have, since its introduction, made
every effort-I
repeat, every effort-to
see to it that
we reach some sort of agreement. But, if these negotiations have not produced results-and,
of course, this
is not the place to say why they have not-the blame
should not be placed on the seventeen nations that produced the non-aligned draft. We have done everything
within our power, we have done everything within the
bounds of patience, to try and reach an understanding
in order that the entire Assembly
should speak with
one voice on the question of the Middle East.
82. Nevertheless,
the mere fact that up to this point
we have not reached any agreed settlement
obviously
means that there are certain fundamental differences.
This might not be the appropriate time to go into the
details of those differences.
However,
I should like
to speak on one point which has been touched upon so
often and this relates to operative paragraph 1 (b) of
the draft resolution submitted by the Latin American
countries [A/L.523 and Add.1 and 21.
83. The question of belligerency
has been so often
referred
to-as though we only had to adopt a resolution stating that beligerency should be terminated and
then the whole problem of the Middle East would be
solved. I submit that if this is the belief of some
Members of the General Assembly,
then indeed it is
an incorrect belief.
84. Why is the General Assembly gathered today in
this emergency
special session? This session was
_.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

convened because of certain
events that had taken
place in the Middle East. Those events were sparked
by the attack of one Power againSt
certain COUntries.
It is true that the Security Council did the appropriate thing by calling for a cease-fire.
85. So far as my delegation is concerned,
we view
the events as a series of stages. First of all, there
was the cease-fire-and
we agree that the Security
Council did the right thing at the right time. The
second important question for which I consider this
Assembly has been convened is that of the withdrawal
of the forces of Israel from Arab territories.
86. I submit that if our own territories
were occupied by other forces, very few of us in this Assembly
would come to this rostrum
and appeal for an end to
belligerency, Therefore the question of the withdrawal
of Israeli forces from Arab territories
is not only
important, but paramount; for one cannot talkofpence
in the Middle East as long as the forces of Israel still
occupy certain Arab territories.
87. Our draft resolution
endeavours
to solve this
problem by saying in operative paragraph 1:
“Calls upon Israel to withdraw
immediately
all
its forces to the positions they held prior to 5 June
1967.l’ [A/L.522/Rev.3
and Corr.1.l
We submit that if this provision were adopted and accepted, the next stage would be to examine in detail
the problems of the Middle East. After all, these problems, as some speakers
have pointed out, are older
than the United Nations itself. Therefore,
I do not
think that we can solve these problems by just adopting
a paragraph of a draft resolution.
88. The next stage which we believe is absolutely
necessary
is the examination
of the problem by the
appropriate bodies of the United Nations. In order t0
meet this point, we have said in operative paragraph 6:
“Requests that the Security Council consider all
aspects of the situation in the Middle East and seek
peaceful ways and means for the solution of all problems-legal,
political.
and humanitarian-through
appropriate
channels,
guided by the principles
of
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular
those contained in Articles
2 and 33.” [Ib&l.]
I would like to appeal to representatives
to read these
two Articles to which I have just referred-that
is,
Articles 2 and 33 of the Charter-and
they will see
that all the problems which are raised in operative
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution are, in fact, covered
by those articles,
89. Therefore, if we have failed to reach agreement,
it is simply because we do not believe that the question
of belligerency should be coupled with the question of
withdrawal.
We feel that that is a problem which could
be examined at a later stage. At the present
moment
the Assembly should be concerned only with the immediate problem of securing
withdrawal,
because it
iS only by withdrawal
that the conditions
for peace
negotiations can be obtained.
90. I am sorry to say that my delegation will therefore not be in a position to support the draft resolution submitted by the Latin American countries,
If we
are unable to support that draft resolution,
it is simply

1548th meeting - 4 July 1967
that it tries to seek solutions fox
problemS Which this Assembly has not had an opportunity to ~XEDIine
in detail, This Assembly
has not
examined the Bources of belligerency in the Middle
East. This Assembly surely cannot pronounce itself
on the question of belligerency when we have not
examined it in detail.
because

We think

91. I Wish ,to affirm once again that my delegation,
for those reasons, will be unable to support the draft
resolution submitted by the Latin American countries.
However, I wish also to take this opportunity to thank
the Latin American countries for the Spiritthey showed
in these negotiations. Although we were not able to
come to some understanding, we had the benefit of
meeting together and exchanging views. If we diffexed,
we, as usual, differed as friends,
92. Finally, I wish to appeal to this Assembly, The
time has come to deal not only with the problem of the
Middle East but with the problem of the United Nations
itself. Peace in the Middle East is in jeopardy,
Thousands of people in the Middle East are now in
trouble. It is for this As,sembly to alleviate that problem. It is only if this Assembly unanimously pronounces itself on the solution to the problems of the
Ididdle East that the United Nations will indeed remain a United Nations, If this Assembly fails to solve
the Middle East crisis, if we end this session of the
Assembly without arriving at any solution of this problem, it will be another occasion when the reputation
and indeed the foundations of this Organization will be
impaired.
93. Mr. IDZUMBUIR
(Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (translated from French): I should like to explain my delegation’s vote on the various draft resolutions before the General Assembly.
94, To begin with, may I express the hope that in the
circumstances,
neither the General Assembly nor the
delegation of the United States of America will press
for a vote on their draft resolutions. In that hope, I
shall refrain from indicating my Government attitude
in respect of those proposals,
96. As far as the other draft resolutions are concerned, I should like first of all to reaffirm that, in
the view of the delegation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, only respect for the Charter can guarantee lasting peace and peaceful coexistence among all
the States of the region; moreover, only respect for
the Charter can create favourable conditions for a
fruitful discussion of all the related problems upon
whose speedy solution a lasting peace in the Middle
East depends.
96. We are thinking in this connexion of the Problem
of the refugees, the problem of access to international
waters, and many other matters.
97. These fundamental principles of the Charter,
respect for which should be demanded from all the
parties, are in particular those set forth in Article 2
(3) and (4). The specific obligations which, this Article imposes
on the parties are to refrain
from ViOlating the territorial
integrity of any Member State
and not to threaten the existence of any State in the
region. No one will deny that these PrinoiPles have
been violated in the Middle East and are still being
violated, That is why we think that the General As-

9

sembly should call upon the parties to respect these
specific obligations and that the Security Council,
exexoising its prerogatives, should take the necessary
steps to ensure that they axe respected,
96. These are the principles which will guide our
delegation in its attitude towards the two substantive
draft reSOlUtiOnS that have been submitted to the
Assembly,
99. We believe that we have found an affirmation of
these fundamental principles and the need to respect
the obligations which ensuefrom them in the two draft
resolutions in documents A/L.522/Rev.3 and Corx.1
and A/L.523 and Add.1 and 2, although our delegation
has certain reservations in regard to their formulation,
100. In point of fact, we think that both draft resolutions could gain, one by being made decidedly more
balanced, and the other by being less detailed as regards the solution to be found for the problems which
axe still pending, However, we are ready to accord
both our support.
101. As regards the draft resolution in document
A/L.526 and Add.1 to 3, it goes without saying that
my delegation will support it, Indeed, it expresses
the humanitarian concern of my delegation, which has
decided to make an immediate contribution of U.S.
$20,000 to assist the Palestine refugees.
102. With regard to the draft resolution of Pakistan
on the status of Jerusalem (A/L.527/Rev.l), my delegation would like to say that at this stage it intends to
confine itself to the views which it will express through
its vote on the two draft resolutions appearing in document A/L.522/Rev.3 andCorr.1 andA/L.523 andAdd.
and’2.
103. Mr. PARTHASARATHI (India): Our deliberations
in the General Assembly have shownthat the United
Nations is anxiously concerned about the grave situation in West Asia, A great number of delegations have
clearly supported-and none has challenged-the cardinal principle of the Charter that force shall not be
used in settling disputes and that the United Nations
will not reoognize any advantage, territorial or otherwise, gained through force.
104. We are deeply interested in bringing about conditions for the establishment of a just and durable
peace in the entire region of West Asia. My delegation is aware of the existence of a number of serious
problems and issues in West Asia and does not minimise their complexity, but we are not pessimistic
about the possibilities of a peaceful resolution of those
difficulties. It is our firm belief that these problems
oan be dealt with on the basis of first things coming
first, We have been accused of giving a PreSCriPtion
for renewed hostilities; on the contrary, what wehave
been proposing is a recipe for the restoration of
peaceful conditions and the establishment of a durable
peace. As we conceive it, there should be reversion
to the Armistice Agreements, respect for which should
be ensured by the United Nations Truce Supervision
Crganization in Palestine.
195, We are convinced that once the central issue of
withdrawal,is tackled, all other problems Willfallinto
their proper perspective
and will be dealt with in their
turn. However, to make withdrawal conditional on the

10

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

settlement of long-standing and complexdisputes,
in an
atmosphere of tension, can only place an intolerable
strain on the efforts at peaceful settlement and will
come in the way of the establishment
of lasting peace.
106. As representatives
are aware, India iS a cosponsor of the draft resolution contained in document
A/L.522/Rev.3
and Corr.1.
We co-sponsored
this
draft resolution because, in our view, as was explained
by the Foreign Minister
of India on 22 June 1961
[ 1530th meeting], the first and most essential step to
bring about peace and stability
in West Asia is the
withdrawal
of Israeli armed forces to the positions
they. held prior to the outbreak of the recent hostilities. That is the one and only step which the General
Assembly can take, leaving the rest of the issues to
the Security Council for solutions and adjustments.
107. My delegationts attitude to the other draftresolutions and amendments will be governed by the principle I have just mentioned.
108. My delegation appreciates
the concern of our
Latin American colleagues and their sincere efforts
in putting forward draft resolution A/L.523 and Add.1
and 2. Nevertheless,
we must frankly
state that the
Latin American draft falls short of the acceptedprinciple and the primary objective which I mentioned
earlier.
It couples withdrawal
with the settlement of
complicated
issues, and it thus becomes a formula
for bargaining from a position of strength by Israel.
109. We have given very careful consideration
to the
draft, and our view is that it would lead to a deadlock because it does not give primacy to the central
issue of immediate withdrawals.
No State Member
of the United Nations, particularly
no small State,
could ever agree to negotiate so long as alien armed
forces remain on its soil anditissubjected
ta duress,

Mr. Pazhwak (A@hanistan) took the Chair.
110. We have in the last twenty-four
hours tried hard
with our Latin American colleagues to find a basis for
a common approach, but regrettably we have failed because of a profound disagreement
on the necessity of
bringing
about immediate withdrawals
before consideration
could be given to any other issue. T’his is
an issue
of principle for us, and thereforemy
delegation will vote against the Latin American draft,
111. A few moments ago the representative
of Trinidad and Tobago said that our draft resolutiondoes
not
go far enough. I hope that what I have just stated
proves that ours is a much more Practical and stepby-step
approach, Our complaint
is that the Latin
American draft resolution ignores the history of the
Middle East during the last twenty years. If the Arab
States have refused to change their attitude for the
last
twenty years, is it fair to ask them to do so now
when alien armies occupy vast chunks of their territory? Is it right for the Assembly
to tell the Arab
States that Israel need not withdraw
its armed forces
SO long as the Arabs do not, side by side, recognize
Israel,
do not end the state of belligerency,
do not
agree to maritime passage-in
fact, do not agree to a
host of conditions?
112. The approach of the Latin American draft resolution, if approved by the General Assembly, will have
far-reaohing
and. deleterious
consequences
for most

Special Session - Plenary
Member States,
might belong.

Meetings

to whichever

part

of the world

they

113. I now come to the two sets of amendments to our
draft resolution submitted by the delegations.of Albania
[A/L.5241 and Cuba [A/L.525],
respectively.
Mydelegation stands solidly behind the non-aligned and AfroAsian draft resolution
[A/L.522/Rev.3
and Corr,l]
which it has co-sponsored,
This draft resolution has
been hammered out after the most careful consideration, and it is consistent
with the principles
of the
Charter of the United Nations. In our view, it provides
a chance towards a just and peaceful resolution of the
very difficult
and dangerous situation prevailing
in
West Asia. What we are anxious for is to move cons tructively
towards finding a way for the re-establishment of peace on the basis of the principles
and
purposes of the Charter. We cannot, therefore countenance any move which thwarts our draft resolution by
bringing in all kinds of amendments
thereto. The
amendments before the Assembly do not represent a
constructive
approach which can find broad support,
My delegation therefore
cannot support either of the
two amendments submitted by Albania and Cuba,
114. The PRESIDENT:
Before I Call
on the next
speaker,
the representative
of Yugoslavia,
I should
like to apologize to Members for not having been at
their service in this Ball this morning and for some
time this afternoon, I was engaged inservices
to them
elsewhere. Also I wish to thank the distinguished VicePresidents
who have assisted me this morning and
this afternoon, I now call’ on the representative
of
Yugoslavia.
115. Mr, BOiOVIe
(Yugoslavia):
The draft reSOlUtion sponsored by non-aligned and Afro-Asian
States
is, as is well known, the result of a broad exchange
of views between a large number of delegations, whose
considered opinion it is that the most important
and
urgent task of this Assembly
is to secure an immediate withdrawal
of Israeli
armed forces from the
territories
of sovereign States Members of the United
Nations, By demanding immediate
withdrawal,
the
General Assembly would thereby reaffirm
the principle that no territorial
acquisition or other advantages
gained through the threat or use of force should be
recognized,
116. Animated by a spirit of co-operation
and desirous of evolving conditions that would permit consideration of all aspects of the problem, thedelegations
of non-aligned and Afro-Asian
States, the sponsors
of draft resolution A/L.522/‘Rev,3
and Corr.1,
held n
fruitful
exchange of views with representatives
of
some other groups, The revisions
of the originaldraft
resolution took into account the various opinions and
views expressed in the course of these consultations.
117. The sponsors have also stated on a number of
occasions,
while elaborating
the draft resolution,
that either they or their representatives
were ready
to meet with the Latin American
group or with its
respective representatives.
Unfortunately,
these efforts did not materialize
until yesterday
afternoon,
To our satisfaction,
meetings
between designated
representatives
of the non-aligned
and Afro-Asian
countries and of the Latin American group took place
yesterday
evening and today, To our regret,
these

1548th meeting
meetings
did not yield any results,
the differences
being differences
of principle and not of drafting,
118. The Latin American group continued to adhere
to its view that there can be no withdrawal
prior to
the ending of the state of belligerency,
On such a
premise,
naturally,
it was not possible to find a
common
meeting-ground,
Our position has been all
along and continues to be-and it is inconformity
with
the Charter
of the United Nations-that
there can be
no settlement
of any of the problems with which the
Assembly
is now dealing as long as foreign armed
forces
Continue to occupy territories
of sovereign
Member States of the United Nations,
119. Under such circumstances,
.and in view of the
Position
that has been expressed
in our statement
in the general debate, the delegation of Yugoslavia
will
vote against the draft resolution submitted by
the Latin American countries [A/L.523 and Add.1
and 21. That draft resolution, starting with the situation created by the use of force, is aimed at imposing
solutions and is therefore unrealistic.
120. I should now like to refer to amendments which
are before this Assembly. We have condemned the
aggression committed on 5 June of this year.We continue to maintain that view. However, having in mind
the whole structure of the draft resolution submitted
by non-aligned and Afro-Asian countries and the need
to create the necessary conditions for the accomplishment of this primary aim-that is, the immediate withdrawal of Israeii*armed
forces-the
delegation of
Yugoslavia finds it difficult to accept anyamendments
to the draft resolution, of which it is one of the sponsors, which would affect the present character and
aims of that draft resolution. Otherwise, and in another context, the condemnation of aggression would
be acceptable to the delegation of Yugoslavia as corresponding with the views we have expressed in the
general debate.
121. The PRESIDENT: I call on the last speaker in
explanation of vote, the representative of the United
Arab Republic.
122. Mr. PAW21 (United Arab Republic): At this Stage
of our deliberations, and in my capacity no less as a
member of the human family at large than as a representative of my country, I ask leave briefly to submit
some thoughts and refer to some facts which are of
particular
relevance to the work we are all trying to
do here and to the draft resolutions and suggestions
which have been submitted in relation to it.
123. It is only just and right that my delegation and
many others should agree with those who say, as we
should all say, that the aggressors must not be allowed to retain the spoils of their aggression, that
they must be condemned, and that they must compensate the victims of aggression, It is equally just and
right
that my delegation and many others should
disagree with those who say, as none of us should
say, that aggression must be condoned, that the aggressor must be rewarded, and that the victims of
aggression must be made to pay.
124. Please permit me at this point to say something
which is not a statement of defiance but a statement of
fact. There is no doubt that any delegation present

- 4 July 1967

11

would consider it impossible to come to this rostrum
and agree to accept for its country the approach which
some are recommending that we should adopt, according to which an aggressor would be allowed to occupy
the territory of others and would not withdraw until it
had exacted a price for that withdrawal, I defy any
delegation to come up here and say that. Nor can
anyone believe that a delegation would consider coming
to this rostrum and accepting for its country and its
people what has been meted out to the Arabs. The
Arabs have been made responsible for Hitler’s misdeeds; they have been made Hitler’s whipping boy.
They have been penalized for Hitler’s misdeeds.
People of Jewish extraction, who often came from
lands which Hitler’s hand had never reached, have
been forced upon Arab lands, to the exclusion and
expulsion of the lawful Arab inhabitants,
125. Israel, from the starting point through the
moment when Mr. Eban assured us of Israel’s disdain for whatever majority vote of the Assemblyeven if 121-that would order it to withdraw from
recently occupied territory, has gone on compounding
and continues diligently to compound its contempt of
the Assembly, There has been and continues to be the
unfolding of the Zionorama picture-not a mere film
but an ugly and most disturbing reality of life. Just
look at the motley crowd, the misguided, the frightened,
the Zionism-drugged, and their Uncle Sam, cajoling,
arm-twisting,
their ubiquitous, omnipresent Uncle
Sam, with his steamroller, gold bag and all, leading
the band. Just look and try in vain not to feel disdain.
Just look and try not to see theabyss. What a far cry,
what a sad retreat, what a dizzy descent the Johnson
posture is from the wise andmoral stance of Jeffersbn
when he said, “I have sworn upon the altar of God
eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over
the mind of man.”
126. Playing its principal part, Israel in a few days
destroyed more towns and villages and committed
more savage acts all over the territories it invaded
than the vandals of old committed in many a month.
It took action, enacted so-called laws, and made
statements relating especially to the West Bank of
Jordan and to the Gaza Strip, indicating unequitocally
its dreams of lingering forever and belying its pretence of intending to go away.
127. Naturally Israel feigns that it has no ambitions
of territorial
aggrandizement and that its retention
of the territories which it has recently occupied is no
more than transient, Yet let us have at least a sampling
of the successive Israeli acts and statements in this
c onnexion,
128, The New York Post published on 28 June the
statement that’%raelwrested
theOld City from Jordan
during the Middle East war, and Government leaders
have made clear they would not give it up.” Mr. Eban
stressed at a news conference at the United Nations on
1 July that Israel’s policy remained the preservation
of what he called the unity of Jerusalem. These are
acrobatics of words, We have more and more of that
as we go on.
129. The New York Times reported on 29 June that
“the absorption of the Jordanian sector was carried
out administratively,
but in a carefully planned, paramilitary fashion”.

.

12

General Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

130, The Israelis,
even according to the journal called
the Jewish Advocate of 29 June went further;
that
journal stated that “the Bank of Israel introduced
Israeli currency
as the only legal tender in the new
areas of the United Jerusalem”.
i31. The Israelis,
moreover,
have emphasized that
if they do not have their say about the future of the
West Bank, they are, as reported in The New York
Times of 30 June, “expected to hold at least the
western
part of this region”. Even as late as yesterday and today, we have read and heard that the
Israeli broadcast
announcing that refugees from the
Jordan River’s
West Bank would be permitted
to
return stipulated that they should return by 10 August
and that no one who left after today would be allowed
to return.
132. Are these acts and statements
of logic in line
with the Israeli pretence of not coveting any territorial aggrandizement?
Or* are these Israeli professions of good intent in this regard much rather flat
lies and a sustained insult to this body, the General
Assembly?
133. Yet hearing Mr. Eban speak today for the 150th
time or so during this special session and launching
a renewed attack against the United Arab Republic
and its President,
some might be inclined to believe
actual history no more and to think that it was Egypt
which committed
an aggression
against Israel
in
1956 and not the other way around; and that the aggressor
against Syria, Jordan and the United Arab
Republic in 1967 was not Israel but some mysterious
fiend for whom the Federal Bureau of Investigation
or its equivalent must immediately start a search.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

137. Are all these happenings, all these enactments,
all these statements,
and all these acts of horror
such that the Arabs can be expected to submit to them?
Are they such that the United Nations, with its Charter in hand and its principles inmind and in heart, can
be expected to put up with them?
138. Can the Arab countries and the Arab peoplesall
over North Africa and East Africa and a great part of
West Africa really be expected meekly to accept such
destruction
of their own rights and their own selves7
Can they be expected meekly to allow their communications facilities
and the flow of the excellent and
less-costly
Arabian oil to countries
whose Governments are supporting
Israeli aggression?
Can they
again really be expected meekly to allow a large part
of their sterling and dollar earnings to lie in the coffers and at the disposal of the banks of those countries, instead of channelling all these earnings out of
these coffers, out of the reach of thesebanks,
and into
the healthy processes of Arab economic evolution-the
projects and progress for all of which there is particularly ample scope within the frontiers
of each and all
of the Arab oil-producing
countries?
139. On one condition, namely, respect for our rights,
we the Arabs want our communications
facilities to
resume their role as the arteries
of goodwill and of
world as well as Arab prosperity.
We want our oil
to flow to as many countries as possible. We want it
to help in creating more and more of the good things
of life for as many people as possible,” We want not
only to co-operate,
as we have done before, in the
maintenance of world peace and prospesity,
but to
foster and redouble this co-operation.
On only one
condition: respect for our rights,

134. Let us look, even if it pains us, as it is bound
to, at ‘the double or triple number of Arab refugees
in the recently invaded Arab lands, We read the following not from our own Arab reports,
but from an
Associated Press dispatch:

140. For those reasons and for many other good
reasons,
my delegation trusts that the vote of this
Assembly
will uphold the principles
of the Charter
and will heed the call of justice and of foresight,

“Refugees who crossed the improvised foot-bridge
on the wreckage of the Allenby Bridge started walking toward Amman. The representatives
of their
Government on the East Bank urged them togo back
to and keep their homes, but Israeli soldiers guarding the bridge barred them.”

141. The PRESIDENT:
In view of the fact that the
statement which has just been made was not strictly
an explanation of vote, if any other representative
wishes to speak at this stage I shall be pleased to
call upon him, Since no other representative
wishes
to speak, the representative
of the United Arab Republic was the last speaker before the voting.

135. On 26 June last, the Associated Press reported
from Tel Aviv that the Israeli
Defence Minister,
Moshe Dayan, had made a statement to the effect that
about 300,000 Palestinian inhabitants
of Gaza might
be transferred
to camps in the occupied region west
of the Jordan River. The Associated
Press added that
Dayan declared that he had already discussed
this
idea with officials of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency.’ Dayan also declared that he believed
that Israel should allow the inhabitants of Gaza to be
deported in Israeli buses from Gaza, just as it did,
step by step, with the refugees from the occupied
regions of Jordan,
136. Let those, then, who believe or pretend to believe the fictioq of Israel’s
insecurity
ponder. Let
them open their eyes and see not the fiction but the
reality of Arab security being continuously threatened
and many a time exploded by Israeli aggressions,
the
most salient examples of which happened in 1956 and
last month in 1967.

142. The General Assembly
will now consider
ths
request made by the representative
of Yugoslavia
that priority
should be given to the draft resolution
in document A/L.522/Rev.3
and Corr.1. As T understand it, that is a formal request before the Assembly,
If no representative
wishes to speak on this point,
and if I hear no objection, I shall take it that the ASsembly approves the request of the representative
of Yugoslavia.
It was so decided.
143. The PRESIDENT:
At this stage, for the reasons
that T. have explained to the Assembly
in connexioa
with other draft resolutions,
I call on the representative of Pakistan, who wishes to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/L.527/Rev.l.
144. Mr. PIRZADA
(Pakistan):
I am grateful to ~0%
Mr. President,
and to the Members of the Assembly
for acceding to our request to be permitted to intro-

1548th meeting
duce at this stage, on behalf of the delegations of
Guinea, Iran, Mali, Niger, Turkey and my own delegation, the draft resolution
contained in document
A/L.527/Rev.l.
The draft resolution reads:
/
“The General Assembly,
“Deeply concerned at the situation prevailing in
Jerusalem
as a result of the measures
taken by
Israel to change the status of the City,
“1.

Considers

that these measures

are invalid:

“2. Calls upon Israel to rescind all measures
already
taken and to desist forthwith
from taking
any action which would alter the status of Jerusalem;
“3, Requests the Secretary-General
to report to
the General Assembly and the Security Council on
the situation and the implementation
of the present
resolution not later thanoneweekfromits
adoption.”
145. The Assembly
will appreciate
that the draft
resolution
is self-explanatory,
The Holy City of Jerusalem commands the deepest spiritual
allegiance of
millions of people in all continents. Its fate during and
since the recent hostilities
has, therefore,
caused
the deepest anguish in the Islamic
and Christian
worlds
and among the more responsible elements of
Judaism.
It is a matter of satisfaction
that, both in
the Assembly and outside, His Holiness the Pope, the
Heads of States and Governments,
and the Foreign
Ministers
of many Member States have expressed
their deep concern at Israel’s unilateral action. The
draft resolution seeks nothing more than to make this
concern effective.
146. We note the provision
regarding the Holy City
in the draft resolution sponsored by the Latin American countries.
Paragraph
4 of this text, however,
provides
only for the consideration
of the status of
Jerusalem
at the twenty-second
session of the General
Assembly.
This would have the effect meanwhile
of
permitting
Israel’s
illegal action to continue and be
consolidated.
Considering
the paramount importance
attached ‘to the question by the faithful of the great
world
religions, it is obviously not desirable that the
Assembly
should rest content with a passive role.
147. I would appeal to the General Assembly not to
entertain
the comforting
illusion that Israel’s
action
to alter the status of Jerusalem does not amount to
annexation,
Some misleading statements
to this effect have been made by Israel’s
leaders, Mr. Eban
was reported as having said that he would choose his
own vocabulary to describe Israel’s action. The matter
is too serious to be only a question of vocabulary or
a play of words. Any so-called municipal or administrative
action, accompanied by such measures
as
census-taking,
the demolition
of habitations,
the
imposition
of Israeli currency,
etc., has the same
effect
as a constitutional
action in consolidating
physical
seizure and possession.
No amount of hairsplitting
can possibly
delude world opinion, which
is gravely agitated on this issue.
148. Current developments,
of which the Assembly
is aware, and in particular
the strident defiance and
stentorian
harangue to which the Assembly was subjected earlier today by Mr. Eban, make the adoption
of our draft resolution a matter of the greatest urgency.

- 4 July 1967

13

149. The question of Jerusalem goes far beyond any
clash of State interests
or conflict of ideologies.
It
unites people of four continents and many faiths. It
is our earnest belief, therefore,
that the Assembly
will adopt our draft resolution.
150. The PRESIDENT:
The Assembly
has decided
to give priority
to draft resolution
A/L.522/Rev,3
and Corr.1.
However,
before the voting begins, I
should like to inform Members
that I intend to put
the proposals
to the vote in the following
order:
First, the amendments contained in document A/L.525;
second, the amendment contained in document A/L.524;
third,
draft resolution
A/L.522/Rev.3
and Corr.1;
fourth, draft resolution
A/L.519;
fifth, draft resolution A/L.520;
sixth,
draft resolution
A/L.521;
seventh, draft resolution
A/L.523
and Add.1 and 2;
eighth, draft resolution
A/L.526
and Add.l-3;
and
ninth, draft resolution A/L.527/Rev.l,
151. It is understood
that representatives
who wish
to explain their votes after the vote will be heard
after voting has been completed on all the draft resolutions and amendments.
152. Is there any objection to the procedure
of
voting that I have put before the Assehbly?
If I hear
no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly wishes
to proceed in the way I have suggested.

It was so decided.
153. The PRESIDENT:
We shall now proceed to vote
on all the draft resolutions
and amendments
before
the General Assembly,
I understand
that a roll-call
vote has been requested on all the proposals except
draft resolution A/L.526 and Add.l-3.
154. Before we proceed to the voting,
the Under-Secretary,
Mr. Narasimhan,
the voting procedure.

I would ask
to explain

155. Mr. NARASIMHAN
(Under-Secretary
for General Assembly
Affairs):
In respect
of the roll-call
votes that are to be taken now in the General Assembly,
may I request representatives
to be kind
enough, at the same time as they call out their votes
when their names are called, and not before, to press
the corresponding
button in the small panels on their
desks: the green button at the extreme left for “Yesn,
the red button at the extreme right for nNon, and the
amber button in the centre for “Abstention”.
156. The PRESIDENT:
Amendments to draft resolution A/L.522/Rev.3
and Corr,l
have been submitted
by Albania [A/L.5241 and by Cuba [A/L.525].
We shall
first vote on the amendments.
According
to rule 92
of the rules of procedure:
“When two or more amendments
are moved to a
proposal,
the General Assembly
shall first vote on
the amendment furthest removed in substance from
the original
proposal and then on the amendment
next furthest removed therefrom,
and SO onn.
157. I therefore put to the vote the amendments proposed by the delegation of Cuba in document A/L.525.
Although that document contains two amendments,
I
understand that the delegations of Cuba does not insist
that a vote be taken on the second amendment. I therefore now put to the vote the first amendment proposed
by Cuba in document A/L.525.

’

General

14

Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

A vote was taken by roll-caZ1.
Honduras, having been drawn by lot by the President, was calZed upon to vote first.
In favolir: Hungary, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritania, Mongolia, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics,
United Arab Republic, Yemen,
Albania, Algeria,
Bulgaria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Czechoslovakia.
Against: Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan,
Kenya, Laos, Lesotho, Liberia,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malawi,
Malaysia,
Malta, Mexico,
Nepal,
Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal,
Rwanda,
Sierra
Leone, Spain, Sweden,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tpbago, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burma,
Cameroon, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Costa Rica, Cyprus,
Dahomey, Denmark,
Dominican
Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador,
Ethiopia,
Finland,
Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana.
Abstaining: Lebanon, Libya, Mali, Morocco, Niger,
Romania, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa,
Tunisia, United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia,
Zambia,
Burundi,
Cambodia,
Central
African
Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
France, Gabon,
Guinea.

The amendment was rejected
22 abstentions,. ’

by 78 votes to20, with

158. The PRESIDENT:
Next I put to the vote the
amendment contained in document A/L.524,
submitted by Albania,

A vote was taken by roll-call.
Morocco, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first:
In favour:

Morocco, Pakistan, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Arab Republic, Yemen, Z,ambia, Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria,’ Bulgaria, Burundi, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Guinea, Hungary, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia.

Against: Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Sweden,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Costa Rica, Dahomey, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Finland, Gambia, Ghana,
Ecuador, El Salvador,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Laos, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malta, Mexico,

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

Abstaining:
Nepal, Romania, Senegal, Singapore,
South Africa, Spain, Turkey, United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Burma, Cambodia, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Cyprus,
Ethiopia, France, Gabon, India, Indonesia, Iran,
The amendment was rejected by 66 votes to 32, wlfh
22 abs ten tions .
159. The PRESIDENT: Before we proceed to a vote
on the draft resolution contained in document A/L.622/
Rev.3 and Corr.1, I call on the representativeof Albania to speak on a point of order.
160. Mr. BUD0 (Albania) (translated from French):
When we expressed our views yesterday [ 1545th meeting] on draft resolution A/L.522/Rev.3 and Corr.1,
we laid some stress on our reservations regarding
paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 5 and6,Inview of our delegation’s
position, we should like to ask for separate votes on
the operative paragraphs, that is to say, that we should
vote first on paragraph 1, and thenonparagraphs 2, 3,
4, 5 and 6.
161. The PRESIDENT: Members have heard the request of the representative of Albania for separate
votes, Two delegations may speak in favour of that request, and two against,
162. Mr. TINOCO (Costa Rica) (translated from
Spanish): If it was ever wrong to vote separately on a
proposal, this is the time. Every one of the proposals
before the Assembly has been carefully worked out
and every word and sentence weighed.
163. If, for instance, the Latin American pxOpOSa1
[A/L.523 and Add.1 and 21 were taken separately,
the balance which our delegation sought to maintain
in presenting it to the General Assembly would be
lost, Were we to vote separately on the various parts
of the resolution now before us, we might also be
making the serious mistake of altering and distorting
the intentions of those who submitted it.
164. With all due respect, my delegation opposes the
motion put forward by the representative of Albania.
165. The PRESIDENT: One delegation has spoken in
opposition to the motion which has been made by the
representative of Albania. Does any representative
wish to speak in favour of the motion? It appears that
that is not the case, Does any representative wish to
second the statement of the representative of Costa
Rica in opposition?
166. As that is not the case, I shall put to the vote
the motion of the representative of Albania,

The motion
abs ten tions .

was rejected by 83 votes to 12, with 22

167.. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote
the draft resolution contained in document A/L.522/
Rev.3 and Corr.1.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
Saudi Arabia, having been drawn bylotby
dent, was called upon to vote first.

the Presl-

In favour:
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Spain,
Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Arab Republic, United Republic of

’

1548th meeting
Tanzania,
Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Bulgaria,
Burma,
Burundi, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Cameroon, Ceylon, Congo (Brazzaville) , Congo (Democratic
Republie of), Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
France, Gabon,
Greece, Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mongolia,
,Morocco,
Nigeria,
Pakistan,
Poland, Romania.
Against: Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Barbados,
Belgium,
Bolivia,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica,
Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El
Salvador,
Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Lesothe, Liberia,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malawi,
Mexico,
Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines.
Abstainning: Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sweden, Thailand, Upper Volta, Central African Republic,
Chad, China, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Finland,
Ivory
Coast, Kenya, Laos, Malta, Nepal,g
Niger,
Portugal,
Rwanda.
The result of the vote was
against, with 20 abstentions.

$3 in favour

and 46

The draft resolution was not adopted, having failed
to obtain the required two-thirds
majority.
168. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the Vote
the draft resolution which has been submitted by the
delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
[A/L.519].
Separate votes have been requested on
each of the operative paragraphs
of the draft resolution.
169. I now put to the vote in their entirety the preambular paragraphs of draft resolution A/L.519.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Italy9 having been drawn by lot by the President,
called upon to vote first.

was

In faVOttr:
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Pakistan,
Poland, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, United Flepublic of Tanzania, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Afghanistan,
Algeria, Bulgaria, Burundi, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq.
Against: Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Lesotho,
Liberia,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malawi, Malta,
Mexico,
Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, NorWay, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Sweden, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Canada,
y The delegation
of Nepal subsequently
informed
the SecretaryGeneral
that it wished to be recorded
as having been in favour in the
vote on the draft resolution,

- 4 July 1967

15

Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Dahomey,
Denmark,
Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland,
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Abstaming:
Kenya, Laos, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria,
Romania,
Senegal, Singapore, South Africa,
Spain,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Burma, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, China, Congo (Brazzaville), Cyprus, France, Gabon, Iran.
The preambular
paragraphs
of the draft resolution
were rejected by $7 votes to 36, with 24 abstentions.
I now put to thevoteoperative
170. The PRESIDENT:
paragraph 1 of draft resolution A/L.519.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Saudi Arabia, havmg been drawn
dent, was called upon to vote first.

bylotbythe

Presi-

In favour: Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab
Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, YugoAfghanistan,
Algeria,
Bulgaria,
slavia,
Zambia,
Burundi, Byelorussian
SovietSocialist
Republic, Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Guinea, Hungary, India,
Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya,
Mauritania,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Malaysia,
Mali,
Pakistan, Poland.
Against: Sierra Leone, Sweden, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil,
Canada,
Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Dahomey, Denmark,
Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland,
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras,
Iceland, Ireland,
Israel,
Italy, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Laos, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Madagascar , Malawi, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines,
Portugal, Rwanda,
Abs ta&&g: Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Burma, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, China, Congo (Brazzaville),
Cyprus,
France, Gabon, Iran, Kenya, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Romania.
Operative paragraph
1 of the draty resolution
rejected by $?’ votes to 36, with 23 abstentions.

was

171. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to the vote operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution A/L.519.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Syria, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Syria, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Afghanistan, Algeria, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, ByelorussianSoviet
Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Ceylon, Congo (Brazzaville) , Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Greece, Guinea,
,Hungary,
India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait,
Lebanon,
Libya,

16

General

Assembly

- Fifth Emergency

golia, Morocco,
Nepal, Pakistan,
Poland,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal,y Somalia, Sudan.

Romania,

Against: Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Veneiuela, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Denmark,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
El
Salvador, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway,
Panama,
Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Sweden.
Abstafnfng:
Thailand,
Turkey,
Cameroon,
Central
African
Republic,
Chad, China, Finland,
France,
Gabon, Iran, Ivory Coast, Japan, Kenya, Laos, Madagascar, Mexico, Niger, Nigeria, Portugal, Singapore,
South Africa, Spain.
Operative paragraph
2 of the draft resplutfon
rejeoted by 48 votes to 4.5, with 22 abstentions,

was

1’72. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to thevote operative
paragraph 3 of draft resolution
A/L.519.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Belgium, having been drawn
was called upon to vote first.

by lot by the President,

In favour:
Bulgaria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Guinea,
Hungary,
India, Indonesia,
Iraq,
Jordan,
Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Morocco,
Pakistan,
Poland,
Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Sudan, ’ Syria,, Tunisia,
Ukrainian
Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United
Arab
Republic,
United Republic
of
Tanzania, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan,
Algeria,

1

Botswana,
Brazil,
Belgium,
Bolivia,
Against:
Canada, Chile, ,Colombia,
Costa Rica, Dahomey,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Finland, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel,
Italy, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Patiama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Sweden, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and
Northern
Ireland,
United States of America,
Upper
Volta, Uruguay,
Venezuela,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria, Barbados,
Abstafnfng:
Burma,
Burundi,
Cameroon,
Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, China, Congo (Brazzaville), Cyprus,
France, Gabon, Greece, Iran, Kenya,
Laos, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria,
Portugal,
Romania,
Senegal, Singapore,
South Africa,
Spain, Thailand,
Turkey, Uganda, Zambia.
Operative paragraph
3 of the draft resolution
rejected by $4 votes fo 34, with 28 abstentions.

was

173. The PRESIDENT:
We will now proceed to arollcall vote on operative paragraph 4 of draft resolution
A/L.519.
u In a letter dated 5 July I967 addressed to the Secretary-General
the representative of Senegal asked that his vote should be recorded as
abstaining.

Special Session - Plenary

Meetings

A vote was taken by roll-call.
El Salvador, having been drawn by lot by the President was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco, Pakistan, Poland,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialipt
Republics, United Arab Republic, United R.epublic of
Tanzania, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Afghanistan,
Algeria, Bulgaria, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia.
Against: El Salvador, Finland, Gambia,’ Ghana,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Lesotho, Liberia,
Luxkmbourg, Malawi, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Sweden,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of Ame- I
rioa, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina,
Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Dahomey, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador D
Abstafnfng: France, Gabon, Greece, Iran, Kenya,
Laos, Madagascar, .Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Romania,
Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Thailand,
Turkey, Uganda, Burma, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, China, Congo (Brazzaville),
Cyprus.
Operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution was
rejected by 5’4votes to 36, with 26 absten Cons.
174. The PRESIDENT: Since no part of the draft
resolution. [A/L.5191 h,as been adopted, there is no
need to take a vote on it as a whole.
175. We turn now to the draft resolution submitted
by the United States of America [A/L.520]. I have
been informed that the United States is not pressing
for a vote on its draft resolution,
176. I therefore now put to the vote the draft resolution submitted by Albania [A/L.521].
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Uganda, havfng been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic,
Yemen, Albania, Algeria, Bulgaria, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
wauritania, Mongolia. Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sudan,
Syria,
Against: Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo (Democratic Republic of), Costa Rica, Cyprus, Dahomey,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, E 1 Salvador,
Ethiopia, Finland, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,

1548th meeting
Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan,
Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi,
Malaysia,
Malta, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway,
Pakistan,
Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, Sierra
Leone, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey.

Abstaining: United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Afghanistan,
Burma, Burundi,
Cameroon,
Central African
Republic,
Ceylon,
Chad, Congo
(Brazzaville),
France, Gabon, Guinea, Kenya, Laos,
Libya, Mali, Morocco,
Niger,
Nigeria,
Romania,
Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Tunisia.
The draft resolution
with 27 abstentions.

was rejected by 71 votes to 22,

177. The PRESIDENT: We turn now to the draft resolution submitted
by several Members in document
A/L,523 and Add.1 and 2, as revised by the sponsors.
As the representative
of Trinidad and Tobago announced earlier [para, 581, operative paragraph 1 (a)
reads as follows in the revised text:
ll(&) Israel
to withdraw
the territories
occupied
recent conflict;n.

all its forces from all
by it as a result of the

A vote was taken by roll-call.
Peru, having been drawn bylot by the President,
called upon to vote first.

was

1n favour: Peru, Philippines, Sierra Leone, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republio,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Costa Rica, Dahomey, Denmark,Dominioan
Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Lesotho, Liberia,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malawi, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway,
Panama,
Paraguay.

Against: Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Arab Republic, United Republic of
Tanzania, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Afghanistan,
Albania,, Algeria,
Bulgaria,
Burundi,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Ceylon, Congo (Brazzaville)
,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Finland, Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, MorOCCO,
Pakistan.
Abstaining:
Portugal,
Rwanda, Singapore,
South
Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Turkey,
Burma, Cambodia,
France, Gabon, Greece, Iran, Israel, Kenya, Laos,
Malta, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
The res tilt of the vote was 5’?in favour and 43 agalns t,
with 20 abstentions,
‘.The draft resolutfon was not adopted, having failed
to obtain the required two-thirds majori&.

- 4 July 1967

17

178. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to the vote the draft
resolution
submitted by several members
and contained in document A/L.526 and Add.l-3.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
Luxembourg, having been drawn by lat bythe President, was called upon to vote first,
In favour: Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda,
Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South
Africa,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian
Soviet “Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Arab Republic, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Upper Volta,
Uruguay,
Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia,
Afghanistan,
Algeria, Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Barbados,
Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
,j I)“,
Congo (Brazzaville)
, Congo (Democratic
Republic of),
Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Dahomey, Denmark,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador , E 1 Salvador,
Ethiopia,
Finland,
France,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel,
Italy, Ivory Coas‘t, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya,
Kuwait,
Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia,
Libya.
Agalns t: None.
Abstaining: Syria, Cuba.
The draftresolution
with 2 abstentions.

was adopted byll6votes

to none,

179. The PRESIDENT:
The resolution which has just
been adopted by the General Assembly expresses
in
the clearest
and most explicit fashion the concern of
the Assembly
for the humanitarian
aspects of the
situation in the Middle East, Therefore,
I hope that
Members
will
consider
it appropriate
if, at this
point in our proceedings,
I again make a very brief
reference
to the situation
of the refugees and the
civilian population, a situation to which I referred
in
my statement here on the afternoon of 26 June [1536th
meeting] a
180. I believe that we are all aware that in the last
few days a very considerable
number of Governments,
private organizations
and agencies, as well as indi-,
vidual citizens in many countries,
have come forward
to offer financial or material contributions
to help to
alleviate the condition of the homeless and the wounded,
The situation remains and will remain critical,
for
the need far exceeds the means available. A vastly
greater effort and amuchwider
response are required.
Nevertheless,
I feel that it is only appropriate
to
record
here a profound expression
of gratitude
to
all those Governments
*and private individuals
alike
who, seeing the need and understanding
the urgency,
have contributed generously and promptly.

’

General Assembly

18

- Fifth Emergency

181. Finally,
I put to the
A/L.527/Rev.l.
A vote was taken by roll-call,

vote

draft

resolution

pinland, having been drawn
was called upon to vote first.

by lot by the President,

In favour: Finland, France, Gambia, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India,
Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Ireland,
Ivory Coast, Japan,
Jordan,
Kuwait,
Laos, Lebanon,
Lesotho,
Libya,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore,
Somalia,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia,
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Argentina,
Austria,
Belgium,
Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic,
Cambodia,
Cameroon,
Canada,
Ceylon, Chad, Chile, China, Congo (Brazzaville),
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark,
D ominioan Republic, Ecuador, E 1 Salvador, Ethiopia.

Litho

in UN.

Special Session - Plenary
Against:

Meetings

None.

Abstaining: Gabon, Iceland, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya,
Liberia,
Malawi,
Malta, Portugal,
Rwanda, South
Africa, United States of America, Uruguay, Australia,
Barbados, Bolivia, Central African Republic, Colombia, Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Dahomey.
The draft resolution
with 20 abstentions.

was adopted by99 votes to none,

182. The PRESIDENT:
The Assembly has now voted
on all the proposals that were before it. Some delegations wish to explain their votes after the voting. There
are, up to now, sixteen suoh delegations on the list.
After listening to those explanations of vote, we shall
have to deal with the report of the Credentials
Committee, and I expect that there will be delegations that
will wish to speak on that item too. Therefore,
if it is
agreeable to Members of the Assembly, I suggestthat
we adjourn this meeting and schedule a meeting for
tomorrow
afternoon, when we shall proceed to complete our work.
183. Since I hear no objection,
journed until 3 o’clock tomorrow

this meeting
afternoon,

is ad-

The meeting rose at 8.05 p.m.

17868-July 1976-2,400
