S/PV.8937

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8937

th meeting
Monday, 20 December 2021, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Mathur
Ms. Byrne Nason
Ms. Muigai
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585 (2021)
(S/2021/1029)
Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations Humanitarian Operations in
the Syrian Arab Republic (S/2021/1030)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-40995 (E)
*2140995*

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585
(2021) (S/2021/1029)
Report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations humanitarian operations in the
Syrian Arab Republic (S/2021/1030)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Ms. Amani Ballour, Syrian-born
paediatrician and advocate of women’s and children’s
rights.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2021/1029, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449
(2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585 (2021), and
document S/2021/1030, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on United Nations humanitarian
operations in the Syrian Arab Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: We meet at another year’s end,
and we can look back on 2021 only as a year of
deepening suffering of the Syrian people. Despite
no shift in the front lines, we have seen continuing
violence against civilians and systematic human rights
2/27

20/12/2021

abuses, including against women and girls. Levels of
hunger and poverty have escalated as the economy has
continue to implode, with 14 million people in need,
the highest number since the conflict began. Many tens
of thousands remain detained, abducted or missing.
Thirteen million civilians remain displaced inside and
outside the country, many of the children not knowing
their homeland, as prospects for a safe, dignified and
voluntary return are not improving, and remain a
continuing challenge for Syria’s neighbours. Syria
remains fragmented into several areas that seem to be
drifting apart, as de facto authorities entrench their
control on the ground and five foreign armies continue
to jostle in the theatre. Syria continues to radiate
instability — a haven for mercenaries, drug trafficking
and terrorism.
Six years since its adoption, we are regrettably a
long way from implementing resolution 2254 (2015) in
a manner that could ease the suffering of the Syrian
people, meet their legitimate aspirations and restore
Syria’s sovereignty and unity. I believe, however, there
are possibilities for progress that need to be explored in
2022. Why do I say this? There are two main reasons.
First, all parties are confronting what I call a
strategic stalemate on the ground that has continued
for 21 months, with no shifts in front lines, making
it increasingly clear that no existing actor or group of
actors can determine the outcome of the conflict and
that the military solution remains an illusion.
Secondly, there are grave risks and costs to all
by simply trying to muddle through the unacceptable
status quo, especially given the humanitarian suffering,
the continuing displacement crisis, the collapse of the
economy, the de facto division of the country, the
dangers of renewed escalation and the continued threat
posed by terrorism.
I have been highlighting those dynamics in all my
engagements. With every passing month, I have sensed
a broader realization than before — that political and
economic steps are needed and that those can truly
happen only together, step by step and step for step. I
have travelled extensively in the region, and I met with
the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Oman,
Egypt and the United Arab Emirates in November and
with the Government of Lebanon earlier this month.
I recently travelled to Damascus for wide-ranging
discussions with the Syrian Government. I also recently
briefed American, European, Arab and Turkish envoys
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

when they met in Brussels, and, as we speak today,
my Deputy, Ms. Khawla Matar, is en route to NurSultan where she will meet with Russian, Turkish,
Iranian and other officials participating in an Astana
format meeting.
My sense from all those engagements is that
there remains a great level of mistrust on all sides. A
common message that I hear from many is that, “We
have made steps, but those on the other sides have not”.
Nevertheless, in my opinion, there is enough interest
from all sides to test what might be possible via a wider
political process. In order to further explore that, I have
begun consulting with senior officials from key Syrian
and bilateral stakeholders in bilateral consultations
in Geneva.
Those are under way and will continue in January.
That is the first set of consultations in what I believe
needs to be a rolling process. So far, the Russian
Federation, the European Union, Turkey and Qatar
have participated in bilateral consultations with me
in Geneva. I look forward to engaging with additional
participants in the new year. I am asking each
stakeholder not only their priorities and demands, but
also what they are prepared to put on the table in that
context to help move the process forward.
In time, I would hope that we can begin to define
and agree on incremental, reciprocal, mutual, realistic,
precise and verifiable steps that can be taken in parallel
to build trust and confidence and help move the political
process forward in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Let me recall why the political solution in Syria must
be Syrian-owned and Syrian-led. Many issues are not
solely in the hands of the Syrians. Moreover, we have
seen that, when key stakeholders have worked together
in taking mutual steps on issues of common concern, at
least some progress has been possible.
For example, United States-Russian channels
laid the groundwork for resolution 2585 (2021),
and it is important that we maintain and build on
that. As the Secretary-General states in his recent
report (S/2021/1030), we must continue to take every
opportunity to address humanitarian needs, including
by further increasing access and further expanding
early-recovery efforts. I look forward to hearing
more from Martin Griffiths on those issues. The
recent Brussels and tomorrow’s Nur-Sultan meetings,
which I mentioned earlier, are important because
they can address issues on the ground, especially of a

S/PV. 8937

humanitarian and security character. Such efforts will
undoubtedly continue.
Nevertheless, the truth is that all existing channels
and formats exclude at least one of the critical Syrian or
international players. I am convinced that we need all of
those with a stake in the conflict involved in the common
political effort if we are to see concrete progress on the
issues that matter most both to the Syrians themselves
and in terms of regional stability, which includes steps
that could actually move us towards a safe, calm and
neutral environment and could reinforce a Syrian-led
political dialogue.
We must channel frustrations over the lack of
progress and decide to take initiatives towards a
coordinated strategy on a broader process. I hope that,
in that way, we can set in motion a virtuous cycle of
reciprocal steps and build trust and confidence and
the process could meet the aspirations of the Syrians,
enable refugees to return voluntarily and in safety and
dignity and fully restore Syria’s serenity, unity and
territorial integrity.
Let me note that, while in Nur-Sultan, my team will
attend a meeting of the working group on the release of
detainees, abductees, the handover of bodies and the
identification of missing persons. We will continue to
urge meaningful progress on the various aspects of the
file. Team members will also review the most recent
release operation under the working group’s umbrella
when on 16 December, in an operation observed by my
Office, five persons from each side were simultaneously
released in northern Syria. What is absolutely clear
is that wide-scale action with regard to releases,
particularly women, children, the sick and the elderly,
and sharing information on the fate and whereabouts of
missing persons are needed to move forward. I urged
that during my recent visit to Damascus.
As I work to advance a broader process, I am
actively engaged in seeking to reconvene the Syrianled and Syrian-owned United Nations-facilitated
Constitutional Committee. In October and November,
Deputy Special Envoy Matar went twice to Damascus
for consultations with regard to a new session and
also met in Istanbul with the Syrian Negotiations
Commission and the co-Chairs, which it nominated.
Just over a week ago, as I mentioned earlier, I travelled
to Damascus where I met with the Foreign Minister and
the co-Chairs nominated by the Syrian Government.

21-409953/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

It is important that the delegations not only propose
constitutional texts, but that they be ready to commit
to revising those that have yet to be in the light of
the discussions. We need a productive drafting process
in accordance with the Committee’s mandate. As its
terms of reference outline, the Committee must work
expeditiously and continuously to produce results
and continued progress. I have discussed concretely
with both co-Chairs what that would look like, and I
am continuing to engage in efforts to produce a clear
understanding. After my discussions in Damascus, I
am awaiting further communication from them before
reaching out to the Syrian National Council.
To be clear, I am ready to convene a seventh session
of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva as soon as
understandings are in place. Once they are, we will of
course brief the civil society middle third in preparation
for a seventh session.
Let me add that I continue to engage widely with
Syrian women and men in civil society who have
diverse networks in Syria and the region, including the
members of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and
participants in the Civil Society Support Room. I value
their contribution to all efforts to promote sustainable
peace in Syria.
Now is the time to explore whether a political
process can meaningfully move forward in 2022. The
status quo has many dangers, and it would be folly
to only manage an unacceptable and deteriorating
stalemate. Equally, the realities facing all parties
should serve to promote an interest in compromise and
open up opportunities for concrete steps forward on
the political track. No one should expect miracles or
quick solutions. The path forward will necessarily be
incremental. However, I hope that this coming year we
can work on concrete steps towards the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015). I count on the support of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: As you mentioned, Sir, the SecretaryGeneral has issued the report requested by Security
Council members with regard to resolution 2585 (2021)
(S/2021/1030). The report outlines the robust measures
in place in some detail to ensure transparency in our
Syria operations.
4/27

20/12/2021

The operating environment is clearly complex.
Nonetheless, the United Nations operates in a
transparent manner to mitigate risks and provide
principled assistance. The report describes the robust
systems in place for needs assessments, due diligence,
monitoring and risk management. The report also
speaks to our efforts to facilitate regular and predictable
cross-line operations.
In north-east Syria, we reach nearly 1 million people
every month through regular cross-line deliveries.
However, we continue to strengthen that activity.
Approvals for cross-line access to the Tel Abyad area to
assess the situation and distribute vaccines are a very
positive recent step in that regard.
In the north-west, as we have discussed before and
as is stated in the report, over the past six months we
have taken renewed steps to create a cross-line delivery
system to assist people in need. Two cross-line convoys
have now deployed to north-west Syria. The second one
crossed conflict lines on 9 December — just a few days
ago. They carried food and other humanitarian supplies
for a total of approximately 80,000 people. The next
convoy is planned for January.
Through our access negotiations, we were able
to identify solutions acceptable to all parties. But
an agreement needs to be reached on who would be
involved in conducting cross-line convoys and who
would be authorized to distribute the aid. All of that, as
you know, Mr. President, has taken time. We also need
and rely on the necessary security guarantees by all
the relevant parties to ensure the safety of our convoys
and personnel.
On 16 December, distributions of food through a
local World Food Programme team commenced under
a newly established distribution mechanism. We will
continue to push for distributions to proceed apace.
We need to collectively translate the initial progress
into more predictable and sustained humanitarian
operations and, as we have discussed in this Chamber
before, the six-month plan that we have developed to
achieve that predictability. We will continue to do
everything in our power to facilitate those cross-line
convoys, with a convoy once a month and deliveries
every week. I call upon all parties to facilitate, not
block, the implementation of our plan.
As the Secretary-General has said, cross-line
deliveries cannot, at this point, replace the massive scale
of our cross-border operation, but they are important.
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8937

Both those operations are essential to support the
3.4 million people in need in the north-west.

course, they are forced to rely on credit, loans and help.
It should be obvious that that is simply not sustainable.

Let me turn to my monthly humanitarian update.
I am sure that Ms. Amani Ballour, who will give a
briefing after me, will speak much more vividly and
clearly to those issues, among others. As Mr. Pedersen
has said, as the year ends, the situation for people in
Syria remains grim. Humanitarian needs have grown,
while funding has shrunk. I have said it before on many
occasions and I will say it again: we continue to fail
the Syrian people in what they need, what they deserve
and what they are entitled to in terms of humanitarian
assistance and protection.

Immediate life-saving activities therefore remain
a priority, but we must also help the people in Syria
chart their own course towards a better future. As is
emphasized in resolution 2585 (2021), early recovery
is another critical aspect of the humanitarian response.

Violence continues to kill and injure civilians. For
example, on 11 November, a reported air strike hit a
shelter in northern rural Idlib, killing five civilians,
of whom three were children. As I say to the Council
every month, civilians must be protected, and they are
legally entitled to that protection.
As winter sets in, millions of people are in the
cold. Internally displaced persons living in temporary
tents are especially vulnerable. I regret to say that
the humanitarian operation simply does not have
sufficient funds to provide basic shelter, heating and
warm clothes to all those in need. As I said, we are
failing in our responsibilities to the people of Syria.
The coronavirus disease, on which I am sure we will
hear more in a minute, continues to wreak havoc across
Syria, with vaccination rates, as we have discussed
before, below 5 per cent. Women of course bear the
impact of that disproportionately.
Over 5 million people do not have sufficient and
safe water in northern Syria. Food security, access to
electricity and livelihoods are also impacted and, as
they are connected, exponentially so in terms of how
they impact each another. We continue to build on our
constructive dialogue with parties — I am happy to
say — to find a sustainable solution for the Allouk water
station. After two months of sustained engagement and
operation, the station has functioned again, however
only intermittently, since 26 November. That limits
access to water for over half a million people.
The economy continues its downward trajectory.
Food costs more now than at any time since the World
Food Programme started monitoring such costs in
2013. Many families — and this is an extraordinary
assessment — spend on average 50 per cent more on
basic items than they earn each month and are. And, of

Beyond food, people in Syria are the same as people
anywhere. They want jobs to earn a living; they want
their basic needs met; and they want a future. Working
at the local level, through investment in early recovery
we can ensure that basic services can be provided in
a manner that is equitable, responsive and accountable
to affected populations. To take just one example, a
midwifery project of the United Nations Population
Fund in rural Aleppo addresses the massive need for
trained health-care workers. In that project, a training
facility was rehabilitated to broaden access to maternal
health care, and midwives were trained and received
essential equipment — a simple process that is repeated
daily throughout the world of aid. Those midwives
helped nearly 800 pregnant women safely deliver their
babies in the past year. In turn, the midwives were able
to make a living to support their own families. That is a
story that can, and should, be repeated throughout Syria.
The Secretary-General’s report identifies our
increasing focus on that aspect of the response to the
needs of the Syrian people. The United Nations is
currently completing an allocation of approximately
$20 million to early-recovery activities from the
Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund. The Syria
Humanitarian Fund, which provides assistance to those
in other parts of the country, allocated 40 per cent of its
budget to enhancing community resilience. The good
news is that donors are increasing their engagement
in early recovery. We are grateful for such additional
support that Member States recently provided, including
the recent support from Norway of $17 million.
We have seen real progress on early recovery, and
I am encouraged by the growing donor consensus on
the need for, and priority of, that kind of expenditure.
I expect that to further increase in 2022. I have also
called on the United Nations system to increase
its identification of relevant projects available for
such funding.
We heard from Mr. Pedersen about the plight of
Syria, but also, as he carefully and precisely put it, some
hopes for next year that we must work on. I associate

21-409955/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

myself with everything that Mr. Pedersen said about
the fact that the essential quality of the humanitarian
requirement for the people of Syria requires us to hope
and to adopt, as he described, a step-by-step approach
to meeting those needs and giving the people of Syria
a future. Civilians must be protected. There must be
support for life-saving aid, especially as people in
Syria endure this winter, early-recovery aid, the safe
and voluntary return of refugees — if we can make that
happen — and, finally, access to all in need.
We will work in lockstep with Mr. Pedersen and his
colleagues as we go into 2022 to identify ways in which
we can support his mission, because it is quite clear to
us all that only an end to this conflict will really meet
the needs of the people of Syria.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ballour.
Ms. Ballour: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council today. I would
especially like to thank the Government of the Niger for
the invitation.
My name is Amani Ballour. I am a paediatrician
from Syria. I currently work for the Syrian American
Medical Society (SAMS), a humanitarian organization
dedicated to providing principled humanitarian
assistance to Syrians in need. SAMS operates 40
medical facilities in north-western and north-eastern
Syria, including specialized intensive care units for
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) patients, the only
cancer treatment centre and mental health centres.
We also provide virtual training and telemedicine for
health workers throughout the country.
I most recently briefed the Security Council this
past March (see S/2021/315, annex III). During that
briefing, I told Council members about my experiences
managing a hospital in Syria and the challenges faced
by health workers throughout the country. I also spoke
about the worsening situation for women and children.
I talked about the ongoing threat of COVID-19. I urged
the Security Council to take further steps to improve
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and take
meaningful action to hold those who carry out attacks
on health accountable.
Nine months later, the humanitarian situation in
Syria is worse than ever, as are the dynamics in the
Security Council. Instead of focusing on achieving its
6/27

20/12/2021

stated objective of maintaining international peace and
security, too many Council members focus on their
own political objectives and geopolitical rivalries. The
Security Council has lost its way. Today I again urge
the Council to refocus its attention on concrete steps
that can be taken to deliver humanitarian assistance and
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
I would first like to focus on the health situation.
More than a decade of conflict, along with the
intentional targeting of hospitals by the Syrian
regime and its allies, has devastated the health system
throughout the country. The brave health workers who
remain are stretched beyond their limits. Many of
my colleagues work 20-hour shifts without a break,
sometimes examining as many as 100 patients a day.
They do that while under the constant threat of an aerial
bombardment, as well as the threat of kidnapping and
torture by armed groups.
Sadly, needs continue to grow. In the north-west,
more than 1.7 million people live in internally displaced
persons (IDPs) camps. Eighty-five per cent of the tents
are beyond their lifespan, while recent rainstorms
literally washed some of them away. Meanwhile,
Council members are in a warm and safe place, and,
after this meeting, they can return to their homes, while
IDPs continue to suffer, with no end in sight.
A tent is not sufficient shelter, neither does a food
basket provide sufficient nutrition. As a result, we
see greater rates of malnutrition, stunting and infant
mortality. An increasing number of pregnant women
suffer from anaemia and malnutrition, leading to more
complications in their pregnancies. Incubators have
become scarce, as babies are increasingly born with
complications. Yet, without an increase in the number
of incubators, doctors are forced to make the difficult
decision between which baby to put in an incubator and
which to leave to die. We should not accept that. No
doctor should ever face that kind of decision.
There are several steps that the Security Council
can take to lessen the burden on the health system. It
can increase the amount of funds, prioritizing long-term
funding to enable sufficient planning. Council members
can make their own donations of essential items,
such as medicines and equipment. The Council must
continue to allow for cross-border assistance, which
is providing life-saving aid to millions of civilians.
Their lives should not be used as political bargaining
chips. The Council should also require the same level of
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

transparency for humanitarian operations in Damascus
and north-east Syria as it does in the north-west. As
the dire humanitarian situation requires maximum
efficiency, it is crucial to increase the capacity of the
health system. That can be achieved through medical
education. The Security Council should support the
training of new health workers, especially nurses and
midwives, and should support specialized training
programmes for existing doctors, particularly for
intensive care and paediatric oncology.
Next, I would like to discuss the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. In recent months, Syria has faced
a devastating outbreak, which has pushed the health
system to the brink of collapse. In the north-west,
positivity rates have averaged as high as 50 per cent,
intensive care units have been at 100 per cent capacity
and hospitals have faced severe shortages of oxygen.
Yet only 2.5 per cent of the population have received
two doses of vaccines. That is unacceptable. Conflictaffected countries, such as Syria, must be prioritized
for the delivery of high-efficacy vaccines.
In recent days, COVID-19 has reached Rukban
camp, where the situation is extremely dire. There are
only three beds prepared, no oxygen, no ventilators
and no doctors. Owing to a lack of cross-border access
and continued obstruction of cross-line assistance,
the civilian population has been left completely
exposed. If immediate action is not taken, this current
wave in Rukban — and the next wave throughout the
country — will be even more deadly. How can families
living in IDP camps be expected to socially distance,
when multiple families live in one tent and when
50 families share one bathroom? The international
community must provide the necessary resources to
enable the health sector to prepare for the next wave.
I would also like to speak about the protection of
humanitarian workers. Health workers have performed
their duties heroically throughout the conflict. Yet after
10 years and more than 600 attacks on health workers,
there has still been no accountability. As a result, in
addition to over 800 health workers having been killed,
many others have fled the country.
It is clear that the only way to stop these attacks
is through accountability. Yet previous efforts have
all been blocked by the Security Council. To those
who continue to use their veto to block any efforts at
independent investigations, I ask a simple question:
what do they have to hide? If, like they say, there have

S/PV. 8937

been no crimes committed against health workers
in Syria, then surely they would have no problem
investigating these allegations.
The Council should make clear its support for
independent investigative mechanisms. It should also
support the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and organizations such as mine in efforts to
strengthen the humanitarian notification system.
In conclusion, as we begin a new year, I urge Council
members to take a fresh approach to the humanitarian
situation in Syria, set aside their differences and look
beyond their own political objectives. Let this be a year
of new beginnings, with an emphasis on promoting
human dignity.
In February, my husband and I will welcome our
first child — a boy. My dream for him is that he will
be able to live in dignity and freedom, as all Council
members hope for their own children. I hope he will not
be like Kareem, who lost one of his eyes in a bombing,
or like Imran, who found himself trapped under the
rubble of his own home. And neither should he lose
his limbs, like Mahmoud or Abdul Rahman. He should
be free to express his thoughts and feelings publicly
without fear of being detained or tortured, like Hamza
Al-Khateeb. I hope that he will always have enough
medicine and food to eat, unlike the many children who
starved to death under illegal sieges, or who today still
live on the brink of starvation. These are thoughts that
no mother should ever have for her child, yet this is the
reality for Syrian mothers today. These are real stories
of innocent children who have been wounded or lost
their lives in the past decade of conflict — children
who know nothing but bombardment, violence and
death. And for what? No amount of power or wealth is
worth such brutality and suffering.
I will tell my child the stories of each of those
children. And I urge Council members to think of their
own children during their negotiations on humanitarian
access and accountability. Syrian children deserve the
same human dignity as their own children. Will Council
members put their interests first, or their own?
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Ballour for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

21-409957/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I make this statement
today on behalf of the co-penholders on the Syrian
humanitarian file, Norway and Ireland.
I want to thank Martin Griffiths for his
comprehensive briefing, which has underlined the
severity of the humanitarian need and the complex
challenge of delivering humanitarian response
throughout Syria. It is good to see Geir Pedersen with
us today; I will address the political aspects later in
my remarks. I want to also thank Dr. Ballour for her
remarks. Her messages to us were very clear.
Ireland and Norway also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for the two reports (S/2021/1020 and
S/2021/1030) furnished to Council Members last week.
We welcome in particular the comprehensive report on
humanitarian operations in Syria, issued in accordance
with resolution 2585 (2021), which was unanimously
adopted by consensus by all Council members in July.
The resolution extended the authorization to use the
border crossing at Bab Al-Hawa until 10 July 2022,
subject to the issuance of this report.
This report illustrates welcome progress in a
number of important areas, including with regard to
cross-line deliveries. We have seen deliveries take place
throughout Syria in spite of constraints and challenges
to access, which vary greatly by region.
The second inter-agency cross-line delivery to the
north-west, which took place on 9 December, marks
another significant and positive step. We welcome
the commencement last week of the distribution of
the much-needed humanitarian aid. We commend the
efforts made by the United Nations and the World Food
Programme to develop a comprehensive plan for crossline deliveries, and we call on all parties to facilitate
their continuation.
Ireland and Norway, as co-penholders on the Syria
humanitarian file, have repeatedly emphasized their
support for all modalities to provide humanitarian
aid to meet the needs of people across Syria. Our sole
objective is ensuring that humanitarian aid reaches all
people in need.
As the report makes clear, the cross-border
humanitarian operation at Bab Al-Hawa remains an
absolutely critical lifeline. As the Secretary-General
has told us, this operation is the essential channel for
the United Nations to provide life-saving assistance
at the scale required to support the significant and
8/27

20/12/2021

growing humanitarian needs of 3.4 million people in
need in north-west Syria.
Ireland and Norway welcome the substantive
update on the considerable work taking place to
ensure transparency in operations throughout Syria.
We commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for the systems it has
put in place to safeguard humanitarian principles and
ensure accountability for humanitarian action at all
stages. The cross-border operation in the north-west
is one of the most heavily scrutinized and monitored
aid operations in the world, ensuring the humanitarian
nature of all deliveries. The role of the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism is critical in that work.
We also note and commend the work of OCHA
in delivering early-recovery activities and building
resilience to prevent a further increase in the number
of people in need, as well as reduce immediate and
protracted humanitarian needs by strengthening the
self-reliance of affected populations and improving
individual and community welfare.
The focus of our attention must be on the worsening
hardship faced by the women, men and children of
Syria. We heard from the Secretary-General this month
that the combination of ongoing hostilities, economic
crisis, water shortages and the coronavirus disease
pandemic have driven humanitarian needs for millions
of vulnerable people to some of the highest levels seen
since the conflict began. Those needs continue to grow
as the people of Syria grapple with another bitter winter,
leaving 4.5 million people in need of winterization
support, many without the bare essentials they need
to survive.
We in the Council must continue to work together to
ensure that those great humanitarian needs are met. We
know that only political progress can bring the conflict
and the long nightmare of the Syrian people to an end.
Ireland and Norway strongly support United Nationsled efforts to find a sustainable political solution, which
is key to transforming the humanitarian situation on the
ground. In all of this, we must keep the Syrian people at
the heart of the Council’s efforts.
We continue to fully support Mr. Griffiths and
his team as they work to deliver a lifeline to so many
in need.
I would now make a statement in my national
capacity on political issues.
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for
his briefing. I commend his tireless efforts on the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), which offers
a clear, agreed blueprint for delivering a long-term
political solution for the people of Syria. I commend
him in particular for his ongoing engagement with
the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and other civil
society organizations. This year, the Council heard
directly from Syrian women, including from Ms. Rouba
Mhaissen during Ireland’s presidency (see S/PV.8866).
Far too often, those voices are silenced and marginalized
by the Syrian authorities. Ireland once again urges
the Syrian authorities to engage meaningfully with
the opposition and with civil society members of the
Constitutional Committee.
Sadly, 2021 has marked another year of conflict,
chaos and catastrophe for the people of Syria. Ireland
calls on all parties to the Syrian conflict to refrain
from violence, de-escalate tensions and exercise
maximum restraint.
We are deeply concerned at the continued violence
in the north-west, particularly the abhorrent and
sustained impact on civilians and civilian objects,
which the Council must unreservedly condemn. We
repeat our calls for a nationwide ceasefire, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
I commend Estonia on last month’s Arria Formula
meeting, which highlighted the need for accountability
as we heard powerful testimony from victims. Ireland
fully supports the work of the General Assembly’s
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We also strongly support
the work of the Human Rights Council’s Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, which has
outlined appalling human rights violations, including
arbitrary detention, disappearances and sexual and
gender-based violence. Ireland calls on the parties to
the conflict, especially the Syrian authorities, to release
detainees and abductees and to take meaningful action
on missing persons.
Finally, we listened with interest to the Special
Envoy’s ideas on steps for steps. Ireland is prepared to
consider proposals that would enable the people of Syria
to determine their own future. That would require a
profound change of approach by the Syrian authorities.

S/PV. 8937

Such a change could help realize the Council’s
vision of the restoration of Syria’s sovereignty, unity,
independence and prosperity for the benefit of all
its people.
Mr.
Polyanskiy
(Russian
Federation)
(spoke in Russian): We thank the briefers for the
information provided.
With respect to the political situation, we wish to
emphasize that we advocate the pursuit of intra-Syrian
consultations in Geneva in the framework of the
Constitutional Committee. We believe that there is no
alternative to the advancement of the Syrian-led and
-owned settlement process, with the support of the
United Nations and without external interference or
the imposition of artificial deadlines. That also applies
to all new ideas and proposals to that end. On that
basis, we will continue to interact with the Syrians,
the Special Envoy and other stakeholders, first and
foremost our Astana partners. We intend to hold the
next meeting of the representatives of Russia, Iran and
Turkey, with the participation of interested parties, on
21 and 22 December in Nur-Sultan.
One important area of the work of the Astana
representatives is the issue of detainees. On
16 December, in the framework of a special working
group of the Astana format, a sixth exchange of such
individuals took place. That initiative was carried out
successfully thanks to the coordination of the Russian
Defence Ministry and Ministry for Foreign Affairs, as
well as the relevant Turkish agencies, the United Nations
and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The general improvement in the situation in and
around Syria is also facilitated by the resumption
of natural ties between that country and its Arab
neighbours, including in the economic arena. We call
for further steps to ensure the full return of Damascus
to the Arab family.
I now turn to the humanitarian situation in Syria,
which remains tense. Difficulties persist in areas
not controlled by Damascus — in Idlib, beyond the
Euphrates River and where Turkish operations are
conducted in the north of the country. We believe
that the achievement of long-term peace and security
in Syria is possible only through the full restoration
of its sovereignty and territorial integrity, including
Government control of its national borders and natural
resources, with ongoing efforts to combat terrorism.

21-409959/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

Given the current circumstances, there is a pressing
need to alleviate the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation. The full and conscientious implementation
of consensus resolution 2585 (2021) should play a
key role in that regard. Another critical component
in that connection has already been mentioned — the
special report of Secretary-General António Guterres
(S/2021/1030).
I now wish to comment on the Secretary-General’s
report. At the outset, I would like to pay special tribute
to the United Nations humanitarian agencies, and to
Mr. Martin Griffiths in particular, for their extensive
efforts to steer the humanitarian situation in Syria
towards a constructive solution. Mr. Griffiths personal
contribution to this process has been invaluable.
On the whole, the report lies within the framework
of resolution 2585 (2021). We have already mentioned
that we fully grasp the difficulties that all parties have
grappled with in the implementation of the provisions
of that resolution and generally recognize the progress
made as the beginning of a long journey. In that
connection, I would like to make various observations.
First, I would like to comment on transparency in
the ongoing humanitarian operations, primarily in Idlib.
I repeat, once again, that, on the whole, we do not
doubt that the United Nations monitoring mission,
which oversees the delivery of humanitarian convoys
exclusively to the border with Syria, is carrying out its
work well. Our concerns, rather, are related to what is
taking place directly in Idlib, which is rife with terrorists
who have seized control of all areas of life, including
freedom of movement. Under such circumstances, how
can the provision of assistance be considered in any
way impartial and independent?
It is no secret that it is indeed the fault of the fighters
that the food that reached Sarmada from Aleppo back
in August was distributed as late as 16 December.
I cannot but voice regret at the fact that over all that
time my colleagues did not utter even a single word of
condemnation, all the while patiently waiting to get the
approval of terrorists for the food aid to reach areas not
covered by the cross-border mechanism. What about
the people for whom this assistance is critical? Are my
colleagues indifferent in the face of their suffering?
Against this backdrop, the proposal for some
kind of effective remote oversight by a United
Nations monitoring mechanism in the Idlib enclave is
10/27

20/12/2021

completely unpersuasive. The terrorists having gained
access to assistance provided by the United Nations in
Aleppo, eastern Ghouta and Rukban clearly attest to
this. Still, we emphasize the pressing need for a United
Nations international presence to be established in the
enclave. This will help to enhance confidence in the
distribution mechanism.
Secondly, with respect to the modest — to put it
mildly — progress in humanitarian deliveries across
the line of contact, essentially what we cautioned
against actually transpired. In six months, only
two humanitarian convoys reached Idlib — only 28
trucks — while, in the period from July to November
this year, through Bab Al-Hawa, 48,498 trucks reached
the de-escalation area. This shows that Idlib fighters are
obstructing implementation of resolution 2585 (2021),
not the fact that the cross-border mechanism has no
alternatives. The potential for cross-line deliveries and
the interest in it on the ground is indeed considerable,
but incentives for Idlib terrorists to allow assistance to
cross through that mechanism are not yet significant.
The Council needs to continue to work to see to the
implementation of its resolutions. While a number of
those in this Chamber criticize the Syrian authorities,
the Syrian authorities are fully carrying out their
obligations on time, which has already been confirmed
by a number of reports of the Secretary-General.
On 27 October, we heard about clear plan of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
to step up cross-line operations into north-west Syria
(see S/PV.8888). According to the plan, the area should
have had five convoys reach it to date. In fact, there
was only one convoy, which did not include the late
August United Nations World Food Programme convoy
to Sarmada. And yet the plan describes the areas
insufficiently covered by cross-border assistance, and
individuals who are not receiving assistance that they
need. Pragmatic and concrete proposals of humanitarian
representatives are rejected by those who are in a
position to unblock cross-line assistance and make it
sustained. Thus, one of the key provisions of resolution
2585 (2021) is therefore simply being torpedoed. The
calm and even positive assessments of the situation,
which are essentially tantamount to being satisfied
with seemingly noble one-off gestures of terrorists is
something which we cannot countenance.
the

We call upon everyone to contribute to unblocking
provision of humanitarian assistance from
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8937

Damascus to Afrin, Al-Bab, and Tel Abyad. We believe
that this is possible. Two years have elapsed since the
closure of Al-Yarubiyah. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/1029) notes that land and air assistance
delivery routes from Damascus have been ironed out and
made available, and that the United Nations presence
has been expanded and access has been improved for
those in need, with the exception of such areas as the
Al-Hol internally displaced persons camp. From July
to October this year in north-east Syria, 425 trucks
made cross-line transfers in addition to seven convoys
received through the World Health Organization. This
number cannot even be compared to the 109 trucks that
crossed through Al-Yarubiyah in the six years that the
operations have run in the area.

restrictions do not apply to early-recovery projects.
Their implementation, including for critical civilian
infrastructure facilities, will help to meet not only
the urgent needs of Syrian people, but will also help
to improve living conditions and assist in preventing
the collapse of water- and electricity-provision systems.
Rebuilding schools, hospitals and homes will also help
to ensure that conditions are ripe for the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

My third point concerns early recovery projects. The
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
S/2021/1029 provided exhaustive argumentation about
the importance of stepping up these efforts. We hear
from our colleagues in various formats about the
importance of accounting for the views of those in
need in carrying out humanitarian needs assessments
and developing humanitarian response plans. This
allegedly enhances the accountability for assistance
being provided.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that, on the
basis of our assessment, both the United Nations and
individual members of the Security Council can and
should do more to ensure implementation of resolution
2585 (2021). Without this, the efforts we undertook in
July to establish constructive cooperation on the Syrian
humanitarian track will not bring us the desired results.

Can my colleagues imagine individuals living in
demolished homes or even tents, not wanting to have
access to normal accommodation; that they would not
want to provide their children with access to education;
or that they would not want access to medical assistance
in a properly functioning hospital and running water?
Their voices need to be heard first and foremost. Very
little is being done for now in the area. We call upon
donors to reconsider their approaches to humanitarian
assistance in Syria for the benefit of ordinary civilians,
including those returning to their homes.

Time will tell as to whether the humanitarian
exemptions are effective; we will closely watch this
situation. We call upon the Secretary-General not
to divert attention from this and to report about the
situation in his regular reports.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me start
by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen, Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Ms. Ballour.
My delegation wants to thank the Secretary
General for his substantive report on United Nations
humanitarian operations in Syria (S/2021/1030)
and for his 60-day report on resolution 2585 (2021)
(S/2021/1029). Both of these reports provide key
insights into the robust United Nations efforts to ensure
the transparency and efficiency of aid operations and
progress on cross-line access.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank those
countries that proactively joined financing plans and
have helped to finance these relevant projects. We
expect that the United Nations will develop the relevant
comprehensive plans and programmes.

Resolution 2585 (2021), together with the crossborder mechanism that it authorizes, remains a vital
lifeline to the Syrian people, as we have just heard.
The United States supports the use of all modalities to
deliver aid in Syria. We echo the Secretary-General’s
observation that cross-line aid complements but cannot
replace the cross-border mechanism.

The stepping up of comprehensive humanitarian
assistance to Syrians is especially important given
the coronavirus disease pandemic. This would be
facilitated by addressing the problem of unilateral
sanctions. In our view, a step in the right direction
was the publication of a special explanation by the
United States Department of the Treasury stating that

There is no denying the tangible progress on
delivering cross-line assistance since resolution 2585
(2021) was adopted (see S/PV.8817). This includes
the two World Food Programme convoys that
delivered assistance in northwest Syria on 31 August
and 9 December, as we heard. We also welcome the
distribution of this aid to beneficiaries and encourage

21-4099511/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

future cooperation among all parties to enable these
operations to continue in a predictable and safe manner.
We support the development and full implementation
of the proposed operational plan for regular United
Nations interagency cross-line operations over the
coming six months and for the new distribution plans
for that cross-line aid. But let there be no illusions:
there have been threats to the security of humanitarian
personnel seeking to deliver and distribute that
assistance — threats from shelling, air strikes,
landmines and improvised explosive devices. Those
aid operations are also extremely resource-intensive
when compared to the cross-border modality. As we
heard from Martin Griffiths earlier, that is especially
important to remember as the gap between needs in
Syria and donor funding grows larger.
The United States will continue to support a
response that puts humanity at the centre of policy. In
that vein, access for United Nations aid through Bab
Al-Hawa remains irreplaceable if we want to alleviate
the suffering that we have heard about in north-west
Syria. If the Council is unified in its position that we
need to let aid flow through all modalities, then we
must also reopen the closed cross-border points.
The report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to resolution 2585 (2021) is clear that, in
the north-east, the closure of Al-Yarubiyah has been
devastating for the health sector, which was the most
reliant on the crossing. That has contributed to limited
access to essential medical supplies for communities
there, including coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
testing kits and treatment. How many more variants of
COVID-19 do we need to see before the Council takes
seriously its responsibility to open the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing so that critical vaccines and supplies can reach
all in need?
The cross-border mechanism remains one of
the most robust and closely monitored humanitarian
operations in the world, subject to multiple layers of
checks to ensure a high degree of transparency and
accountability. As the report notes, more than 47,000
truckloads of humanitarian aid have crossed into
northern Syria through the rigorously monitored system
since July 2014. That is the type of transparency that
the Council has called for. It reinforces why the United
Nations cross-border mandate is so critical.
The United States remains steadfast in its support
for humanitarian relief in Syria, including early12/27

20/12/2021

recovery projects. Early-recovery activities like
rehabilitating schools and clinics and helping vulnerable
families improve their livelihoods aim to make Syrians
more resilient and reduce their dependence on external
assistance. As we have heard, just last month the United
States Department of the Treasury issued an expanded
general license to ensure that United States sanctions
related to Syria do not inhibit activity undertaken
by non-governmental organizations inside Syria in
furtherance of early-recovery projects.
Ultimately, however, humanitarian aid merely
treats the symptoms of Syrian suffering, not the cause.
We support the Syrian people in their efforts to live in
dignity. We continue to call for a nationwide ceasefire.
The only path for a sustainable peaceful future for the
Syrian people is an end of the conflict, as laid out in
resolution 2254 (2015). We urge the Al-Assad regime
to seriously pursue the avenues towards peace that
Special Envoy Pedersen has laid out, including through
the Constitutional Committee.
Confirming the whereabouts of the tens of
thousands of missing Syrians and securing the release
of those arbitrarily detained will remain a priority for
the United States. Seeking accountability and justice
is critical to build confidence in the broader political
process, as called for in resolution 2254 (2015). Without
that accountability, the Syrian people will never
experience a stable, just and enduring peace.
Let me conclude by saying that only through an
inclusive political process can Syrians witness the
future in which they no longer live in fear and are no
longer dependent on humanitarian relief for their day to
day survival.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Pedersen, Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Ballour for
their briefings.
The Syrian people continue to pay a heavy price.
France reiterates its call for an immediate nationwide
cessation of hostilities. The protection of civilians
must remain a top priority. As the coronavirus disease
pandemic continues to spread and fewer than 5 per cent
of the Syrian population is vaccinated, everything must
be done to ramp up the vaccination campaign.
France welcomes the report of the Secretary
General (S/2021/1030) submitted pursuant to resolution
2585 (2021). Progress on cross-line convoys has been
positive. We support the implementation of the plan
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

involving inter-agency operations to that end. But the
Secretary-General is clear: even if the plan were fully
implemented, that would not allow for the removal of
the cross-border mechanism. The latter’s 12-month
renewal came as a sigh of relief. It will remain necessary
as long as aid fails to reach all populations in need.
France welcome the measures taken by the United
Nations to strengthen risk management mechanisms
and guarantee the transparency of operations.
The definitive resolution of the conflict can only be
of a political nature. I would like once again to recall that
the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2254 (2015). It continues to be the shared road map for
Council members to achieve a political solution to the
conflict. As long as resolution 2254 (2015) is not fully
implemented, achieving lasting peace in Syria will
be impossible.
France support the efforts of the Special Envoy
to ensure the convening of the seventh session of the
Constitutional Committee. France regrets the regime’s
obstruction with regard to the work of its sixth session.
As we believe in the virtues of a political solution as
the foundation for lasting peace, we are also open to
the step for step approach presented by the Special
Envoy. We thank him for convening bilateral meetings
to define its structure. All stakeholders must shoulder
their responsibilities. That applies first of all to the
regime, which, for the time being, has not agreed to
make any gesture. The lack of any progress since 2018
on the fate of missing persons attests to that.
In the absence of a solid political solution, there
is absolutely no reason to normalize relations with
the Syrian regime. Without a political solution, our
position on the lifting of sanctions and reconstruction
will remain unchanged. According to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), of the 5.6 million refugees in the region,
only 282,000 Syrian refugees have chosen to return to
their country since 2016. Many other Syrians continue
to leave.
Reports by non-governmental organizations
point to serious human rights violations committed
systematically by the regime against refugees upon
their return to Syria. They will be unable to return as
long as the regime continues to oppose their return
by threatening their lives and depriving them of their
property. It is imperative that UNHCR have access to
all returning refugees.

S/PV. 8937

Lastly, France will continue its relentless fight
against impunity for the perpetrators of crimes
committed in Syria. Those responsible for those crimes
will have to answer for their actions.
Mr. Mathur (India): I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for their updates today. I
also thank the civil society representative, Ms. Amani
Ballour, for her briefing.
India has been reiterating since the beginning of
the conflict that imposing external solutions cannot
help in the resolution of the conflict. It is for the
Syrians to determine and decide what is best for Syria
and their own future. The decade-long conflict and
involvement of external players has adversely affected
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
The Special Envoy briefed us in detail on his recent
efforts to engage proactively with all the stakeholders,
including his visit to Damascus last week. We hope that
those efforts will bear fruit soon and culminate in the
next round of the Constitutional Committee meeting.
While the holding of that meeting is important,
the progress in the step for step approach articulated
by the Special Envoy needs mutual trust among all
parties, including external players. The support of
the international community to address the economic
and humanitarian challenges remains integral to the
success of the political process. The recent diplomatic
engagement between Damascus and other capitals in
the region is reassuring. It may also positively impact
the restoration of Syria’s membership in the League of
Arab States.
Regarding confidence-building measures, we
welcome efforts by the Syrian authorities to prioritize
the return of displaced Syrians to their areas of origin.
We also welcome the recent announcement of the
opening of the border between Jordan and Syria.
On the security front, we remain concerned with
the overall situation in Syria, including increasing
incidents of ceasefire violations in north-west Syria.
We call on all sides to desist from any actions, including
military provocations like missile strikes, that may lead
to violence and disturbance in Syria.
Furthermore, the growing influence of terrorist
groups in internally displaced persons camps like
Al-Rukban and Al-Hol needs to be urgently addressed.
The issue of the repatriation of foreign citizens from

21-4099513/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

those camp sites needs to be dealt with as a priority.
United Nations-designated terrorist groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham, as mentioned in the recent reports of the
Secretary-General, have continued to gain in strength
in Syria. Da’esh has also continued to launch attacks
in areas across Deir ez-Zor, Hasakah and eastern rural
Homs. The global fight against terrorism cannot and
should not be compromised for narrow political gains.
The humanitarian crisis in Syria has not seen
significant improvement in recent months. We believe
that a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire is paramount
to the interest of the Syrian people. It will also help to
expand cross-line humanitarian aid operations. In that
context, we note that progress has been made to expand
the overall humanitarian response and facilitate crossline access.
In the north-west, we believe there is considerable
scope for expanding cross-line operations. The ongoing
cross-border operations will continue to negatively
impact on the sovereignty of the Syrian State. In the
north-east, cross-line operations have become regular
and sustained. In October and November, the World
Health Organization delivered cross-line shipments
by road and air. We encourage the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other United
Nations agencies to expand efforts to enhance crossline operations further.
Taking into consideration the difficult economic
and social situation in Syria, which has been further
compounded by the global coronavirus disease
pandemic and the onset of winter, there is need to
scale up humanitarian assistance. As the Council
looks towards the renewal of the Syria humanitarian
resolution — resolution 2585 (2021) — next year, it is
critical to achieve progress with regard to provisions
related to “expanding the scope of the work in
early recovery and increasing the resilience of the
infrastructure in Syria”.
For our part, India has continued to extend
developmental
assistance
and
human-resource
development support to Syria through grants and
lines of credit for developmental projects, supplies of
medicine and food, artificial limb fitment camps and
capacity-building training programmes. Since the
beginning of the conflict, India has always stood by the
Syrian people.
14/27

20/12/2021

Let me conclude by reaffirming India’s commitment
to a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned United Nationsfacilitated political process in line with resolution 2254
(2015).
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me start by thanking
Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing and for his and
his team’s tireless efforts to seek a political solution
in Syria. Our thanks of course also go to UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Ms. Ballour for their
valuable information and insights, especially on the
grave situation for women and children.
We are encouraged by the Special Envoy’s
recent consultations with key actors on the step for
step approach. Norway urges all actors involved in
the conflict, including the Syrian Government, to
contribute constructively to that process. Despite the
deep disagreements, we believe there is still a shared
interest in providing a better future for the Syrian
people and ensuring stability in the region.
Issues such as the release of detainees, the safe
and dignified return of refugees, combating terrorism
and inclusive political reform should all be part of
the process. The status quo on the ground, both
in Government-controlled areas and elsewhere, is
not sustainable.
The Constitutional Committee also plays
an important role, both in and of itself and as a
confidence-building measure. We encourage all parties
to contribute to the process in good faith and in a
constructive manner. Norway gives our full support to
the Special Envoy’s approach.
Finally, in conclusion, let me reiterate the need to
implement all parts of resolution 2254 (2015), including
a nationwide ceasefire.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): Let
me start by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his
briefing. We very much welcome his efforts over the
past month to facilitate a political solution, including
his recent visit to Damascus to seek to unblock progress
on the Constitutional Committee.
For years, the Security Council, on behalf of the
wider membership of the United Nations, has demanded
the implementation of the steps in resolution 2254
(2015). Yet not only has the regime failed to engage
genuinely in the process, but the issues that gave rise
to and sustained the conflict continue — atrocities,
human rights abuses, disregard for the rule of law,
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

widespread corruption and economic mismanagement.
Until there is genuine willingness to engage in the
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process endorsed by
the Security Council in resolution 2254 (2015), there
is no prospect of a successful peace process, or of a
sustainable solution, which should remain the priority
for us all.
I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his briefing and for the ongoing
work of the United Nations and its partners to address
the dire humanitarian situation in Syria. I also thank
Ms. Ballour for returning to the Security Council and
for her powerful testimony and her appeal for what
a normal childhood would look like for the children
she names.
It is evident from the Secretary-General’s reports
submitted pursuant to resolutions 2139 (2014) and
2585 (2021) (S/2021/1029 and S/2021/1030) that the
humanitarian needs in Syria remain vast. Those needs
are exacerbated by the approach of winter and the lack
of testing and treatment capabilities amid the continued
spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic.
It is vital that the Council continue to support
the provision of assistance to Syrians in need by the
most effective and efficient means. At present, it is
clear that nothing can replace the scale or scope of the
United Nations-mandated cross-border mechanism for
achieving that. We welcome evidence in the reports
of the progress made by the United Nations to scale
up cross-line assistance into north-west and northeast Syria, as well as to increase humanitarian earlyrecovery interventions. We should continue to be
guided by the objective and thorough reporting by the
United Nations on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Finally, this year marked the thirtieth anniversary
of the Global 16 Days Campaign, focused on the issue
of the gender-related killing of women. Women and
girls continue to be acutely affected by the conflict in
Syria, with gender-based violence, sexual exploitation
and assault widespread, particularly in camps. Poverty,
displacement and COVID-19 have exacerbated the
problem. We should continue to ensure the availability
of humanitarian funding to counter gender-based
violence in Syria. The United Kingdom has contributed
more than $34 million to the United Nations Population
Fund to counter gender-based violence in Syria since
2019. We encourage others to do the same.

S/PV. 8937

Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
for their briefings. I also thank Ms. Amani Ballour
for sharing her views. I welcome the participation of
the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran in our
meeting today.
The crisis in Syria has now lasted for nearly 11
years, taking its tremendous toll on the country and
its people. Hundreds of thousands of people have
died, and millions of others have had to seek refuge or
been displaced. Women have been left behind as they
struggle with daily life. Millions of children have been
born into war, without knowing the meaning of peace,
many of whom are without even parental care. It goes
without saying that future generations will continue to
endure the socioeconomic consequences of this crisis
for many years to come.
While there is currently the longest period of calm
since the beginning of the conflict, all efforts should
be devoted to finding a comprehensive and long-term
political solution. A Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political settlement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
was fully endorsed by the Security Council and is
supported by the international community. However,
the decade-long crisis, together with the complex
nature of the conflict in Syria, has been pushing the
parties concerned far apart. Trust needs to be rebuilt
and dialogue needs to be renewed to ensure the longawaited implementation.
In that regard, we encourage the Syrian parties
to engage constructively in dialogue and negotiation
within the Constitutional Committee’s framework to
achieve substantial results and move the broader political
process forward. To assist that process, the constructive
engagement of the relevant international interlocutors is
badly needed. We support all viable diplomatic efforts
that bring the parties to the negotiation table.
In that connection, my delegation commends the
Special Envoy’s efforts. We fully support his step-forstep approach, which was kick-started with a series of
meetings with international and regional actors. We
hope that a tangible outcome will soon ensue.
It is a constant disappointment that the
humanitarian situation in Syria continues to show
no sign of improvement. We keep witnessing sad
milestones, one after another, due to the impact of the
persistent insecurity, the economic crisis, food and
water insecurity, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)

21-4099515/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

pandemic, et cetera. While protection concerns
remain prominent, we call on all parties to ensure
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law.
Food insecurity continues to worsen. The water
insecurity situation in various parts of Syria remains
concerning. The disruption of the Allouk water station
requires a sustainable solution. In addition, it is vital
to ensure safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access to enhance the humanitarian response in Syria.
All appropriate channels need to be utilized.
We also call for greater support from the
international community to the humanitarian response
plan in order to help alleviate the predicaments of
Syrians in the light of the harsh winter and the severe
COVID-19 developments.
My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/1030) submitted pursuant
to resolution 2585 (2021). It is encouraging to see a
real improvement with regard to cross-line deliveries,
including progress towards establishing operations in
the north-west and the preparation of a six-month plan
by the United Nations. We call on all parties on the
ground to fully cooperate in order to reach agreement
on a sustained operational modality in that area.
We also take note of various early-recovery
activities in Syria. Strengthening the resilience of the
Syrian people is indeed the only way towards settling
the deteriorating humanitarian situation. In that regard,
we encourage further collaboration between the United
Nations and all the relevant stakeholders to formulate a
long-term strategy.
Let me end our last statement on the situation
in Syria during our current Security Council tenure
by re-emphasizing our strong support for all efforts
towards sustainable peace, stability and development
for the Syrian people.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths and Ms. Ballour for their briefings.
China commends the tireless efforts of the Special
Envoy for the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
We welcome his recent visit to Damascus, during which
he met with the Syrian Foreign Minister and exchanged
views on outstanding issues facing Syria. We took note
of the fact that the Constitutional Committee has not
yet decided the dates for the next round of meetings. We
16/27

20/12/2021

call on all parties to continue to engage constructively
with the Special Envoy and strive to reach an agreement
as soon as possible on the arrangements for the next
session. The Security Council should provide concrete
support for the work of the Special Envoy to advance
the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process.
Ten years into the conflict, Syria is mired in a
profound economic and humanitarian crisis. The
international community must help the Syrian people to
maintain their livelihoods and hope. China supports the
international community and United Nations agencies
in stepping up their assistance to Syria based on the
guiding principles for emergency humanitarian relief,
as set out in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths just presented
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/1030)
submitted pursuant to resolution 2585 (2021). China
has carefully studied the report, and we would like to
emphasize the following points.
All humanitarian relief operations in Syria should
fully respect Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The cross-border mechanism, which is politically and
legally controversial, should be adjusted in a timely
manner in the light of developments on the ground and
make a gradual transition to cross-line delivery. The
report states that the environment for cross-border relief
operations is complex. The local authorities in some
areas have close ties with terrorists, and the risk of the
misappropriation of humanitarian supplies therefore
cannot be ruled out. China is concerned about that. We
request the United Nations to take all the necessary
monitoring measures to ensure the humanitarian nature
of the cross-border operation.
The cross-line relief operations in north-eastern
and north-western Syria should continue to be scaled
up. China welcomes the development by the United
Nations of a six-month cross-line relief plan for northwestern Syria. We welcome the launch by the World
Food Programme of the second cross-line delivery
to north-western Syria on 9 and 10 December. We
commend the Syrian Government’s active cooperation
in implementing the United Nations plan, and we urge
Turkey and local authorities in north-western Syria to
provide timely access and safety guarantees for crossline relief operations and facilitate the distribution
of supplies.
Early-recovery and livelihood projects should be
robustly supported. We are pleased to note that the
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

United Nations and its partners are carrying out earlyrecovery projects in a number of areas, in line with the
provisions of resolution 2585 (2021), including removing
debris, restoring critical infrastructure and providing
vocational training, among other things. However, the
scale of the relevant projects is quite limited. We hope
that the United Nations will increase its investment
in that regard to help the Syrian people become selfsufficient and reduce their humanitarian needs.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that, to
fundamentally
overcome
Syria’s
humanitarian
challenges, we must comprehensively address the major
issues that endanger Syria’s sovereignty, security and
development. Unilateral sanctions have brought about
immeasurable losses and harm for Syria. Council
members should take concrete measures to eliminate
the negative impact of unilateral sanctions. Countries
concerned should withdraw from the illegally occupied
territory in northern Syria and stop all actions that
undermine Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The international community should abandon double
standards and eradicate terrorist forces in Syria at an
early date. Only in that way can we help Syria restore
peace and order and safeguard the fundamental interests
of the Syrian people.
Ms. Muigai (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Amani Ballour for their briefings. We also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey.
The situation in Syria is a profound test of the
promise of the United Nations and its Charter to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Our
inability as the Council to bring to an end the untold
suffering of the Syrian people should rally us in 2022
to do our utmost to fulfil the Charter of the United
Nations in this situation.
Kenya condemns the unrelenting destruction of
human lives and livelihoods caused by the inability
to find a political settlement in Syria. We implore
the Security Council to rise out of dormancy and its
repetitive meetings and find the means to act together.
Kenya will support all actions that offer relief to the
long-suffering people of Syria.
We
commend
Special
Envoy
Pedersen’s
engagements in Damascus, but regret the lack
of commitments to convene a seventh session of
discussions of the Constitutional Committee. We hope

S/PV. 8937

that the discussions will take place in January and urge
the parties to agree to this undertaking and engage
meaningfully and constructively.
Progress on the political track is the lifeline
for the people of Syria. It is intimately linked to the
humanitarian track. For the international community
to have confidence in the Government’s ability and
willingness to be the primary conduit for aid, it must
show respect for the human and civil rights of all
Syrians regardless of their region or ethnic identity. No
areas or groups should be punished by association, and
neither should the practice of collective punishment
be instituted.
We ourselves recall the practices of collective
punishment meted out by colonial authorities
throughout Africa in the last century. The African
people recall them as profound injustices and condemn
them wherever they may be occurring, including
in Syria.
The Government and actors in Syria must accept
the need to more closely distinguish between civilian
populations and terrorist fighters and insurgents.
The Government should aspire in concrete ways to
providing aid to all Syrians, while making sure that aid
is not diverted.
For Syrians to succeed in implementing such
recommendations, regional and global actors
intervening in the country must play their part. We
strongly condemn the subsuming of the safety and
security of the Syrian people to the interests of external
States. We therefore urge all members with leverage and
engagement in Syria to update their approaches so that
they are not associated in any way with the profound
suffering caused to the people of Syria.
The cross-border aid mechanism, supported by
cross-line deliveries, remains a crucial avenue for
humanitarian assistance. We applaud the development
of a six-month plan, as well as the new direct distribution
modality in north-west Syria. We call for clear standards
of oversight and transparency of aid delivery for the
cross-border mechanism and for cross-line deliveries.
Aid should not be politicized or diverted.
Kenya commends the United Nations humanitarian
response through the early-recovery and livelihood
activities. We encourage the expansion of such activities
to include psychosocial support to the population,
especially for children who have known nothing

21-4099517/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

but war. It is imperative that those programmes be
adequately funded so that they can meet their intended
goal for change.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of
respect for Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
I reaffirm Kenya’s solidarity with the people of Syria in
their quest for peace, which can be delivered only by a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political dialogue.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
also thank Special Envoy Pedersen, Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Ms. Ballour for their briefings.
For over a decade, the Syrian people have endured
the perils of war and the resulting effects of living
through one of the worst humanitarian crises the world
has witnessed. The country’s dire situation is further
exacerbated by a combination of factors, including
severe socioeconomic decline, which has precipitated
commodity shortages and food insecurity.
The perpetuation of hostilities intensifies the
humanitarian crisis. It is therefore crucial that parties
to the conflict immediately end the violence to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure, prevent further
displacement and allow humanitarian actors to carry
out their work. It is past time for a nationwide ceasefire
to be implemented and fully respected by all.
We recognize that counter-terrorism operations
are required for the protection of Syria’s people and
its territorial integrity. However, we remind parties
of their obligation to comply with international law.
Military activities should never take precedence
over the protection of civilians, and the fundamental
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution
must be respected.
The protection of civilians extends to those
residing in displacement camps, such as Al-Hol, where
insecurity persists. We reiterate that camp residents
and humanitarian workers must be afforded safety and
access to basic services.
The economic crisis compounds the myriad
challenges facing the Syrian people, with women
and girls being disproportionately affected. Millions
are heavily dependent on humanitarian aid, and the
cross-border mechanism is a lifeline. However, other
indispensable modalities, such as cross-line deliveries,
are necessary to complement the mechanism and
ensure timely, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
access. We urge the parties to continue working
18/27

20/12/2021

together to expand this modality to ensure regular
and predictable cross-line operations. We further
appeal for the preservation and scaling up of existing
access arrangements to reach all persons in need. That
is especially important to assist in the effective and
efficient distribution of coronavirus disease vaccines.
Beyond humanitarian aid, further practical steps
must be taken to assist Syria. That demands the lifting
of all unilateral coercive measures imposed on the
country, which have deepened the socioeconomic
crisis and are incompatible with international law.
It further necessitates support for early-recovery and
livelihood projects to reduce vulnerabilities, enhance
resilience and enable the achievement of long-term
development goals.
Critically low water levels in the Euphrates River,
due partly to the existential threat of climate change in
combination with other troubling factors, has generated
a water crisis that threatens lives and livelihoods. The
situation is at a critical stage, and it calls for immediate
attention. Furthermore, a sustainable solution to the
issues surrounding the Allouk water station must also
be prioritized.
The political and humanitarian situations are
undoubtedly interwoven and, to resolve the conflict
and protracted humanitarian crisis, there must be full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). We reaffirm
our support for the Special Envoy as he works assiduously
to assist the political process. We note particularly his
efforts to support the Constitutional Committee and
to resolve the unsettled issues of detainees, abductees
and missing persons. We implore all parties to remain
committed to working together on the political track
and to engage constructively. We also reiterate that the
full participation of women is imperative to ensure fair
and balanced outcomes for all.
The Syrian people must remain at the forefront of
all deliberations and decisions. Our words and actions
must be guided by humanitarian considerations, rather
than by what is geopolitically expedient. This calls
for pragmatic steps to be taken, such as the removal
of all foreign forces present in Syria, in violation
of its sovereignty. The politicization of the grave
humanitarian situation must immediately come to an
end. This being our final statement in the Security
Council on this issue, it is incumbent upon us to
reiterate that we have a responsibility to support Syria
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8937

and its people in a meaningful way, and we must not
fail in fulfilling it.

We also support international and regional efforts in
this direction.

Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Geir Pedersen,
the Under-Secretary-General and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Martin Griffiths, and Syrian Civil Society
Representative, Amani Ballour, for their briefings.
I welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey in this meeting.

I thank the Secretary-General for his two recent
reports, and in particular his objective one (S/2021/1030),
which is clear, detailed and frank in response to the
content of resolution 2585 (2021). In this regard, we
commend the renewed vision of Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths to improve humanitarian work in
Syria and increase its effectiveness and transparency,
despite the ongoing challenges.

Regrettably, after more than a decade of crisis,
Syria is still facing difficult conditions, in which the
Syrian people endure the greatest amount of suffering
and sacrifices as a result of the ongoing conflict,
violence and terrorism. The manifestations of the crisis
have been exacerbated and its factors have multiplied
over the years, in a way that has made it more severe
and more complex and that undermines the pillars of
security and stability in the entire region.
In that context, we reiterate that there is no
sustainable alternative to a solution in Syria other
than a negotiated political settlement, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), that preserves Syria’s
unity and sovereignty and ends foreign interference
and the presence of terrorist groups, while working to
accelerate the process in order to end the humanitarian
suffering of the Syrians and put the country back on the
path to stability and development.
In that regard, the international community and the
Security Council must make concerted efforts to have
a positive political and economic impact in Syria, as
was the case when the Council unanimously adopted
the central resolutions on the Syrian issue, that will end
the various manifestations of the crisis and contribute
to the return of the displaced and refugees to their
homeland. That will also require greater efforts and
flexibility on the part of the Syrian parties in their
leadership and ownership of the political process in a
way that prioritizes the interests of the Syrian people
above all else and achieves political and social harmony
to restore security, stability and Syria’s regional and
international role.
In that context, we reiterate Tunisia’s support for
the efforts and good offices of the Special Envoy,
Geir Pedersen, in order to advance the constitutional
and political process among the Syrians and establish
a comprehensive ceasefire, especially within the
framework of a step-by-step approach to the solution.

It is necessary, in light of the difficult conditions
created by the outbreak of the pandemic and the advent
of winter, to continue to meet the growing needs in
all parts of Syria and to reduce the manifestations of
fragility and risks without political considerations.
That can be done by ensuring the access of Syrians to
urgent assistance and early recovery projects across
lines and across borders, thereby contributing to
alleviating human suffering, building resilience among
individuals and local communities and providing them
with a better horizon.
In that context, we note the engagement of the
United Nations with its various specialized agencies and
partners to embody a comprehensive and multisectoral
humanitarian response, in line with resolution 2585
(2021) and General Assembly resolution 46/182,
which specifically states that emergency relief must
be carried out in a manner that supports recovery and
sustainable development.
We reaffirm our thanks to the donor countries that
have contributed to funding early recovery projects,
noting that the amount of funding in this regard is still
small, incommensurate with the needs in Syria and
not in line with the strategic objectives of the United
Nations response plan.
We also welcome the onset of the distribution
of humanitarian aid across the lines in Sarmada on
16 December, and the encouraging signs for more
through the development by the United Nations of a sixyear operational plan to send regular and predictable
aid shipments across the lines to the north of Syria.
In addition, there has been a steady improvement of
the humanitarian situation in north-eastern Syria,
a strengthening of the United Nations operational
presence in the region and various measures taken to
enhance accountability, effectiveness, transparency,
monitoring and risk reduction in relation to cross-line
and cross-border aid.

21-4099519/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

20/12/2021

In conclusion, we reiterate that the priority remains
to identify a political solution pursuant to resolution
2254 (2015), the alleviation of the suffering of the
Syrians and ensuring that aid reaches those who deserve
it by using all available mechanisms and removing all
obstacles, as well as ending the problem of terrorism,
which has continued to complicate the situation.

under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011 and Syrian civil society
representatives gave a detailed overview on the question
of accountability in Syria. Those kind of meetings do
not stop atrocities in Syria. However, they do provide
us with relevant information for taking action against
impunity in future.

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their informative briefings. Their balanced and
objective views have guided us well throughout the two
years that we have been on the Security Council. I also
welcome Ms. Amani Ballour to today’s meeting.

There will be no peace in Syria until impunity
prevails. The international community will never
normalize its views on killings, torture, sexual violence
and forced disappearances, which unfortunately
continue in Syria on a daily basis. I hope the next
membership of the Security Council will be able to
tackle these atrocities in a meaningful and swift way.

Estonia commends the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which continues
to provide humanitarian aid to millions of people in
Syria. As noted by Mr. Griffiths, all modalities are
important in reaching the large number of internally
displaced persons across the country. That is especially
true in the light of the coronavirus disease pandemic
and ongoing winterization efforts.
I welcome the timely publication of the reports
(S/2021/1029 and S/2021/1030) on the implementation
of resolution 2585 (2021), which, among other things,
focuses on cross-line deliveries. There have been
substantial improvements when it comes to coordination
between the relevant parties on the ground. In that
regard, we remain cautiously optimistic about potential
new developments that could make cross-line deliveries
regular and reliable. Until then, however, cross-line
deliveries will be unable to substitute for the large-scale
humanitarian response provided through the crossborder mechanism.
Cross-border aid remains the backbone of the
Organization’s overall humanitarian response in Syria.
Maintaining stable aid flow is crucial, as the war in
Syria has not ended. In the past months, 100 civilians
have been killed in clashes and attacks. I reiterate our
call for a nationwide ceasefire, which is a precondition
for a peaceful dialogue based on resolution 2254 (2015).
All parties must adhere to international law and provide
safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to
all Syrians.
Last month, Estonia organized an Arria Formula
meeting, at which the United Nations-mandated
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
20/27

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen, UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Ms. Ballour for their
briefings. I also welcome the representatives of Syria,
Iran and Turkey to the Security Council.
First of all, I would like to say that Mexico recognizes
the continued efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen to
promote understanding and dialogue between the
Government and the opposition, in the interest of
resuming the work of the Constitutional Committee
and promoting the advancement of a political process
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We welcome his
recent meeting with the Syrian Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates, and call for the parties to
engage constructively in this process in order to resume
the drafting work. We also acknowledge Mr. Pedersen’s
contacts with other international actors. We stress the
importance of those actors with influence helping to
push forward the United Nations-facilitated political
process and the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015).
On the humanitarian front, my delegation
appreciates the issuance of the Secretary-General’s two
comprehensive reports (S/2021/1029 and S/2021/1030),
pursuant to resolution 2585 (2021) of last July. The
bimonthly report contained in document S/2021/1029
makes it clear that, in the face of continuing hostilities
and profound needs, the outlook is critical, as Ms. Ballour
described it. We reiterate our condemnation of the acts
of violence affecting the civilian population and express
our concern about the attacks that have been carried
out in the vicinity of humanitarian-aid warehouses and
distribution routes. We recall that it is imperative for all
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
In terms of access, Mexico welcomes the second
convoy of humanitarian aid that was deployed
across the lines of conflict to the north-west region.
The recently adopted six-month plan is a tool to
strengthen this mechanism and to have regular and
predictable operations. We will remain attentive to
the implementation of this plan, for which we reiterate
the importance of all parties involved providing the
security guarantees required for smooth operations.
We also welcome the issuance of the substantive
report on transparency, both in cross-border operations
and across conflict lines. The report makes it clear that
operations across the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing
have a strict monitoring system in place to ensure a
good level of transparency. It is clear that even with the
full implementation of the six-month plan for cross-line
operations, cross-line operations are complementary to
cross-border operations. Both modalities are essential
to deliver vital assistance to the population, especially
in the face of the additional challenges posed by the
winter season.

S/PV. 8937

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Niger.
I would like to thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Griffiths
for their detailed briefings on the situation in Syria
and, at the same time, salute Ms. Ballour for her
contribution to today’s debate, which cannot leave
anyone indifferent. Syria needs us, and it needs us now.
I welcome the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran
to this session.
My delegation takes note of the regular and
substantive reports submitted by the Secretary-General
on 14 December 2021 on the humanitarian situation and
the aid-delivery mechanism in Syria (S/2021/1029 and
S/2021/1030). Therefore, in this statement, the last that
my country will make on this issue, I would like to dwell
on three aspects that I consider essential, namely, the
security, political and humanitarian situation in Syria.

Likewise, we appreciate that the report contained
in document S/2021/1030, which explains in detail
the mechanisms for monitoring, risk management and
early-recovery projects that are being developed in
the field. On this last point, as we are well aware, the
effects of 10 years of conflict have been devastating
for the Syrian economy and, consequently, for the
resilience of the population. It is very unfortunate that
90 per cent of the population in the country lives in
poverty. Early-recovery projects are critical as part of
the humanitarian response to generate opportunities
and facilitate access to basic services.

First of all, with regard to the security situation,
we deplore the continuing hostilities involving the use
of improvised explosive devices, air strikes and other
rocket attacks on areas inhabited by civilians. My
delegation calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities
as a sine qua non for achieving tangible progress in
resolving the crisis in Syria. However, the call for a
ceasefire and the need for collective efforts to address
the coronavirus disease pandemic must not distract us
from the fight against terrorism, especially since there
are reports of an upsurge in attacks and other crimes
perpetrated by elements of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) on Syrian armed forces and its
allies in the south, but also against Kurdish forces in
the north-east of the country. This state of affairs is a
real source of concern and sufficient proof that the ISIL
is regaining its capacity to act after its defeat following
the decisive actions of the international coalition.

In conclusion, we highlight the close relationship
between humanitarian needs and the ceasefire. As
long as the conflict does not cease, humanitarian
demands will continue to deepen. It is essential to
promote steps towards a peaceful settlement, in
accordance with international law and in compliance
with resolution 2254 (2015). The cessation of violence
and the political transition process are complementary
and mutually reinforcing steps, and we urge their
parallel advancement. The Syrian people deserve a
peaceful future.

With regard to the political situation, the Niger,
which has made this point repeatedly throughout its
term on the Council, remains convinced that only an
inclusive dialogue led by the Syrians themselves and
reflecting the will of the Syrian people will make it
possible to find a peaceful and long-term solution in
Syria in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We
welcome the holding of the latest round of negotiations
in the Constitutional Commission but remain
disappointed at the lack of progress made by this body,
despite its being bipartisan.

21-4099521/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

As we stated in the Special Envoy’s last briefing,
we share his disappointment when he said,
“The Committee lacks both a clear understanding
of how to move the process forward and a vision of
how to develop a ‘substantive drafting process’”.
This conclusion is evidence of the stalemate of that
body and the inability of its members to accomplish the
mission assigned to them. This calls for a radical change
in the structure, composition and working methods
of the Commission, which must begin with an end to
outside interference in the already complex process.
We therefore call on all key external actors to
uphold the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria by refraining from any interference in
the work of the Commission so as to give the resolution
of the crisis — the victims of which, as we all know, are
civilians, primarily women and children — a genuine
chance of succeeding. We acknowledge the tireless
work of Mr. Pederson’s to achieve that goal through
dialogue with all stakeholders in the process, including
the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and civil society
organizations in Syria.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, my
delegation supports the cross-border and internal
mechanisms for delivering humanitarian aid to the
suffering Syrian population. Once again today, we have
learned from Emergency Relief Coordinator Griffiths,
whose work we commend, that the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate under the combined
effects of the destruction of basic social infrastructure,
poverty, food insecurity, caused by more than a
decade of conflict, the effects climate change and the
repercussions of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
With regard to the latter, it is astounding that less than
3 per cent of the Syrian population been vaccinated
to date.
As winter is setting in, more important for Syrians
than the way in which humanitarian aid is delivered
is that it arrives quickly and in sufficient quantity.
We welcome the fact that the cross-border delivery of
aid has seen progress in recent days with the recent
delivery by the World Food Program of humanitarian
aid on 9 and 10 December from Government-controlled
territory to the north-western part of Syria.
Issues related to access to water for populations
living along the Euphrates River remains of concern
for the Niger. Water must be a source of cooperation
22/27

20/12/2021

and shared prosperity rather than conflict and discord
among riparian nations. Therefore, we encourage the
equitable use of that common good in the region.
Lastly, as we have always posited, the imposition of
unilateral economic sanctions has exacerbated the dire
economic and humanitarian situation throughout Syria.
The Niger calls for easing or suspending unilateral
economic sanctions that are severely impacting Syria’s
ability to cope with the pandemic and the current
economic crisis, which is a moral imperative.
In conclusion, it can never be said enough that the
resolution of the Syrian crisis cannot come from the
force of arms alone, but rather through a negotiated and
just political solution, involving the various segments
of Syrian society, without exclusion. We therefore
continue to believe that the political and humanitarian
issues of the Syrian crisis cannot be treated separately,
as the pursuit of hostilities negatively affects the
humanitarian situation, which, in turn, affects the
peace process.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation has taken note of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/1030),
submitted pursuant to resolution 2585 (2021), and
listened closely to the briefing by Mr. Martin Griffiths.
I would like to make the following remarks.
First, with regard to cross-line access, the Syrian
Government continues to spare no effort to facilitate
the operations of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies in implementation of the mandate set out in
resolution 2585 (2021), while the Turkish regime and its
affiliated terrorist groups continue to obstruct them in
Idlib. Cooperation between the Syrian Government and
the United Nations in late August enabled the crossline delivery of a World Food Programme convoy from
Aleppo to Sarmada in north-western Syria. In response,
a hysterical, aggressive campaign was carried out by
the Turkish regime and its terrorist affiliates. The
contents of the convoy were unable to be distributed
for months. The same campaign obstructed another
convoy scheduled to arrive in Sarmada on 9 November,
during the visit to Aleppo by Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme.
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Terrorist groups targeted the routes to be taken by the
convoy with missiles. Another convoy scheduled on
28 November was also blocked.
The Syrian Government, based on its commitment
to stepping up access to all parts of the country,
approved the United Nations six-month plan and
responded positively and in record time to all requests.
That resulted in the delivery of a food and non-food
aid convoy by the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations
Population Fund to Sarmada on 9 December. The Syrian
State’s achievements in enhancing cross-line access in
the north-west should be commended by the Security
Council. We regret that the report fails to explicitly and
unequivocally attribute responsibility to the Turkish
regime and its terrorist affiliates for obstructing the
duly implementation of the mandate.
With regard to the north-east, the report confirms
that access for most of the deliveries was made
possible and that 625 truckloads and seven airlifts
were delivered. The report also notes that the Syrian
Government authorized a UNICEF and World Health
Organization cross-line convoy containing vaccines
against the coronavirus disease to Ras Al-Ayn and Tal
Abyad. My country’s Government also authorized a
United Nations humanitarian assessment mission in
that area. That was the sixth such authorization granted
by the Syrian Government, pursuant to resolution
2585 (2021), also coincided with the publication of the
Secretary-General’s report, confirming that all access
requests have been granted by the Syrian Government.
With regard to the Rukban camp, the report
confirms that humanitarian access to the camp remains
beyond reach. We had hoped that the report would
clarify the reasons that have prevented such access,
which we have already laid out before the Council.
They are directly linked to the illegitimate presence of
United States forces in the area and their sponsorship of
the Jaysh Maghawir Al-Thawra terrorist organization.
We emphasize the need for that shameful camp to be
closed, as it continues to only exacerbate the suffering
of Syrian citizens and support armed groups.
Secondly, with regard to promoting the transparency
and efficiency of the cross-border mechanism, my
country reiterates our principled position rejecting that
politicized mechanism, as it constitutes a stark violation
of the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. We also reject the mechanism

S/PV. 8937

because of the grave shortcomings undermining its
actions, foremost of which is its failure to guarantee
that assistance reaches its intended beneficiaries, not
terrorist organizations.
The Secretary-General’s report states that crossborder humanitarian operations are fraught with risks,
thereby demonstrating the validity of our position with
regard to the mechanism. The report notes that the
operation is managed remotely and that part of the area
covered is under the control of a local authority that
is generally believed to have close ties with non-State
armed group designated by the Security Council as a
terrorist organization, allowing it control aid.
My delegation is astonished by the report’s
exaggeration of the number of people in need in the
north-west. The report’s description that activities
inside the country complements and cannot replace
cross-border action is not objective and based on
unrealistic assessments. The facts demonstrate that
serious and sincere cooperation with the Syrian
Government and stepping up action along the lines
ensure the achievement the desired goals and avert
the risks and shortcomings inherent to the crossborder mechanism.
Thirdly, with respect to rapid recovery projects,
my country’s delegation expresses its extreme
disappointment that certain Western countries, within
the framework of the so-called donors community,
are impeding the implementation and quantitatively
and qualitatively upgrading of many such projects.
Those countries raise unjustified questions regarding
the definition of early recovery projects and obstruct
the adoption of a strategic framework for cooperation
between the Syrian Government and the United Nations
in the humanitarian field, despite the significant
flexibility that has been demonstrated by the Syrian
Government.
Moreover, those countries continue to politicize
humanitarian and development work and to attempt to
impose conditions on the provision and delivery of aid.
How else can we explain the fact that financing for the
humanitarian response plan was reduced by more than
$200 million, despite increased humanitarian needs?
My delegation would like to make it clear that
some of the early recovery projects referred to in the
report (S/2021/1030) have been implemented for years,
even before the adoption of resolution 2585 (2021). We
had hoped to see a list of new vital projects that would

21-4099523/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

20/12/2021

contribute to strengthening resilience, improving the
humanitarian situation and facilitating the dignified
and safe return of displaced persons. It comes as no
surprise that some members of the Security Council
have not tried to hide their hostility towards resolution
2585 (2021) or their rejection of its provisions. We will
have to announce the names of those countries.

as well as with the co-Chair of the national delegation
to the Constitutional Committee meetings. The Syrian
Arab Republic remains committed to a political solution
based on a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned dialogue that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people and ensures
full commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and integrity of Syria.

My delegation also regrets that the report disregards
the catastrophic consequences of the illegitimate,
immoral and inhumane siege imposed by the United
States of America and the European Union against
the Syrian people. We call for the immediate and
unconditional lifting of the illegal coercive measures
in place, which have caused the suffering of each and
every individual Syrian.

Syria awaits the seventh session of the Constitutional
Committee. We applaud the positive contribution of the
national delegation to its work; however, we emphasize
that external parties should refrain from meddling
in the work of the Committee and creating further
obstacles by imposing artificial timelines or prejudging
its conclusions.

For the sake of truth and to be clear, any objective
assessment of the complexities of the humanitarian
situation in Syria lead to one conclusion, namely, that
the root cause is the Turkish regime, with its practices,
crimes and sponsorship of terrorist organizations and
entities affiliated to it in the north and north-west of my
country. We have submitted to the Council a number
of letters describing in detailed the Turkish regime’s
practices and crimes against the Syrian people,
including by depriving them of access to water and
imposing its policy of Turkification. All of this should
prompt the Security Council to undertake urgent and
decisive deterrence. My delegation also demands that
the Turkish regime be held accountable for its crimes
and desperate attempts to impede stability in Syria,
including its obstruction of humanitarian cross-line
convoys and the implementation of the six-month plan.
In this regard, we cannot but note the practices
of the United States forces illegitimately present in
north-eastern Syria. Those forces support separatist
militias and facilitate the efforts of non-governmental
organizations as they seek to lead illegal cross-border
piracy operations through the crossing point at Fish
Khabur, in stark contravention of Security Council
resolutions. They also use humanitarian assistance as
a pretext to violate our sovereignty. Their most recent
practice involves importing large shipments of wheat
riddled with dangerous diseases through the Semalka
crossing point, with the aim of inflicting damage on the
Syrian people and the Syrian economy.
We listened to the statement made by Special Envoy
Pedersen, who a few days ago held talks in Damascus
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates,
24/27

The need for a comprehensive ceasefire has
been mentioned in a number of statements today. We
underscore that, if such a ceasefire is to be achieved,
there is a need to abolish the terrorist organizations
active in certain parts of the country, specifically
Da’esh and Al-Nusra Front, as well as their affiliates.
There is also a need to end the Turkish occupation
and the illegitimate presence of United States forces
in Syria, leading to the restoration of the authority of
the Syrian State throughout its entire territories, the
re-establishment of security and stability and an end to
any irregular and unacceptable situations. We consider
a step forward those national and local reconciliations,
as we have recently seen in Dara’a and Deir ez-Zor.
We note that the cooperation of the Syrian State in
the efforts of our Russian friends has resulted in the
release of a number of detainees and abductees, despite
all attempts by the Turkish side and its agents to block
that humanitarian initiative.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank your delegation, Mr. President, as well as those
of Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Viet
Nam for their efforts and objectivity as members of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I welcome today’s
meeting and I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their briefings. I
would also like to salute Ms. Amani Ballour and I thank
the Secretary-General for his report on United Nations
humanitarian operations in Syria, submitted pursuant
to resolution 2585 (2021) (S/2021/1030).
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Those humanitarian operations are vital for the
people of Syria. Food deliveries have saved millions of
civilians and 1.1 million vaccine doses have protected
Syrians against the secondary threat of the coronavirus
disease. Those cross-border operations are undertaken
in line with the universally agreed principles of the
United Nations, including transparency. There is no
hidden agenda. The aim is simple: to save lives.
We have heard from Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths that the distribution of cross-line aid has
begun. Each and every cross-line mission requires risk
assessments and negotiations with different actors.
Shelling and attacks by the regime and its backers
continue to target the supply routes, warehouses and
distribution points of United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations.
I assure the Council that Turkey remains committed
to ensuring the safe continuation of those missions into
the future. However, we note that, even with the full
implementation of the existing plan, the cross-line
convoys cannot replace or replicate the size and scope
of the cross-border operation. It is clear that there is no
feasible alternative to the cross-border mechanism.
No one wants the Syrian people to be dependent
on humanitarian aid. The cross-border mechanism is
saving the lives of Syrians right now, but their future
will be saved by successful negotiations that lead to a
sustained peace — a sustained peace whereby families
sleep in their own homes without fear and where
children walk to school, carefree, with full bellies.
But delays in the political process prolong the
suffering, Thus far, the Syrian regime has been unwilling
to seriously engage in United Nations-led peace talks
in Geneva. The next round of the Constitutional
Committee must be held as soon as possible. Moreover,
that round should produce tangible results. We support
the Special Envoy’s step-by-step initiative to accelerate
the political process. It is highly critical that those
consultations align with the international community’s
acquis on the Syrian conflict, as well as the letter
and spirit of resolution 2254 (2015). As we all know,
a sustainable solution to the Syrian conflict can be
achieved only by protecting Syria’s territorial integrity
and unity through political means based on resolution
2254 (2015).
The other hurdle in reaching a political solution is
the ceasefire violations by the regime and its backers.
The victims of those violations are innocent civilians

S/PV. 8937

whom international humanitarian law has sought to
protect. The security impact of the prolonged conflict
is, of course, not confined to Syria. It also affects the
surrounding region, including my own country. The
situation in Syria creates a breeding ground for terrorist
organizations. Attacks perpetrated by the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG)
and its offshoot, the Syrian Democratic Forces, take
the lives of defenceless Syrians and, indeed, Turkish
citizens in my own country. No Member State can,
or should, tolerate deliberate attacks against its own
people or territory. We therefore once again invite the
members of the international community to see the real
face of the PKK/YPG and its violations of international
humanitarian law, including the documented deliberate
bombing of civilian targets, including hospitals, the
abduction by force and recruitment of children, as
certified by the United Nations, the use of violence
to suppress civilian demonstrations in response to
hardship, including increases in the price of basic
goods, such as bread and gasoline, and the heinous
act of blocking the return to refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes through the threat of
death, often at gunpoint.
We wish for a world free from terror. History has
proved that backing one terrorist group to do one’s
bidding against another terrorist organization has
never been successful in the long term. It is my duty to
warn that supporting terrorist organization extensions
under the guise of fighting Da’esh will not yield the
results that are hoped for. I ask all members of the
United Nations to exercise caution in rolling out a red
carpet to terrorist leaders. By endorsing such actors,
they legitimize terror. Today’s crimson carpet can very
quickly turn into a floor of blood. Members do not want
to have the blood of innocent Syrians on their hands,
Only two days ago, our pivotal timelines were
flooded with the hashtag International Day of Migration.
In Turkey, every day is a day of migration. For 10 years
now, we have welcomed approximately 4 million Syrian
refugees who left their homes in search of safety. Tens
of thousands of Syrian children took their first breaths
and their first steps in Turkey. We want them to know
their homeland, their culture and their language. No
child should grow up in exile. A hashtag is all well and
good, but a home is better.
I fear that history will define the Security Council
as the hashtag-generation Council. Each month, we
come to the Chamber; we speak; we tweet; and we

21-4099525/27

S/PV.8937

The situation in the Middle East

leave. We return the following month and go through
the motions again. I remind the Council that we are the
last chance for the people of Syria. Is this the best that
we can come up with? Perhaps instead of tweeting our
New Year resolutions, we can actually do something to
save the Syrian people.
As for the statement made by the representative
of the criminal Syrian regime, I will repeat: I do not
consider him as my legitimate counterpart. His presence
in this Chamber is an affront to the millions of Syrians
who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of
the Al-Assad regime. I will therefore not honour his
delusional remarks with a response.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I join other
speakers in thanking the briefers for their inputs.
For well over a decade, the Syrian people have
been seriously suffering from the conflict. To end their
grief and the dangers that the conflict poses to regional
peace and security, we need to redouble our efforts to
find a political solution to this unfortunate conflict.
The Astana format will continue such efforts. To that
end, senior officials of the Astana guarantors will meet
in Nur-Sultan on 21 and 22 December.
We welcome the recent release of 10 Syrian
detainees as a result of the efforts of the working group
on the release of detainees/abductees, established by the
Astana format. Iran will continue to seriously contribute
to such efforts, and we urge all parties to cooperate for
the realization of that noble humanitarian endeavour.
We hope that the ongoing consultations conducted
by Mr. Pedersen will assist in the holding of the
Constitutional Committee’s next meeting soon. The
Committee must work without any external interference
or pressure or the setting of any artificial deadline for
its work or any other conditions of a similar nature.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/1030) on the implementation of resolution
2585 (2021), the humanitarian situation in Syria is
deteriorating, needs continue to grow and significant
parts of the civilian infrastructure have been destroyed
or are disintegrating. That indicates the dire need to
intensify humanitarian work, in particular through the
effective implementation of resolution 2585 (2021),
in which the Security Council calls upon all States to
26/27

20/12/2021

respond with practical steps to address the urgent needs
of the Syrian people, stressing that such efforts must
include supporting early recovery projects.
One such practical step can, indeed, be the removal
of the unilateral sanctions imposed on Syria, prolonging
the sufferings of its people and adversely affecting
the work of international and national humanitarian
agencies in the country. As the Secretary-General
rightly states, early recovery activities are key to
preventing a further increase in the number of people
in need, as well as reducing immediate and protracted
humanitarian needs, and therefore dependence on
external assistance.
While noting the efforts undertaken in early
recovery activities, we believe that such activities are
much less than needed. We therefore support the call
by the Secretary-General for further expanding early
recovery efforts, as, according to him, such efforts are
critical to the continued success of the humanitarian
response in the country. It is important to ensure that
the aid that enters Syria through cross-border operations
reaches the actual beneficiaries and does not fall into
the hands of terrorist groups. We call for an increase
in the funding and allocation of humanitarian aid to
cross-line operations, aimed at turning them into only
humanitarian operations in Syria.
We welcome the positive response of the Syrian
Government to all five United Nations notes verbales
requesting access for cross-line operations, as
confirmed by the Secretary-General in his report.
However, it is extremely disappointing that, due to
the lack of cooperation by other sides, so far only two
cross-line deliveries have taken place, which have yet
to be distributed.
We call for facilitating the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of Syrian refugees and internally
displaced persons. At the same time, we warn about
attempts to discourage them from returning home,
including by disseminating inaccurate information
about the current conditions in Syria.
We strongly condemn all aggressions by the Israeli
regime against Syria, and we reaffirm Syria’s inherent
right to self-defence and to respond at a time and place
of its choosing. The Security Council must compel the
Israeli regime to end the occupation of the Syrian Golan
and immediately stop its aggressions against Syria.
21-40995

20/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Moreover, the continued occupation of parts of the
Syrian territory by foreign forces, which constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, must come to an end and all
occupying and uninvited foreign forces must leave that
country without any precondition or further delay. In that
context, the recent reports by United States media about
the killing of dozens of Syrian civilians — including
farmers, children and villagers — by the United States
forces, which we strongly condemn, indicate the
urgency of their withdrawal from Syria.
We reject separatist activities or illegitimate selfrule initiatives in Syria and condemn any efforts to
support them.

S/PV. 8937

The Syrian crisis must be settled peacefully
and in accordance with principles of international
law, particularly full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
The Islamic Republic of Iran continues to support
the people and the Government of Syria to restore the
unity and territorial integrity of their country.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

21-4099527/27
