S/2002/129*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 February 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 31 January 2002 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the Security Council has agreed to
dispatch a mission to Eritrea and Ethiopia from 20 to 25 February 2002. The
members of the Council have also agreed on the terms of reference of the mission, a
copy of which is enclosed herewith (see annex).
The composition of the mission is as follows:
1.

Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby (Norway), head of mission.

2.

Ambassador Stefan Tafrov (Bulgaria).

3.

Mr. Ferdinand Ngoh Ngoh, Minister (Cameroon).

4.

Mr. Chen Xu, Minister Counsellor (China).

5.

Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso (Colombia).

6.

Madame Emmanuelle D’Achon, Political Counsellor (France).

7.

Ambassador François Lonseny Fall (Guinea).

8.

Ambassador Gerard Corr (Ireland).

9.

Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul (Mauritius).

10.

Ms. Maria Angelica Arce de Jeannet, Minister (Mexico).

11.

Ambassador Gennady Gatilov, First Deputy Permanent Representative
(Russian Federation).

12.

Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani (Singapore).

13.

Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, Minister Counsellor (Syrian Arab Republic).

14.

Ambassador Stewart Eldon, CMG, OBE (United Kingdom).

15.

Ambassador Richard Williamson, Alternate Representative for Special
Political Affairs (United States).

I should be grateful if you could have the Secretariat make all the necessary
arrangements to facilitate the work of the mission.
(Signed) Jagdish Koonjul
President of the Security Council

* Reissued for technical reasons.

02-23928* (E) 210202

*0223928*

S/2002/129

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Ethiopia
and Eritrea
1.
The Security Council is sending a mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea in support of
the peace process between the two neighbouring countries and the efforts to
implement the Algiers Agreements and relevant Council resolutions. The mission
will visit Addis Ababa, Asmara and the Temporary Security Zone. It will spend one
day in each location.
2.
The Security Council recognizes that the upcoming border delimitation
determination by the Boundary Commission, which is final and binding, represents a
key step in the peace process between the two countries. The Council stresses that,
in accordance with article 4.15 of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (see
A/55/686-S/2000/1183), the parties have committed themselves to accepting fully
the determination of the Commission. The mission will relay to the parties the
monumental importance that the international community attaches to their
embracing the Commission’s determination as the ultimate measure of their
commitment to the peace process. The mission will discuss with the parties
measures to implement all aspects of the Commission’s determination.
3.
The mission will also address elements related to the consideration of the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE) by 15 March 2002, particularly related to outstanding issues, in
accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council issued on 16
January 2002 (S/PRST/2002/1), as well as concrete ways and means for UNMEE to
assist in the physical demarcation process, including through mine clearance.
4.
The Security Council emphasizes the need for broad-based confidencebuilding measures and reconciliation efforts at all levels within and between the two
countries. The mission will encourage initiatives in that regard, such as the release
of all prisoners of war and civilian internees and the dialogue between religious
leaders. The mission will strongly urge the parties to support and initiate further
reconciliation measures.
5.
The mission will address the humanitarian situation resulting from the conflict
in the two countries, including reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, the situation for women and their role in post-conflict rehabilitation, the
demobilization of soldiers, and the status of rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts.
6.
The mission will stress that the overall objective of the peace process is to
normalize the relations between the two neighbouring countries.
7.
The mission will praise the leaders for their leadership in guiding the peace
process forward, and will reiterate the international community’s unwavering
commitment to contribute to the completion of the peace process.
8.
The mission will report back to the Council, at which time it will make
recommendations for further actions by the Council and the Secretary-General. In
that connection, an open meeting of the Council will be convened in early March
2002.

2
