A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/150
10 March 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 110 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.2)]
53/150. Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
2
Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International Covenants on Human Rights
and the other relevant
international human rights instruments,
Recalling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978 concerning disappeared persons and its
resolutions 46/125 of 17 December 1991, 49/193 of 23 December 1994 and 51/94 of 12 December 1996 on
the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Recalling also its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992 proclaiming the Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a body of principles for all States,
Expressing concern that, according to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
of the Commission on Human Rights, the practice of a number of States can run counter to the Declaration,
Deeply concerned, in particular, by the intensification of enforced disappearances in various regions of
the world and by the growing number of reports concerning the harassment, ill-treatment and intimidation of
witnesses of disappearances or relatives of persons who have disappeared,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

99-77125

/...

A/RES/53/150
Page 2

Convinced that further efforts are needed to promote wider awareness of and respect for the Declaration,
and taking note in this regard of the report of the Secretary-General,3
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1998/40 of 17 April 1998,4
1. Reaffirms that any act of enforced disappearance is an offence to human dignity and a grave and
flagrant violation of the human rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights1 and reaffirmed and developed in other international instruments in this field, as well as a
violation of the rules of international law;
2. Reiterates its invitation to all Governments to take appropriate legislative or other steps to prevent
and suppress the practice of enforced disappearances, in keeping with the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and to take action to that end at the national and regional levels and in
cooperation with the United Nations, including through technical assistance;
3. Calls upon Governments to take steps to ensure that, when a state of emergency is introduced, the
protection of human rights is ensured, in particular as regards the prevention of enforced disappearances;
4. Reminds Governments of the need to ensure that their competent authorities conduct prompt and
impartial inquiries in all circumstances, whenever there is a reason to believe that an enforced disappearance
has occurred in territory under their jurisdiction, and that, if allegations are confirmed, perpetrators should be
prosecuted;
5. Once again urges the Governments concerned to take steps to protect the families of disappeared
persons against any intimidation or ill-treatment to which they might be subjected;
6. Encourages States, as some have already done, to provide concrete information on measures taken
to give effect to the Declaration, as well as obstacles encountered;
7. Requests all States to consider the possibility of disseminating the text of the Declaration in their
respective national languages and to facilitate its dissemination in local languages;
8. Notes the action taken by non-governmental organizations to encourage implementation of the
Declaration, and invites them to continue to facilitate its dissemination and to contribute to the work of the
Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the Commission on Human
Rights;
9. Expresses its appreciation to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of
the Commission on Human Rights for its humanitarian work;
10. Requests the Working Group, in the continued exercise of its mandate, to take into account the
provisions of the Declaration and to modify its working methods, if necessary;

3

A/53/304.

4

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect.
A.
/...

A/RES/53/150
Page 3

11. Recalls the importance of the Working Group, the primary role of which is, as described in its
reports, to act as a channel of communication between the families of disappeared persons and the
Governments concerned, with a view to ensuring that sufficiently documented and clearly identified
individual cases are investigated, and to ascertain whether such information falls under its mandate and
contains the required elements, and invites the Group to continue to seek the views and comments of all
concerned, including Member States, in preparing its report;
12. Invites the Working Group to identify obstacles to the realization of the provisions of the
Declaration, to recommend ways of overcoming those obstacles and, in this regard, to continue a dialogue
with Governments and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
13. Encourages the Working Group to continue to consider the question of impunity, in close
collaboration with the rapporteur appointed by the Subcommission and with due regard for the relevant
provisions of the Declaration;
14. Requests the Working Group to pay the utmost attention to cases of children subjected to enforced
disappearance and children of disappeared persons and to cooperate closely with the Governments concerned
to search for and identify those children;
15. Appeals to the Governments concerned, in particular those which have not yet replied to the
communications transmitted by the Working Group, to cooperate fully with it and, in particular, to reply
promptly to its requests for information so that, while respecting its working methods based on discretion, it
may perform its strictly humanitarian role;
16. Encourages the Governments concerned to give serious consideration to inviting the Working
Group to visit their countries so as to enable the Group to fulfil its mandate even more effectively;
17. Expresses its profound thanks to the many Governments that have cooperated with the Working
Group and replied to its requests for information and to the Governments that have invited the Group to visit
their countries, asks them to give all necessary attention to the recommendations of the Group, and invites
them to inform the Group of any action they take on those recommendations;
18. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to continue to study this question as a matter of
priority and to take any steps it may deem necessary to the pursuit of the task of the Working Group and to
the follow-up of its recommendations when it considers the report to be submitted by the Group to the
Commission at its fifty-fifth session;
19. Renews its requests to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Working Group with all the
facilities it requires to perform its functions, especially for carrying out missions and following them up;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed of the steps he takes to secure the widespread
dissemination and promotion of the Declaration;
21. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at its fifty-fifth session a report on the steps
taken to implement the present resolution;
22. Decides to consider the question of enforced disappearances, and in particular the implementation
of the Declaration, at its fifty-fifth session under the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”.
/...

A/RES/53/150
Page 4

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
