S/2011/586

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 September 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 13 September 2011 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 13 September 2011,
which I received from His Excellency Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, concerning the meeting of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union which was held today to review the situation in Somalia (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-50498 (E) 111011

*1150498*

S/2011/586

Annex
Letter dated 13 September 2011 from the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union held its 293rd meeting
today, 13 September 2011, in Addis Ababa to review the situation in Somalia. I am
forwarding herewith the report that I submitted to the Council, as well as the
communiqué adopted by the meeting (see enclosures).
As you are aware, the political and security situation in Somalia has, in the
past few months, witnessed major developments, marked by the signature of the
Kampala Accord of 9 June 2011, as well as the extension of the control of the forces
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Transitional Federal
Government to the areas previously occupied by Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu. These
developments provide a unique opportunity to further the quest for peace and
reconciliation in Somalia and bring to an end the untold suffering visited upon its
people over the past two decades.
Against this background, the Peace and Security Council stressed the need for
the international community to take full advantage of these positive developments
and assume its responsibilities towards the Somali people. In this respect, the Peace
and Security Council endorsed the revised concept of operations for AMISOM, as
developed by the Commission, following extensive consultations with all
stakeholders. The Peace and Security Council requested the Security Council to
authorize an enhanced support package for AMISOM to enable it to more
effectively fulfil its mandate and support the Somali people.
I would be most grateful if you could urgently circulate the attached report and
communiqué to the members of the Security Council ahead of their planned meeting
on Somalia. In this respect, I would like to highlight the request by the Peace and
Security Council to the Security Council to consider further inputs and updates on
the situation before the adoption of its resolution on Somalia, including by
thoroughly engaging with the African Union and giving due consideration to the
requests and other elements contained in the attached communiqué, in a spirit of
consultation and partnership, as well as by taking into account the conclusions of
the planned mini-summit on Somalia scheduled to take place in New York on
23 September 2011 at your initiative.
Allow me, once again, to express the African Union’s appreciation for the
support of the United Nations, and your personal support, for our efforts in Somalia,
including the active and constructive participation of the United Nations Secretariat
in the technical consultative meeting on AMISOM which took place in Addis Ababa
on 17 and 18 August 2011.
(Signed) Jean Ping

2

11-50498

S/2011/586

Enclosure 1
Communiqué of the 293rd meeting of the Peace and
Security Council
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its 293rd meeting,
held on 13 September 2011, adopted the following decision on the situation in
Somalia:
The Council:
1.
Takes note of the report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the situation
in Somalia (PSC/PR/2(CCXCIII)), as well as the statements made by the
representatives of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, the United
Nations and Ethiopia, in its capacity as Chair of the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development (IGAD);
2.
Recalls all its previous decisions and press statements on the situation in
Somalia;
3.
Welcomes the gains made on the ground by the forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Transitional Federal Government, in
particular the extension of their control to the areas previously occupied by
Al-Shabaab, as well as the results achieved by pro-Transitional Federal Government
militia in other parts of the country, notably in Hiraan, Galgadud, Bay and Bakool,
Gedo and Lower Juba;
4.
Expresses its deep appreciation to the AMISOM and Transitional Federal
Government forces for their courage and dedication which made these achievements
possible, and encourages them to persevere in their efforts. The Council reiterates,
once again, its appreciation to the Governments of Burundi and Uganda for their
unwavering commitment to the advancement of the cause of peace and
reconciliation in Somalia, and commiserates with the families of the AMISOM and
Transitional Federal Government soldiers who have paid the ultimate price in
pursuit of peace and security in Somalia;
5.
Welcomes the signing of the Kampala Accord of 9 June 2011, which extended
the transitional period by one year, up to 20 August 2012, the Road Map adopted by
the consultative meeting held in Mogadishu from 4 to 6 September 2011, which
outlined the key deliverables to be accomplished before August 2012, the timelines
for the completion of each task and the institutions responsible, the resources
required and the mechanisms to ensure compliance by the Transitional Federal
Institutions;
6.
Commends the President of the Transitional Federal Government and the
Speaker of the Transitional Federal Parliament for the Accord reached in Kampala,
which shows a renewed commitment to successfully conclude the transition and
bring about lasting peace and reconciliation in their country, and urges all the
Somali stakeholders to continue to demonstrate the unity of purpose and
determination required to keep the momentum arising from the gains made in
Mogadishu, as well as the Kampala Accord and subsequent Road Map, by fully
implementing the commitments made and sticking to the timelines agreed upon. The
Council calls on all Somalis, including those in the Diaspora, to continue to support
the peace process in their country;

11-50498

3

S/2011/586

7.
Expresses its gratitude to President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, for his
contribution in facilitating the conclusion of the Kampala Accord, and to Prime
Minister Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia and to the other IGAD leaders, for their
continued involvement and leading role in bringing about peace, security and
stability in Somalia. The Council also commends the leaders of the East African
Community for their efforts;
8.
Reiterates the African Union’s deep concern at the humanitarian situation
prevailing in Somalia as a result of the current drought and famine, takes note of the
outcome of the pledging conference organized by the Commission in Addis Ababa
on 25 August 2011, and commends the African Union Member States and partners,
in particular the African Development Bank, that made pledges. The Council
expresses appreciation to the actors present on the ground, in particular the Somali
non-governmental organizations, for their efforts, in spite of the challenging security
conditions in which they are working, as well as to African civil society
organizations, for the initiatives they have taken in support of the affected
populations in Somalia;
9.
Urgently calls on the Member States that have not yet done so to contribute
financially and in kind to the relief efforts, and on those in a position to do so to
provide further assistance. The Council stresses the imperative need for the
continent to rise to the challenge and to extend to the Somali people the support they
so desperately need, in a true spirit of African solidarity. The Council also appeals to
the international partners to provide support that is commensurate with the
requirements on the ground;
10. Notes with satisfaction the steps taken on the ground by AMISOM to ensure
security for relief efforts, facilitate access and provide humanitarian assistance to
populations in need, and encourages the Mission to pursue its efforts. The Council
also commends the Nairobi-based Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources for its
outstanding work in mitigating the impact of the drought and famine, through
support to the livestock sector, which is the mainstay of the Somali economy, and
requests the Commission to keep it regularly informed of the programmes and
activities carried out by the Bureau;
11. Stresses that the recent political and security developments create a unique
opportunity to further peace and reconciliation in Somalia and bring to a definite
end the untold suffering inflicted on the Somali people. Accordingly, the Council
once again calls on the international community, in particular the United Nations, to
take the steps expected of it and to fully assume its responsibilities towards the
Somali people, in line with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations;
12. Reiterates the African Union’s determination to continue doing all that is
necessary to assist the Somali people and facilitate the successful conclusion of the
peace and reconciliation process and, to that end, to work with the Transitional
Federal Institutions in a spirit of partnership. In this respect, the Council endorses
the revised concept of operations, as outlined in paragraphs 52 to 55 of the report of
the Chairperson and which was elaborated on the basis of the conclusions of the
technical consultative workshop convened by the Commission in Addis Ababa from
17 to 18 August 2011;

4

11-50498

S/2011/586

13. Notes with satisfaction the commitment by Burundi and Uganda to provide
1,000 and 2,000 troops, respectively, in addition to their current contributions to
AMISOM, as well as the pledges by Djibouti, Guinea and Sierra Leone to each
provide a battalion;
14. Requests the United Nations Security Council, in line with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, to reaffirm its
commitment to authorize the deployment of a United Nations operation to take over
AMISOM and support the long-term reconstruction and stabilization of Somalia. In
the meantime, the Council requests the Security Council to authorize the
enhancement of the support package provided by the United Nations, under
resolutions 1863 (2009) and 1964 (2010), to take into account the shortcomings
identified over the past few months and the fact that AMISOM is a
multidimensional Mission with military, police and civilian components, with
particular focus on:
(a)

Self-sustenance of the troops,

(b)

Reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment,

(c)

The provision of the requisite enablers, including helicopters,

(d) The deployment of formed police units, as provided for in the revised
concept of operations,
(e)

Logistical support for the civilian component of the Mission,

(f) The creation, as part of AMISOM and under its command, of a guard
force of a battalion size (850), to provide security for civilian staff and protection
for the African Union, the United Nations and the Transitional Federal Institutions
in Mogadishu, it being clearly understood that this force should be in addition to the
12,000 strength already authorized by the United Nations Security Council under
resolution 1964 (2010), and
(g)

Welfare and travel for the personnel of the Mission;

15. Reiterates the other requests made by the African Union as contained in
communiqué PSC/MIN/1(CXXXXV) adopted at its 245th meeting, held on
15 October 2010, in particular the steps required to prevent the entry into Somalia,
by air and sea, of foreign elements and weapons destined for armed groups attacking
the Somali population, the Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM;
16. Requests the United Nations Security Council to consider further inputs and
updates on the situation before the adoption of its resolution on Somalia, including
by thoroughly engaging with the African Union and giving due consideration to the
requests and other elements contained in the present communiqué, in a spirit of
consultation and partnership, as well as by taking into account the conclusions of
the planned mini-summit on Somalia, scheduled to take place in New York on
23 September 2011 at the initiative of the United Nations Secretary-General;
17. Expresses its gratitude to the African Union bilateral and multilateral partners
providing support to AMISOM and calls on them to enhance their assistance;
18. Expresses appreciation to the African Union High Representative for Somalia,
former President Jerry John Rawlings, the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the Commission, Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra, the Force Commander, Major

11-50498

5

S/2011/586

General Fred Mugisha, and all AMISOM personnel for their dedication and
commitment. The Council further acknowledges the efforts of the former Force
Commander, Major General Nathan Mugisha, under whose command AMISOM
forces made notable gains on the ground;
19. Commends the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for Somalia, Augustine Mahiga, and the IGAD Facilitator for Somalia
Peace and Reconciliation, Kipruto arap Kirwa, for their efforts and commitment, as
well as for their cooperation with the African Union;
20. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to transmit this communiqué and
his report to the United Nations Security Council members and to the SecretaryGeneral, as well as to the other African Union partners, to seek their support and
cooperation, and to report to the Council on the outcomes of its requests,
particularly with regard to the resolution on Somalia to be adopted by the Security
Council;
21. Decided to undertake, as early as possible, a visit to Mogadishu to further
express its support to the peace and reconciliation process in Somalia, as well as to
the efforts of AMISOM, and to assess the situation on the ground. The Council
requests the Commission to make the necessary preparations;
22.

6

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

11-50498

S/2011/586

Enclosure 2
Report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
the situation in Somalia
I.

Introduction
1.
At its 245th meeting, held on 15 October 2010, the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, having reviewed in depth the situation in Somalia on the basis
of the report (PSC/MIN/1/(CCLXLV)) I submitted, endorsed a new force strength of
20,000 for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), with the requisite air
and maritime capabilities, and an enhanced civilian and police component of 1,680,
comprising 560 police experts on mission and eight formed police units of 140 each.
The Council called on the United Nations Security Council to take the decisions
required of it, in line with its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, by endorsing the revised concept of operations,
including the newly authorized strength of AMISOM, and authorizing an enhanced
support package for the Mission, funded through United Nations assessed
contributions (PSC/MIN/1(CCXXXXV)).
2.
On 22 December 2010, the United Nations Security Council adopted
resolution 1964 (2010), in which it authorized the African Union to maintain the
deployment of AMISOM until 30 September 2011 and to increase its force strength
from 8,000 to 12,000 troops. The Security Council noted the recommendations made
by the Council, and underlined its intention to keep the situation on the ground
under review. It requested the Secretary-General to continue to provide a logistical
support package for AMISOM, as called for by resolution 1863 (2009), for a
maximum of 12,000 troops, comprising equipment and services but not including
the transfer of funds. Finally, it encouraged the Member States to support AMISOM
and the Somali Security Sector Institutions, as well as to contribute generously and
promptly to the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM, without caveats, or to
make direct bilateral donations in support of AMISOM.
3.
On 20 January 2011, the Council, at its 258th meeting, deliberated on the
situation in Somalia. Recalling its earlier decisions and communiqués, as well as
resolution 1964 (2010), the Council decided to renew the mandate of AMISOM for
a supplementary period of 12 months, beginning from 17 January 2011
(PSC/PR/COMM.3(CCLVIII)).
4.
The present report provides an update on the situation in Somalia, covering the
political, security and humanitarian aspects, as well as the deployment and
operations of AMISOM. The report makes a number of recommendations on the
way forward, including the enhancement of the effectiveness of AMISOM, to build
on the momentum generated by the extension of the authority of AMISOM and the
forces of the Transitional Federal Government to areas previously under the control
of Al-Shabaab.

II.

Political Developments
5.
In the past five months, several encouraging political developments have been
recorded in the Djibouti peace process. These mark a welcome departure from the
internal squabbles within the Transitional Federal Institutions that characterized the
political process in Somalia during the early part of 2011.

11-50498

7

S/2011/586

6.
In my report (PSC/PR/4(CCLXXIII)) to the 273rd meeting of the Council,
held on 21 April 2011, I briefed the Council on the decision on the situation in
Somalia taken by the 17th Extraordinary Summit of the IGAD Assembly of Heads
of State and Government, held in Addis Ababa on 30 January 2011. Having noted
that the transitional period for the Transitional Federal Institutions ends on
20 August 2011, and stressing the need to avoid a political vacuum, the Summit
reached a consensus on the imperative need to extend the term of the Transitional
Federal Parliament, while the remaining political dispensation is handled by the
people of Somalia. At its 16th ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 30 and
31 January 2011, the Assembly of the Union endorsed the IGAD decision to extend
the term of the Transitional Federal Parliament.
7.
It was on this basis that, on 3 February, the Transitional Federal Parliament
adopted a motion extending its term for three years, starting from the end of the
current transitional period. In the same decision, the Parliament called for the
election of the President of the Transitional Federal Government, as well as of the
Speaker of the Transitional Federal Parliament and his deputies. As the Council will
recall, this decision was rejected by the regional administration of Puntland and
Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a. In addition, some members of the international
community strongly condemned the extension, which, they observed, had been done
without due consultations with relevant stakeholders. The Transitional Federal
Government rejected the decisions of Parliament, and reiterated its preference for a
shorter post-transition period as demanded by the international community.
Subsequently, the Cabinet tables before Parliament a policy proposal to extend the
mandate of all the Transitional Federal Institutions, including the Executive, for an
additional one year (up to August 2012), after which presidential elections would be
conducted. That proposal was rejected by the Speaker of Parliament, who
announced plans to conduct presidential elections in July 2011. The Parliament thus
proceeded with the drafting of a workplan for a three-year extended mandate, a
move that was condemned by the Office of the President as usurpation of executive
powers.
8.
A United Nations-sponsored high-level consultative meeting, held in Nairobi
on 12 and 13 April 2011, did not overcome the impasse. While the Speaker of the
Transitional Federal Parliament, the Presidents of Puntland and Galmudug regions,
representatives of Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a and countries of the region, as well as
key partners, attended the meeting, the President and the Cabinet, after numerous
attempts to cancel the meeting, refused to participate in this gathering, arguing that
it was counterproductive and could further factionalize Somalia.
9.
It was against this background that, on 9 June 2011, President Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed and Speaker Sharif Hassan Aden, during talks facilitated by President
Yoweri Museveni, signed the landmark Kampala Accord, which effectively ended
the protracted political stand-off between the Executive and the Parliament. Under
the Accord, the two Somali leaders reached agreement to extend the transitional
period by one year, up to 20 August 2012. In addition, the Accord called for the
resignation of the Prime Minister and the formation of a new Government. The
parties to the Accord also agreed to establish a road map with benchmarks, timelines
and compliance mechanisms, for the implementation of the priority tasks to end the
transition, including improving security in Mogadishu and other areas in southern
Somalia; finalizing and adopting the National Security and Stabilization Plan;
pursuing national reconciliation and outreach; finalizing and adopting the draft

8

11-50498

S/2011/586

Constitution; implementing institutional reforms in the Transitional Federal
Institutions; and organizing elections of the President, Speaker and Deputy Speakers
prior to 20 August 2012.
10. In a communiqué issued on 20 June 2011, following a meeting in Addis Ababa
with the Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General,
Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, and my Special Representative for Somalia,
Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra, I welcomed this Accord, stressing that its expeditious
implementation would go a long way in consolidating the important military gains
made on the ground by Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM forces. I
paid tribute to President Museveni for the critical role he played, and acknowledged
the contribution of the current Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, as well as other leaders of
IGAD and the East African Community, in promoting peace, stability and
reconciliation in Somalia. The 17th ordinary session of the Assembly, held in
Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, from 30 June to 2 July 2011, also welcomed the signing
of the Kampala Accord.
11. Since then, the Transitional Federal Institutions and other Somali stakeholders
have made commendable progress in the implementation of the Kampala Accord.
Following the resignation of Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed on
19 June 2011, Dr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali was appointed by the President as the new
Prime Minister. This appointment was unanimously approved by the Transitional
Federal Parliament on 28 June 2011. Subsequently, on 28 July 2011, the Parliament
overwhelmingly approved the new, clan-balanced Council of Ministers, comprising
18 Cabinet Ministers, 9 Ministers of State and 24 Deputy Ministers. The Prime
Minister received parliamentary approval of his political programme, with priority
on the improvement of the security sector and the completion of the transitional
tasks. Earlier, on 11 July 2011, the Parliament had approved the Kampala Accord.
12. My Special Representative, in collaboration with the Special Representative of
the United Nations Secretary-General, the IGAD Facilitator and other members of
the Core Group on Somalia, has continued to work closely with the Somali
stakeholders to sustain the momentum in the political process. In this regard, the
international partners provided political, technical, financial and logistical support
in planning and convening a consultative meeting in Mogadishu from 4 to
6 September 2011 to discuss the ending of the transition. This meeting was attended
by delegates from the Transitional Federal Government, the Transitional Federal
Parliament, Puntland, Galmudug and Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a, with the facilitation
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and other members of
the international community. I am pleased to inform the Council that the meeting
realized very important outcomes, notably the adoption of a Transitional Road Map
outlining the key deliverables to be accomplished before August 2012, the timelines
for the completion of each task and the institutions responsible, the resources
required, and the mechanism to ensure compliance by the Transitional Federal
Institutions.
13. More specifically, the Road Map defines five major benchmarks for the
completion of the transition, under the following broad themes: (a) security,
(b) constitution, (c) political outreach and reconciliation, (d) good governance,
transparency and accountability, and (e) parliamentary reforms and preparation for
elections. It also sets out a four-tier Road Map Implementation Mechanism,

11-50498

9

S/2011/586

comprising the Facilitator (African Union High Representative), the Regional
Political Initiative (Heads of State and Government of East African Community and
IGAD countries with the participation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission), the International Monitoring Group (the Transitional Federal
Institutions and members of the international community), and a Technical
Committee of experts from the Transitional Federal Institutions and the international
community operating from Mogadishu.
14. On 26 August 2011, I visited Mogadishu, accompanied by the Commissioner
for Peace and Security, to assess the situation on the ground. I seized the
opportunity to meet with the President of the Transitional Federal Government, the
Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Transitional Federal Parliament. I encouraged
them to spare no efforts to conclude the transition, in line with the Kampala Accord,
and assured them of the African Union’s continued support.
15. The period under review also witnessed developments relating to the
implementation of the sanctions imposed by the Security Council in relation to
Somalia and other situations. In mid-July 2011, the Commission received a note
verbale from the IGAD secretariat forwarding the communiqué of the 18th
extraordinary session of the IGAD Heads of State and Government on the activities
in the Sudan, Somalia and Eritrea. The communiqué called on “the African Union
and United Nations Security Council to fully implement the existing sanctions and
impose additional sanctions selectively on the Eritrean regime, especially on those
economic and mining sectors that the regime draws on, including the Eritrean
Diaspora”. The IGAD secretariat requested the inclusion in the agenda of the
Council of an item on the “destabilization role of the Eritrea regime in the Horn of
Africa”. Immediately thereafter, the Commission forwarded the communication
from the IGAD secretariat to the members of the Council in order to consult on the
inclusion of the item in the agenda and its possible consideration, in due course, in
line with the rules of procedure of the Peace and Security Council. The Commission
also wrote to the IGAD secretariat to acknowledge receipt of its communication and
to inform it of the steps taken in that respect.
16. In the meantime, on 18 July 2011, the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia
and Eritrea transmitted the report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea
to the United Nations Security Council. The report states, among other things, that
Eritrea continues to maintain a relationship with Al-Shabaab, which is designed “to
legitimize and embolden the group rather than to curb its extremist orientation or
encourage its participation in a political process”. Eritrea continues to strongly
reject these accusations, and has sent communications in this respect to the
Commission, including a letter addressed to me by President Isaias Afewerki. The
Security Council has yet to pronounce itself on the matter.
III.

Security situation
17. Since my last report to the Council, there has been a significant improvement
in the overall security situation in the country. Somalia Transitional Federal
Government and AMISOM forces have continued to gain ground in Mogadishu and
to consolidate their control of previous acquired positions. During the 11-22 May
period, Transitional Federal Government forces backed by AMISOM took control of

10

11-50498

S/2011/586

the strategically located Wadnaha Road, including the symbolic Red Mosque, the
former military camp, Bondhere district headquarters, the former Italian Embassy,
the former Interior Ministry building and the Alimo Hotel. The insurgents suffered
another significant setback on 7 June 2011, when the Transitional Federal
Government police manning a checkpoint at Ex-Control Afgooye killed the
Al-Qaida leader in East Africa, Fazul Abdullah Mohammed.
18. The first three weeks of July were marked by insurgent build-up ahead of their
planned Ramadan offensive, directly threatening Transitional Federal Government
and AMISOM forces and the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the thousands of
internally displaced persons who had flocked to Mogadishu, fleeing the famine in
south-central Somalia. Somalia Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM
forces launched a pre-emptive operation on 28 July 2011 and secured the northern
part of the city, Ade Aden Junction, Florenzia, Sinai and Monopolio Junction up to
Armed Forces Road. The strong pressure from the Transitional Federal Government
and AMISOM and internal disputes compelled the insurgents to retreat from almost
all of Mogadishu on 6 August 2011. The Transitional Federal Government and
AMISOM now control about 95 per cent of the capital Mogadishu.
19. The pockets of insurgents remaining in Mogadishu have now resorted to
asymmetrical warfare, including grenade, improvised explosive device (IED) and
other forms of attacks targeting AMISOM positions and Government installations.
In August, over 20 incidents involving grenade and IED attacks were registered in
Mogadishu and the surrounding areas. The insurgents also carried out beheadings in
some parts of Mogadishu to intimidate populations suspected of supporting the
Transitional Federal Government. The internal disputes within the group may also
lead to the emergence of various factions within Al-Shabaab. Some of these factions
might compete for supremacy by carrying out attacks that rival each other in
violence and brutality, while some others might consider opening talks with the
Transitional Federal Government.
20. Clan militias under the command of some politicians have attempted to take
advantage of the vacuum created by the sudden departure of the insurgents. In
particular, mention should be made here of the establishment of illegal checkpoints
in some of the districts of Mogadishu to extort money from the public and, in some
cases, the disruption of the delivery of aid or attacks against Transitional Federal
Government and AMISOM forces attempting to extend the authority of the
Government.
21. In other parts of the country, pro-Transitional Federal Government militias
have gained further ground in the Hiiraan, Galgadud, Bay and Bakool, Gedo and
Middle and Lower Juba regions. During the months of July and August, the
insurgents attempted to recapture lost ground in the Gedo and Juba regions, but
were repulsed. In the Bay and Bakool region, military progress was hampered by
internal disputes among pro-Transitional Federal Government militias. The security
situation in Puntland and Galmudug deteriorated during the period under
consideration. Heavy fighting was reported in Galkayo between Puntland security
forces and pro Al-Shabaab militias under the command of Sheikh Said Atom.
Meanwhile, in Galmudug, two clans, which have long clashed over water, continued
hostilities with intermittent clashes in southern Galkayo.
22. The Joint Security Committee, which coordinates international support to the
Somali security sector institutions, held its 9th meeting in Mogadishu on 23 August

11-50498

11

S/2011/586

2011. In light of the sudden withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu, the meeting
focused on the progress that has been made by the Transitional Federal Government
in revising the National Security and Stabilization Plan to take account of current
security sector development priority needs and required actions to consolidate the
achievements made. The Joint Security Committee meeting concluded with (a) a
decision on priority security sector development needs for the months to come
following the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab; (b) a draft Mogadishu security action plan;
and (c) a consensus on completing the revised National Security and Stabilization
Plan as an implementation of the Joint Security Committee directives of June 2011.
23. Piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia continue to be of
concern. Both the National Security and Stabilization Plan and the Road Map
address this issue. In line with its earlier articulated position, the African Union will
continue to call for a comprehensive strategy to deal not only with the
manifestations of the problem, but also with its underlying causes, in particular the
collapse of State authority on the mainland, the illegal exploitation of Somalia
marine resources, which adversely affects the livelihoods of the coastal populations,
and the dumping of toxic waste. This position will inform the Commission’s input to
the planned report of the United Nations Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 1950 (2010) of 23 November 2010, in which States and regional
organizations cooperating with the Transitional Federal Government are requested
to provide information on the efforts undertaken in the fight against piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia.
IV.

Humanitarian situation
24. The humanitarian emergency in Somalia has been exacerbated by drought and
famine, mostly in the southern and central regions of the country. Below-average
rainfall and the heavy toll of the drought on livestock have contributed to the high
level of food insecurity. According to humanitarian agencies, about 3 million
Somalis, that is, 1 in 3 Somalis, are in need of humanitarian assistance as a result of
the current drought affecting their country, one of the worst in recent memory,
compounded by the conflict that Somalia has been experiencing for the past two
decades and the resulting collapse of State structures, as well as by soaring global
food prices. This figure represents a sharp increase compared with the 2.4 million
people reported in January 2011. It is estimated that 554,000 children were suffering
from malnutrition in the first half of 2011.
25. Owing to this situation, thousands of Somalis are moving into major urban
areas, in particular Mogadishu, as well as to neighbouring countries. Since January
2011, about 1.8 million people have been uprooted as a result of the drought, and
most of those are internally displaced in Mogadishu and surrounding regions or
have fled across the borders into Kenya, Ethiopia, Djibouti and other neighbouring
countries where refugee camps have become even more overcrowded. According to
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 5,200 people moved into
Mogadishu in the month of June 2011. Between the end of June and early July,
4,800 Somalis were registered at the Dadaab refugee camps in eastern Kenya, while
an average of 1,000 people were received daily at the Dollo Ado camp in Ethiopia.
In the month of June alone, a total of 54,000 Somalis crossed into Ethiopia and
Kenya, a threefold increase compared with the month of May.

12

11-50498

S/2011/586

26. The funding needs to address the humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa
have been estimated at $2.48 billion, out of which just over $1 billion has been
mobilized. Many traditional and non-traditional donors, United Nations
humanitarian agencies, local and international non-governmental organizations,
among others, have provided humanitarian support to Somalia in the form of aid
deliveries and/or funding through bilateral arrangements or as contributions to the
Somalia Consolidated Appeals Process, managed by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. Out of the $45 million available in 2011 for the second
Common Humanitarian Fund allocation, $35 million was allocated to drought
response activities focusing on food access, livelihoods, water and health sectors. In
addition, the Central Emergency Response Fund allocated $15 million from the
underfunded window, also to address the drought situation in the most affected areas
in the south and central regions of Somalia. In December 2010, the Humanitarian
Coordinator allocated $4.5 million from the Common Humanitarian Fund
emergency reserve, also to respond to the drought.
27. In my report to the Council in April 2011, I expressed concern at the
humanitarian situation and the significant reduction in overall funding levels for
Somalia over the last two years. I called on all African Union Member States and
other members of the international community to urgently provide the necessary
support. In the press statement concluding its deliberations, the Council echoed my
appeal. I reiterated my concern in a communiqué dated 17 May 2011 and in my
opening statement to the 17th ordinary session of the Assembly of the Union. The
Panel of the Wise, at its 10th meeting, held on 12 May 2011, also made an appeal
for urgent humanitarian support to the affected populations in Somalia.
28. On 20 July 2011, in view of the worsening humanitarian conditions on the
ground, I addressed a letter to all the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Member
States to underline the need for African countries to do everything in their power to
assist the Somali people at their critical hour of need, in a true spirit of continental
solidarity. I also directed AMISOM to continue doing everything in its power to
provide security for humanitarian personnel and to facilitate access to those in need.
Subsequently, my High Representative for Somalia, former President Jerry John
Rawlings, travelled to Somalia in July to assess the situation. He also travelled to
other Member States, namely, Equatorial Guinea, Nigeria, South Africa, the
Republic of the Congo and Angola, to mobilize support, both financial and in kind. I
also met with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, António
Guterres, and the United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Baroness Valerie Amos, while the Deputy
Chairperson of the Commission met with the World Food Programme (WFP)
Executive Director, Josette Sheeran. These meetings provided an opportunity to
discuss the drought situation and how best the African Union and its partners could
work together in support of the Somali people.
29. The Commission also took the initiative to convene a Pledging Conference, in
Addis Ababa on 25 August 2011, to mobilize resources for the victims of famine in
Somalia and elsewhere in the Horn of Africa. More than $350 million was
mobilized, out of which the African Development Bank alone pledged $300 million.
An additional $28 million in in kind assistance, including food, medicines and other
forms of assistance, was also pledged. While recognizing the need to address the
current humanitarian emergency in order to alleviate the suffering of millions of
people in the Horn of Africa, the Pledging Conference also called on the
international community to renew its commitments and support medium- and long-

11-50498

13

S/2011/586

term strategies for food security, as well as mitigate the negative impact of climate
change on the continent.
30. During my visit to Mogadishu, I had the opportunity to witness first-hand the
suffering of the Somali people. Against this background, I would like to reiterate my
appreciation to the Member States that made pledges, as well as to the African
Development Bank for its outstanding contribution. I strongly urge the Member
States that have not yet done so to contribute to this effort, and those in a position to
do so to provide further assistance. Through the deployment of AMISOM, our
continent has demonstrated strong commitment to help the Somali people open a
new chapter in their troubled history. Today, as the Somalis face yet another
calamity, it is critical that Africa rise to the situation obtaining on the ground.
V.

Activities on Somalia by the Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources
31. As the Council is aware, livestock is the mainstay of the Somali economy and
the basis for the livelihoods of the largely pastoral and agro-pastoral population of
Somalia. The export of live animals, hides and skins and chilled carcasses generates
the foreign currency needed for the importation of food items. Livestock marketing
and trade also provide employment and incomes for market operators and associated
industry operators, while generating important revenues for local administrations
and municipalities. In my October 2010 report, I briefed the Council on the
activities and programmes being carried out with respect to Somalia by the
Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources, an African Union regional office based
in Nairobi. The Council, in turn, noted with satisfaction the significant contribution
being made by the Bureau.
32. Since then, the Bureau has completed a number of activities aimed at
mitigating the impact of the drought and food crisis. These include the eradication
of rinderpest, a contagious and devastating disease of cattle and other ruminants,
through the Somali Ecosystem Rinderpest Eradication Coordination Unit (SERECU II
project); the enhancement of the capacity of the Somali authorities to control animal
diseases, through the provision of training, laboratory facilities and vehicles, within
the framework of the Support Programme for Integrated National Action Plans; and
the Somalia Livestock Certification Project, which enabled the adoption of an
Animal Health Certificate Model that promotes the World Organization for Animal
Health sanitary and phytosanitary standards for livestock.
33. The Bureau has also continued to implement the Livestock Emergency
Interventions to Mitigate the Food Crisis in Somalia project, under which it is
carrying out the vaccination and treatment of small ruminants in order to enhance
their health status, as well as the rehabilitation of livestock trade infrastructure.
More specifically, around 4 million animals have been vaccinated in Somalia and
2 million treated for endemic diseases, while 100 infrastructure facilities have been
constructed or renovated. In so doing, the project contributes to increased export
trade to the Gulf States, increased incomes and the reduction of hunger.
34. A number of other continent-wide activities being carried out by the
Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources will also tremendously benefit the Somali
people. These relate to the Participation of the African Nations in Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Standard-setting Organizations and Reinforcing Veterinary Governance
in Africa. The Bureau also intends to implement additional activities directed
specifically at Somalia. Among other things, mention should be made here of the

14

11-50498

S/2011/586

Livestock Emergency Intervention to Mitigate Food Crisis in Somalia, whose
objective it is to equip pastoralists and other concerned communities with assets and
services that can strengthen their resilience in the face of the current drought; the
Somali Livestock Industry Institutional Support Project for Enhancement of Private
Sector Capacity for Advocacy, Market Facilitation and Self-Regulation; the
development of Somalia’s coastal and marine fisheries, through the provision of
technical assistance for the delineation of a Somalia exclusive economic zone and
the development of policy, legal and regulatory instruments; as well as capacitybuilding activities for artisanal fisheries and trade and marketing infrastructure. I
commend the Director and personnel of the Inter-African Bureau for Animal
Resources for their outstanding work and thank the European Union and all the
other partners supporting the Bureau.
VI.

AMISOM deployment and operations
35. Since my last report to the Council, in April, the troop strength of the
AMISOM force has increased to 9,595, comprising five battalions and a fire support
unit from Burundi, and five battalions, with a support unit and marine elements
from Uganda, under the command of Major General Fred Mugisha, who took over
on 5 August 2011 from Major General Nathan Mugisha. Uganda and Burundi have
pledged an additional 2,000 and 1,000 troops, respectively, to be deployed before
the end of this year, once the required equipment has been mobilized from bilateral
partners. Cameroon, Senegal and Zambia have one military staff officer each at the
force headquarters. I once again pay tribute to all the countries contributing
personnel to AMISOM, for their commitment to the cause of peace in Somalia.
36. I would like to report that Djibouti has formally confirmed its commitment to
deploy a battalion of 850 troops and 100 trainers and interpreters. An African Union
Commission team is scheduled to travel to Djibouti shortly to discuss the modalities
for the deployment of the Djiboutian contingent and to identify the logistical needs.
Sierra Leone has also pledged to deploy a battalion of 850 troops; a Sierra Leonean
reconnaissance team visited Addis Ababa, Nairobi and Mogadishu in July 2011 as
part of the preparations for the deployment of this battalion. The pledge by the
Republic of Guinea to contribute a battalion is still pending. Furthermore, and in
line with the memorandum of understanding signed by the Commission and the
Eastern Africa Standby Force Coordination Mechanism in Addis Ababa on
18 August 2011, the Coordination Mechanism has finalized plans to deploy 14 staff
officers and 57 trainers in October 2011 and a Level II hospital in December 2011.
This memorandum of understanding is a milestone in the operationalization of the
African Standby Force, as it provides the framework for the first-ever deployment of
elements belonging to an African Standby Force regional brigade.
37. Regarding the police component, a total of 50 officers from Burundi, the
Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Uganda have been deployed to
AMISOM. Forty officers, including the Senior Leadership Team, trainers, advisers
and mentors, are deployed in Mogadishu, while 10 trainers are deployed at
Manyani, Kenya, pending relocation to Mogadishu by October 2011.
38. Progress has been made regarding the relocation of the AMISOM civilian
component to Mogadishu, which was delayed owing to the prevailing insecurity on
the ground and logistical constraints, particularly accommodation. Thus, in May
2011, 14 AMISOM civilian international staff, including members of the senior

11-50498

15

S/2011/586

Mission leadership, were deployed in Mogadishu. Additional staff will be deployed
as soon as the necessary logistical arrangements are finalized. In the meantime, the
insertion of civilian personnel has made it possible to interact in a more sustained
manner with the Transitional Federal Institutions and other Somali stakeholders, to
advance the political and reconciliation process.
39. On the ground, AMISOM forces have, as indicated earlier, consolidated and
expanded their areas of control in Mogadishu and its environs. Following the
withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu, AMISOM forces, together with Somalia
Transitional Federal Government forces, now control and are fully deployed in all
the districts of Mogadishu except those of Dayniile, Huriwa and Karaan. Plans are
under way to deploy those districts as soon as additional forces are inserted into the
Mission area. AMISOM continues to protect key installations, such as Villa
Somalia, which houses the Presidency and the Office of the Prime Minister, and
Villa Baidoa, where other Somali institutions are located. In addition, AMISOM is
also securing both the Mogadishu international airport and the seaport, thus
facilitating humanitarian access through these vital corridors, which have recorded
increased human and cargo traffic in the past few months.
40. As it has been doing since its initial deployment, in 2007, AMISOM continues
to provide free medical care to more than 12,000 Somalis every month at two of its
hospitals in Mogadishu, and about 60,000 litres of safe drinking water every day to
Somalis living near AMISOM camps. AMISOM is also implementing, in
partnership with local non-governmental organizations, a number of community
support projects to better the lives of Somali people. With the prevailing drought,
the Mission has taken a number of additional steps to assist the local communities,
distributing food, medicine and other relief items, in addition to protecting
humanitarian convoys, on request.
41. During the period under review, AMISOM has provided VIP protection to
foreign dignitaries and journalists visiting Mogadishu, in relation to the prevailing
drought and famine. In the last weeks, AMISOM has facilitated the visits by
President Ismaël Omar Guelleh of Djibouti; the Turkish Prime Minister, Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan; the United Kingdom’s International Development Secretary,
Andrew Mitchell; the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; the United
Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and the Executive Director of WFP, among others. While the request
for protection and assistance puts additional strain on the Mission’s capability, it
was felt necessary for AMISOM to do everything possible to facilitate such visits, as
they help to highlight the plight of the Somali people and the need to mobilize the
requisite support for both peace and relief efforts.
42. AMISOM has continued to support the reform of Somalia’s security sector. In
this respect, the police component of the Mission continues to carry out mentoring,
advisory and training activities in support of the Somalia Police Force. Besides the
development of training manuals and curricula in community policing, criminal
investigations and traffic management courses, the AMISOM police component has
also conducted several courses for the Somalia Police Force, including basic police
training, junior and middle management courses, democratic and traffic
management courses. AMISOM has deployed civil aviation security advisers and
mentors at the Mogadishu airport police station, who are providing mentoring and
advisory support to the Somalia Police Force. The AMISOM police component has

16

11-50498

S/2011/586

also developed a biometric database onto which biodata for 4,850 Somalia Police
Force personnel have been captured and uploaded. Arrangements are also being
made for AMISOM police to provide, in the last quarter of 2011, training to the
Somalia Police Force in the following areas: criminal investigation; counterterrorism; gender-based violence; public order management, with the support of the
Angolan Government; and English literacy. In addition, AMISOM police will
support the United Nations Development Programme in upgrading the training of
900 Somali police officers to meet the required international standards.
43. The AMISOM police component has finalized plans to establish its main team
site at Somalia Police Force headquarters and the General Kahiye Police Training
Academy, and will deploy police advisers and mentors at key operational service
delivery and managerial decision-making levels. It has also finalized project
proposals to fund the renovation, rehabilitation and re-equipping of Somalia Police
Force headquarters and 10 other police stations to assist in restoring police services
in Mogadishu and its environs.
44. On 30 August 2011, a total of 900 Somali troops completed their six-month
training at the Bihanga training camp, in Uganda. The troops were trained by the
European Union Training Mission. The first intake of 1,000 Somali troops trained
by the European Union Training Mission graduated last year as part of the European
Union’s contribution to the stabilization of Somalia. This training is complemented
by AMISOM in the form of induction and reintegration courses conducted in the
Al-Jazeera training camp in Mogadishu, which is currently undergoing expansion to
accommodate more trainees. The objective is eventually to carry out all training
activities within Somalia.
45. In line with the Council’s decision of last October, AMISOM has continued to
make sustained efforts to ensure strict compliance with international humanitarian
law and to minimize civilian casualties. The task of the Mission in this respect was
made difficult by the tactics employed by Al-Shabaab, in particular the use of
human shields. The Mission has observed the highest level of restraint in the face of
such flagrant violations of the rules of war, accepting to sustain a significant number
of casualties in order to spare the lives of the innocent civilians it is tasked to
protect.
46. From 6 to 8 July 2011, AMISOM convened a three-day round table in Kigali,
Rwanda, on “Enhancing the respect for international humanitarian law in the
implementation of the mandate of the Africa Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM)”. The round table was attended by delegates representing the
Transitional Federal Government, Somali civil society, Burundi and Uganda, the
United Nations, the European Union, the United States of America and France,
international humanitarian law, human rights and protection institutions, peace and
security research and training institutions, non-governmental organizations, and the
media. The round table called for the strengthening of AMISOM, including the
civilian and police capacities, to enhance the promotion of human rights and
protection of civilians. It welcomed the AMISOM draft indirect fire policy, whose
implementation will go a long way in enhancing adherence to international
humanitarian law. The meeting further requested the African Union Commission to
finalize and adopt the Draft Guidelines on the Protection of Civilians, including the
protection of children in armed conflict, and assist AMISOM in mainstreaming
relevant parts of the Guidelines into the work of the Mission. I would like to express

11-50498

17

S/2011/586

my appreciation to the Government of Rwanda for the support it provided for the
successful convening of this meeting.
47. As part of efforts to mitigate the regional threat posed by Al-Shabaab activities
in Somalia, the Commission, through AMISOM, convened an information-sharing
meeting in Kampala from 19 to 21 July 2011, bringing together relevant
stakeholders, including the troop-contributing countries, the Committee of
Intelligence and Security Services of Africa and the African Centre for Studies and
Research on Terrorism. The meeting identified areas for information exchange
regarding armed groups operating in Somalia. The meeting also called for specific
actions to be taken to address the threat posed by Al-Shabaab in the region, as well
as for the early deployment by the Committee of an Information Support Mission to
AMISOM in order to enhance its analytical capacity. I thank the Government of
Uganda for having hosted the meeting.
VII.

United Nations support package for AMISOM
48. While reiterating the African Union’s appreciation to the partners providing
financial and logistical support to AMISOM, I would like to stress that the Mission
continues to face serious challenges, particularly with regard to logistics, critical
force enablers and reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment. Clearly, there is
a need for greater support from the international community to enable AMISOM
more effectively to support the peace and reconciliation process in Somalia.
49. As the Council is aware, and in line with resolution 1863 (2010), the United
Nations is providing a logistical support package funded from United Nations
assessed contributions and implemented by the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM (UNSOA). This comes in addition to the Trust Fund established to cater
for some of the AMISOM requirements. The United Nations support package, as
implemented by UNSOA, is essentially directed at the military component of
AMISOM, thus excluding the police and civilian components. This approach
negates the very essence of the multidimensional nature of AMISOM and affects the
effectiveness of the Mission in delivering support to the Somali people. It is the
intension of the Commission to engage the United Nations Secretariat in order to
address this situation and take the appropriate measures to extend support to both
the police and the civilian components, in line with the spirit and letter of resolution
1863 (2010), which refers to AMISOM as a Mission and not as a purely military
operation. There is also a need for the African Union and the United Nations to
make further efforts to ensure greater integration between the African Union mission
support concept and UNSOA support for AMISOM.

VIII.

Revised concept of operations and way forward for AMISOM
50. The Council will recall that, at its 245th meeting, it endorsed the revised
concept of operations for AMISOM. This revised concept of operations was aimed
at bringing the authorized strength to 20,000 military personnel, implying an
additional 12,000 to the initially authorized level of 8,000, with the requisite air and
maritime capabilities. The additional 12,000 were to be deployed in two phases.
Initially, it was planned to insert 4,000 additional troops into Mogadishu (Sector 2)
to pacify the capital and consolidate the Transitional Federal Government’s
authority. In the second phase, steps were to be taken to expand gradually to other
areas of Somalia, in particular those controlled by groups allied with the

18

11-50498

S/2011/586

Transitional Federal Government, with the intension to concurrently deploy 4,000
troops in Sector 1 and the remaining 4,000 in Sectors 3 and 4. However, the Security
Council authorized the provision of the United Nations support package for only
12,000 troops in Mogadishu.
51. With the completion of most of the tasks provided for in phase 1 of the
concept of operations, Mogadishu now being under the full control of Transitional
Federal Government and AMISOM forces, there is a need to build on the recent
gains to consolidate security, extend the authority of the Transitional Federal
Government beyond the capital, and address security requirements for strategic
installations and visiting foreign dignitaries. It is against this background that the
Commission convened a technical consultative workshop on AMISOM, in Addis
Ababa on 17 and 18 August 2011, attended by IGAD, the United Nations, the
European Union, WFP, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Eastern Africa Standby Force Coordination Mechanism and troop-contributing
countries to AMISOM, as well as the permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council. Having acknowledged the major developments brought about by
the signing of the Kampala Accord and the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu, as well as the requirements to effectively address the situation created
by the drought and the resulting famine, the workshop recommended the following,
in order to enable AMISOM to proceed with the implementation of the next phase of
its mandate:
(a) The acceleration of the deployment of the additional troops pledged by
Burundi, Uganda, Djibouti, the Republic of Guinea and Sierra Leone to enable the
Mission to quickly reach the strength of 12,000 troops covered by the United
Nations support package. In this respect, African Union Member States in a position
to do so and partners were urged to expeditiously provide the requisite support,
including equipment and training, to facilitate the early deployment of the remaining
3,000 troops;
(b) The enhancement of the support package provided by the United Nations,
under resolutions 1863 (2009) and 1964 (2010), to take into account the
shortcomings identified over the past few months and the fact that AMISOM is a
multidimensional mission with military, police and civilian components. Priority
areas of support include self-sustenance of the troop-contributing countries
reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment and the provision of adequate force
enablers (attack and utility helicopters, maritime capability, combat engineering
equipment, among other things), as well as support for the civilian component of the
Mission;
(c) The insertion of formed police units into Mogadishu to bolster the
maintenance of law and order in the city. This will make it possible to free the
military for operations on the ground;
(d) The creation, as part of AMISOM, and under its command, of a guard
force of an adequate size, to facilitate the deployment of civilian staff and provide
protection for the African Union, the United Nations and the Transitional Federal
Institutions in Mogadishu. This force should be above the 12,000 United Nationsauthorized strength, and its deployment will make it possible to release additional
elements for operations on the ground; and

11-50498

19

S/2011/586

(e) The elaboration of a revised concept of operations, in light of the
developments that have taken place since October 2010 and the elements above,
including the planned insertion of formed police units, and the refinement of the
implementation modalities for the next phases of the AMISOM mandate.
52. Subsequently, the Commission developed a revised concept of operations,
which provides for the following three phases:
(a) Phase I (3 to 4 months), which will be devoted to the reinforcement of
AMISOM up to the United Nations-approved strength of 12,000 troops, supported
by formed police units, to meet current threats in Mogadishu and its environs, and
create further space for political dialogue and reconciliation;
(b) Phase II (5 to 12 months), which will entail the expansion of AMISOM
operations beyond Mogadishu into south and central Somalia with 8,000 additional
troops;
(c) Phase III (12 to 24 months), which will make it possible to create
conditions for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation, to take
over AMISOM and assist in the long-term reconstruction and stabilization of
Somalia.
53. The implementation of this revised concept of operations requires close
cooperation with the Transitional Federal Government forces and other allied forces.
Significantly, the technical workshop emphasized the key role to be played by the
forces of the Transitional Federal Government, calling, in this respect, for enhanced
support to the Transitional Federal Government forces and for better coordination
between the latter and the allied forces. The revised concept of operations is also
premised on the availability of a number of capabilities, including air and maritime
capabilities and other force enablers, especially combat engineering capabilities,
medical equipment and self-sustenance, as well as enhanced information-gathering
capabilities. In particular, the availability of air assets will facilitate the conduct of
battlefield air interdiction, the intensification of reconnaissance operations on
suspected insurgent areas, the provision of close air support and in-mission troop
insertion and extraction, as well as medical and casualty evacuation, among other
things.
54. Regarding the police component, the revised concept of operations provides
for a progressive deployment, as follows:
(a) Phase 1 (first quarter 2012): 1 formed police unit of 140 personnel and
85 police officers, including advisers, trainers, mentors and support services staff;
(b) Phase 2 (second quarter 2012): 1 formed police unit of 140 personnel at
bases vacated by AMISOM military in Zone 1 and Zone 2 of Mogadishu and 60
police officers, including advisers, trainers, mentors and support services staff;
(c) Phase 3 (third quarter 2012): 55 police officers, including advisers,
trainers and mentors and support services staff;
(d) Phase 4 (fourth quarter 2012): 2 formed police units of 140 personnel
each in Zone 3, in Mogadishu, and 50 police officers including advisers, trainers,
mentors and support services staff. The remaining 290 police advisers, trainers and
mentors will be deployed outside Mogadishu under phase 2 of the revised concept
of operations.

20

11-50498

S/2011/586

55. The formed police units will play a key role in supporting the Somalia Police
Force in maintaining law and order and act as a bridge through which the Somalia
Police Force will gradually transition from a militarized policing strategy to civilian
policing that conforms to international democratic policing standards. In particular,
the formed police units will assist the Somalia Police Force in holding, securing and
consolidating peace in liberated areas of Mogadishu; conduct joint public order
reassurance patrols to reduce the fear of armed violent crime in communities,
including coastal patrols and joint checkpoints; provide direct law enforcement
support to the Somalia Police Force to maintain law and order, including the
containment of public order disturbances; provide armed escorts as may be
necessary or requested; perform internally displaced person protection tasks as may
be requested; and provide mentoring support to their Somalia Police Force
counterparts. The deployment of formed police units will indeed contribute to a
reduction of pressure on the military to attend to their core military duties,
especially fanning out to liberate areas outside Mogadishu.
56. The revised concept of operations seeks to facilitate the achievement of the
desired political end state in Somalia, that is, the creation of an enabling
environment for the Transitional Federal Institutions to effectively implement their
stipulated tasks as enshrined in the Transitional Federal Charter. This will also
create conditions for the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance and the
commencement of an effective post-conflict reconstruction programme.
IX.

Observations
57. During the reporting period, tremendous progress has been recorded in
enhancing security and moving the peace process in Somalia forward. Almost all of
Mogadishu is now under the effective control of the Transitional Federal
Government and AMISOM forces. For the first time in over two decades,
Mogadishu and its environs are today free from the tyranny of warlords and
extremists. Residents of Mogadishu are now enjoying relative security such that
they are able to go about their day-to-day lives without the fear of violence. This
achievement has been made possible thanks to the courage of the Transitional
Federal Government and AMISOM forces, which, under extremely challenging
conditions and with limited resources, compelled Al-Shabaab to pull out of the
capital.
58. I would like to pay tribute to the Transitional Federal Government and
AMISOM forces for the results achieved. I commiserate with the families of the
soldiers and officers who lost their lives in the line of duty, showing utmost
commitment to the cause of peace and security in Somalia. The Governments of
Burundi and Uganda deserve the continued gratitude of the entire continent and the
international community in general for their contribution to AMISOM and for
staying the course, in spite of the many challenges encountered. That AMISOM is
today the longest-serving peacekeeping operation in Somalia, having been on the
ground for four years, speaks volumes about the determination of the Governments
and the people of both Burundi and Uganda.
59. Equally significant is the signing of the Kampala Accord and the steps taken
towards its full implementation. A Road Map, including benchmarks, timelines and
monitoring mechanisms, for ending the transition is now in place. This clearly
demonstrates a renewed commitment by the Somali leaders and stakeholders. I

11-50498

21

S/2011/586

commend President Yoweri Museveni for the instrumental role he played in the
conclusion of the Kampala Accord. I am also appreciative of the efforts and
dynamism of the United Nations Special Representative for Somalia, Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga.
60. I encourage the Transitional Federal Institutions to continue to show the unity
of purpose and the determination required in order to fully take advantage of the
opportunity thus created to enhance the reconciliation and outreach efforts, improve
service delivery and accelerate the implementation of the pending transitional tasks.
I call on all Somalis, including those in the Diaspora, to continue to support the
peace process in their country. At the same time, it should be borne in mind that for
the Transitional Federal Institutions to successfully address these challenges, it is
necessary that the international community move away from the half-hearted
measures that have characterized its efforts so far and provide a more decisive
support, one that is really commensurate with the challenges at hand.
61. Throughout the period under review, IGAD has continued to play a leading
role in the promotion of peace, security and stability in Somalia, ensuring the
continued support of the region for the reconciliation efforts, encouraging the
Somali stakeholders to remain focused on the critical transitional tasks and keeping
the situation in Somalia high on the agenda of the international community. I would
like, once again, to express my appreciation to the member States of IGAD and its
Chair, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia, as well as to the IGAD Facilitator
for Somalia Peace and National Reconciliation, the Honourable Kipruto Kirwa, for
their tireless efforts. The African Union will continue to work closely with IGAD
and its member States in addressing the current challenges and bringing about
lasting peace and reconciliation in Somalia. The East African Community should
also be thanked for its involvement and efforts.
62. The need to do whatever is possible to end the conflict in Somalia is made
even greater by the drought affecting the country, the worst in decades, and the
resulting famine. Millions of Somalis are affected, and many are dying for what
could, to a large extent, have been prevented had the international community acted
swiftly and heeded the early warning calls made by the humanitarian organizations.
While commending all those who are making contributions to the relief efforts in
Somalia, I call for renewed efforts both within the continent and beyond to extend to
the Somali people the assistance they so desperately need. I would like to seize this
opportunity to highlight the initiative taken by the 11-year-old Ghanaian schoolboy
Andrew Adansi-Bonnah to mobilize support for the famine-affected populations in
Somalia, moved as he was by the images of suffering Somalis, in particular women
and children. His gesture is not only the expression of an early consciousness and
sense of solidarity, but also a call for immediate action by all those in a position to
help, both within and outside Africa.
63. As indicated in paragraphs 49 to 55 above, the Commission, in light of the
new developments that have taken place, has elaborated a revised concept of
operations for AMISOM. The overall objective is to consolidate the gains made at
both the political and military levels. In developing this concept of operations, the
Commission carried out a deliberate consultative process, involving all
stakeholders, so as to mobilize maximum support for the planned steps. I
recommend to the Council that it endorse this revised concept of operations. In so
doing, the Council will further demonstrate the continued commitment of the

22

11-50498

S/2011/586

African Union to do whatever is necessary to stabilize Somalia and help its people
enjoy the peace they are so desperately yearning for. An increasing number of
Member States have pledged troops for the Mission. At the moment, with the
existing commitments, and provided the requisite logistical and financial support is
mobilized, the African Union can deploy up to 16,000 troops.
64. Against this background, the challenge therefore is to secure adequate support
from the partners, in particular the United Nations. The Council therefore may wish
to request the Security Council to give due consideration to the need to provide
AMISOM with the support required for it to discharge its mandate more effectively.
In the immediate term, the Council may wish to urgently call on the Security
Council to authorize support for the following steps, in line with the
recommendations of the technical workshop of 17 and 18 August 2011:
(a) The enhancement of the support package provided by the United Nations,
under resolutions 1863 (2009) and 1964 (2010), to take into account the
shortcomings identified over the past few months and the fact that AMISOM is a
multidimensional mission with military, police and civilian components, with a
focus on self-sustenance of the troop-contributing countries, reimbursement for
contingent-owned equipment and the provision of adequate enablers (attack and
utility helicopters, maritime capability and combat engineering equipment, among
other things), as well as support for the civilian component of the Mission;
(b) The insertion of formed police units into Mogadishu to bolster the
maintenance of law and order in the city;
(c) The creation, as part of AMISOM and under its command of a guard
force of a battalion size, to provide security for civilian staff and protection for the
African Union, the United Nations and the Transitional Federal Institutions in
Mogadishu, it being understood that this force should be above the 12,000 strength
authorized by the United Nations.
65. In addition, I would like to reiterate the continued relevance of the other
requests to the Security Council as contained in the Council’s communiqué of
15 October 2010, in particular with respect to the steps required to prevent the entry
of foreign elements into Somalia, as well as flights and shipments carrying weapons
and ammunition to armed groups inside Somalia which are carrying out attacks
against the Transitional Federal Government, AMISOM and the Somali population.
It is equally important that the Security Council reaffirm its commitment to deploy a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia through the re-hatting of
AMISOM and by urgently establishing a timeline for this deployment. In that
respect, the Commission intends to propose to the United Nations Secretariat to
undertake a joint assessment mission to evaluate the progress made so far by
AMISOM on the ground and identify whatever additional benchmarks need to be
met and the corresponding resources to be provided by the United Nations, for the
transformation of AMISOM into a United Nations operation.
66. AMISOM and the Somali people have come a long way in the struggle for
peace. Many have sacrificed their lives for the results that have been achieved thus
far, while several partners provided valuable resources. It would be highly
regrettable if the progress made were to be reversed because of the collective
inability of the international community to assume its responsibility and take the

11-50498

23

S/2011/586

measures called for by the situation. It is critical that the opportunity arising from
the most recent developments in Somalia not be squandered.
67. In taking up the challenge of assisting the Somali people, the African Union is
not only living up to its obligations under its Constitutive Act and the Peace and
Security Council Protocol, but also acting on behalf of the Security Council. This
organ, by the virtue of the Charter of the United Nations, has primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is the African Union’s
earnest expectation that this responsibility will be fully assumed towards the Somali
people, with the urgency called for by the situation.
68. In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the African Union High
Representative for Somalia, former President Jerry John Rawlings; my Special
Representative, Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra; the AMISOM Force Commander,
Major General Fred Mugisha, and all the personnel of the Mission. My gratitude
also goes to former Force Commander Major General Nathan Mugisha, who led the
AMISOM military component for two years. I commend him for his good service,
commitment and gallantry. Under his command, AMISOM forces made significant
progress in extending their area of control in Mogadishu.

24

11-50498
