asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6826

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6826th meeting
Thursday, 30 August 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fabius/Mr. Araud

(France)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Kumar
Mr. El Othmani/ Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Ohin
Mr. Hague
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-47508 (E)

*1247508*

S/PV.6826

Access to health facilities has become difficult or
impossible in some areas due to violence, checkpoints
and fuel shortages. Food prices have tripled in some
areas.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, the Syrian
Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. António Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to participate
in this meeting.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Guterres and the Ministers of Colombia,
Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Togo, Turkey and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson.
The Deputy Secretary-General (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to convey the greetings of
the Secretary-General, who is currently attending
the Non-Aligned Movement Summit in Tehran. I am
speaking today on his behalf.
I will essentially speak about the humanitarian
and security situation in Syria, as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Guterres, will
address the worsening of the crisis caused by the waves
of Syrian refugees to neighbouring countries.
(spoke in English)
More than 2.5 million people, including refugees
from Palestine and Iraq, are now in grave need of
assistance and protection inside Syria. This is more
than double the number that Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos reported to the
Security Council in March. The most pressing needs
include water and sanitation, food and shelter, blankets
and health care. Less than half of primary health-care
facilities and hospitals in Syria are now fully functional.
The destruction of pharmaceutical plants and storage
facilities is making drugs and equipment scarce. At the
same time, the number of people in need of medical
care is increasing.

2

A great number of Syrians are internally displaced
and are being supported by family or friends; more
than 1.2 million others have sought refuge in public
buildings such as schools and mosques, which lack
adequate water and sanitation.
In response, despite ongoing fighting and
intensifying violence, United Nations agencies, the
Red Cross, the Red Crescent Movement and their
non-governmental organization partners have managed
to reach more people in more places every month. In
July, World Food Programme food distribution through
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and its local partners
reached 820,000 people throughout Syria, as compared
to 250,000 in April. We are reaching ever more
people with non-food items, health kits and water and
sanitation services. But — and this is a big “but” — as
the conflict intensifies the number of people in need
is clearly exceeding our capacity to assist. We are now
revising the humanitarian response plan to be able to
assist up to 2.5 million people.
Both the Government and the opposition have
chosen the path of armed confrontation, with no
immediate prospect of an end to the fighting or a
resolution of the conflict.
Defections from the army and the Government
continue as the brutality of the Government’s military
response alienates ever more sections of the population.
Arms flows from outside appear to be reaching
both sides. Military operations have intensified,
encompassing all major cities. Indiscriminate shelling
with heavy weapons, tanks and air assets has increased.
Civilians and non-combatants, including women
and children, face systematic slaughter. There are almost
daily reports of atrocities, most recently in Darayya.
Those recent accounts of possible war crimes are
deeply troubling, and should give us all further impetus
to work to end this nightmare. Those responsible in the
Government and the military forces, as well as armed
opposition groups, must be held accountable for gross
human rights violations, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
The withdrawal of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria and its observers is now almost

12-47508

S/PV.6826

complete. Throughout its deployment, the Mission
provided clear and verified information and was in
contact with all parties, under difficult circumstances.
I commend those who served under complex and
dangerous conditions.
As conditions deteriorate, we see dangerous
repercussions for Syria’s neighbours. We view with
great concern, indeed alarm, the political, social and
economic consequences of the movement of large
numbers of refugees from Syria to its neighbours.
Those consequences must be identified and addressed.
The affected Governments, which have generously
opened their borders and accepted their responsibility
to shelter those who have sought refuge, need urgent
support.
There are now more than 220,000 Syrian refugees
in Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. That weighs
heavily on local authorities and communities and risks
having serious destabilizing effects. The spillover
of conflict and violence into neighbouring countries
must be prevented. We urge all parties in Syria and
neighbouring countries to refrain from cross-border
actions that will escalate tensions. In that context, on
behalf of the Secretary-General, I call for the release of
all who have been kidnapped or are being held hostage,
in Syria and elsewhere.
That is the difficult environment in which the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, begins
his work. We welcome his presence here today and are
grateful that he has accepted this important and heavy
responsibility. It is essential that the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
unite behind him and his efforts. Separate diplomatic
tracks will only prolong the violence, the human rights
abuses and the humanitarian crisis.
To meet the increasing humanitarian pressure,
we need to urgently address two main issues. The
first is humanitarian access. The Syrian Arab Red
Crescent has done remarkable work, but it is clearly
overstretched. We need the Government to authorize
more international non-governmental organizations to
operate in the country. And United Nations agencies
will need to expand their presence.
At the same time, security has to be improved. Our
response is shackled by obstacles, both conflict-related
ones and others linked to the increase in criminality,
kidnapping and attacks on vehicles. I urge Member

12-47508

States to emphasize to the Government and opposition
groups the urgency of guaranteeing the security of aid
agencies operating in areas under their control to allow
for safe access to civilians and for evacuation.
The second issue is funding. As of yesterday, the
$180 million humanitarian response plan was only
half-funded. Some critical sectors have received almost
no funding at all. Donors should urgently rise to this
humanitarian imperative. Hundreds of thousands of
lives are at stake.
As the conflict continues, Syria risks undermining
its State institutions and losing its cultural and
historical heritage. The cohesion of its diverse society
is in danger. That will have profound implications for
the Syrian people, for the countries of the region and
for the world. The massive destruction, the human
tragedies and the abuses we are witnessing are the
direct consequence of the increased and irresponsible
militarization of the conflict. Syrians need fewer
weapons, not more. Those who supply the Government
or the armed opposition with weapons, equipment or
money are creating a vicious circle of violence and are
paving the way for more suffering and chaos. Member
States with influence on the Syrian Government or the
opposition forces have an obligation to end the killing
and promote a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Finally, we note recent calls to establish
humanitarian corridors or buffer zones inside Syria
where civilians could, it is argued, find relief from the
violence. Such proposals raise serious questions and
require careful and critical consideration.
(spoke in French)
The Syrian people need humanitarian assistance.
Ultimately, however, the current crisis will not be
resolved in the absence of a credible political process.
Such a process should be supported by an unified
international community, allowing for an end to the
violence and making possible a political transition
carried out by Syrians themselves. It is time for all the
parties in Syria and abroad the put the interests, dignity
and human rights of the people of Syria first. The Syrian
people are today the victims of suffering, devastation
and divisiveness; while all the while they aspire only
to live in peace and to enjoy the rights and freedoms
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.

3

S/PV.6826

I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres: Syria has a long and generous
history of providing refuge to people in need of
sanctuary, including Palestinian and Iraqi refugees. It
is now particularly heartbreaking to see so many Syrian
citizens losing their lives, being uprooted from their
homes and becoming trapped in war zones.
As of yesterday, 229,000 people had left the country
and sought registration as refugees in neighbouring
States. That number is growing rapidly. All sorts of
assets are quickly being used up and social support
networks are fragmenting. For many, becoming a
refugee is the only way to survive.
The number of Syrians arriving each day in Turkey
continues to increase dramatically. Thanks to the
Turkish Government, more than 80,000 Syrians are
now being hosted in camps and public buildings in the
south-east of the country. As the fighting intensifies,
pressure is increasing at border checkpoints, with
thousands of people waiting as new sites are made
ready — as is the case at the present moment.
In Jordan the number of refugees arriving each
day is also rising. Earlier this week, more than 5,000
people arrived in a span of just 30 hours. Some 72,000
Syrian refugees have now been registered. In total, the
Government estimates that there are now approximately
180,000 more Syrians in the country than at the outset
of the crisis. Most are hosted by local communities, but
in accordance with a decision of the authorities, over
21,000 recent arrivals are being accommodated at the
newly established Zaatari refugee camp.
The number of Syrian refugees in Lebanon registered
or awaiting registration now exceeds 57,000. They have
largely been absorbed into local communities, along
with many thousands more who have not yet sought
assistance. Efforts are under way with the Government
to expand accommodation options, as hosting families
are stretched and schools where many hundreds have
been sheltered are due to reopen shortly.
In Iraq, a country striving to make its own transition
from conflict to stability, the number of Syrian refugees
is now more than 18,000.
In those four countries, there has been exemplary
cooperation between Governments, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other
United Nations agencies, the Red Cross/Red Crescent
Movement and non-governmental organizations.

4

Smaller numbers of Syrian citizens have also
sought protection beyond the region, in areas such as
North Africa and Europe. I am deeply saddened by the
drowning of a number of Syrians, including children,
earlier this week in the Mediterranean.
The most tragic consequences of the crisis are being
felt inside Syria itself. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent
Society, supported by the United Nations system and
other humanitarian actors, continues to undertake
exceptional work in the most difficult circumstances,
despite being considerably overstretched. Humanitarian
activities, as has been noted, are severely hampered by
constraints on access and funding.
UNHCR persists with efforts to provide protection
and assistance to Iraqi and other refugees and asylumseekers in Syria. The commitment of the Syrian people
and authorities to maintaining asylum space has been
commendable. Refugees are nonetheless exposed to
increasing insecurity, which also limits their access to
our offices and restricts the movement of staff. Some
31,000 Iraqis have now returned to their own country
since the surge in violence in mid-July, while migrant
workers and other third-country nationals are also
experiencing acute hardship.
Refugees from Palestine in Syria fall within the
mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Our
colleagues at UNRWA need funding to expand their
assistance programme, and are very appreciative of the
temporary protection afforded in neighboring countries
to the relatively few who have been forced to flee.
The refugee exodus is having a significant impact
on the society, economy and security of host countries.
Thousands of Iraqi, Jordanian, Lebanese and Turkish
families are sharing their homes and their increasingly
meager resources with relatives and friends, but mostly
strangers, who have been rendered homeless. The largescale arrival of refugees brings about a significant
economic cost, leads to complex social consequences
and has a serious impact on local infrastructure and the
environment. The acute pressure on water resources in
Jordan is just one example.
All of that is taking place in countries also affected
by the national security implications of the current
crisis. By keeping their borders open to refugees in
such a complex and challenging environment, the
countries that neighbour the Syrian Arab Republic
are providing a very positive example to the world.

12-47508

S/PV.6826

However, their capacities are being severely tested.
International solidarity in support of their generosity
must be urgently reinforced.
The commitment of those countries to refugee
protection has upheld the internationally recognized
principle whereby all human beings have the right to
seek and enjoy asylum in another State. That is a right
that must not be jeopardized, for instance through
the establishment of so-called safe havens or other
similar arrangements. Bitter experience has shown
that it is rarely possible to provide effective protection
and security in such areas. However, evidently, more
effective humanitarian assistance inside the Syrian
Arab Republic might well reduce the numbers forced to
flee across borders.
As the conflict intensifies, the ability of the
international system to respond is being tested in
many ways. In that respect, I would like to conclude by
making the following appeals.
First, I appeal to all parties to the conflict to
grant unrestricted humanitarian access inside the
Syrian Arab Republic in order to enable humanitarian
actors to deliver protection and assistance without
discrimination, in accordance with humanitarian
principles.
Secondly, I would like to appeal to the parties to the
conflict to continue to respect and provide protection to
Iraqi, Palestinian and other refugees inside the Syrian
Arab Republic. We are all aware of the complexity of
the Palestinian refugee issue and its impact on countries
in the region. A situation in which large numbers of
Palestinians are forced to flee must be avoided at all
costs.
Thirdly, I would like to call for enhanced
international support to all victims of the conflict. I urge
all States to respond positively to the two appeals that
will shortly be made by the humanitarian community
for additional funding in countries of asylum and inside
the Syrian Arab Republic. However, direct support to
the victims is not enough. International solidarity must
translate into effective burden- and responsibilitysharing, with meaningful support to Governments and
communities in refugee-hosting countries.
Fourthly, I ask all States in the region and beyond
to continue to extend protection to the Syrians fleeing
their country, and to ensure that the civilian and
humanitarian character of asylum is maintained, in
accordance with international law.
12-47508

Finally, we must recognize that there is no
humanitarian solution to the Syrian crisis. Only
through a political solution leading to peace can the
humanitarian emergency be brought to a conclusion.
As history has so clearly demonstrated in the Middle
East and elsewhere, it is in nobody’s interest for a
political conflict and the plight of its resultant refugee
population to be left unresolved.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Nasser Judeh, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Jordan.
Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on France’s presidency of the Council this month at
this extremely sensitive juncture. We thank you, Sir,
for organizing this meeting at the ministerial level to
discuss the dramatic and tragic situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, the repercussions of which are being
felt beyond the borders of that country, affecting
neighbouring countries. I would also like to thank you,
Foreign Minister Fabius, for having invited the Syrian
Arab Republic’s neighbouring countries, including my
own country, Jordan.
It is appalling for all of us to recognize that the
tragic situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
has lasted over a year and a half now, persists and is
deteriorating. Likewise, the bloodshed has not ceased,
but has increased over that period. The situation has
deteriorated to the point that, every day, hundreds
of sons and daughters of the Syrian Arab Republic,
regardless of age, are engulfed in violence, which
continues to increase. The violence is forcing hundreds
of thousands of Syrians to flee the country in order to
escape the violence and terror, and to seek food.
What we are witnessing today in Syria has far
exceeded our fears that Syria could potentially slide
into the inferno of civil war. The increase and spread
of violence and murder have very clearly begun to tear
apart the social fabric of the Syrian Arab Republic and
peace in that country. It threatens social cohesion and
the unity of the country. This serious threat requires
that we act decisively and immediately so that Syria
does not fall into a civil and sectarian war, a war that
would have repercussions reaching far beyond the
Syrian borders, jeopardizing the stability of the entire
region.
His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein has
expressed Jordan’s fears about the disastrous situation in

5

S/PV.6826

Syria and our concerns about its possible implications.
His Majesty has spoken on the subject on more than
one occasion, in particular at the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation summit in Mecca. Our position in
Jordan is very clear. We are convinced of the need for
a political solution to the Syrian crisis, despite the fact
that time seems to be running out. We recognize that
circumstances are making such a solution more and
more difficult. Still, that is the ideal means — indeed
the only means — to resolve the crisis in Syria.
We believe that a political solution must include a
transition framework, and that it must be implemented
immediately, leading to the realization of the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people — aspirations for which
it has shed its blood and made bitter sacrifices. Such a
solution is the only way to guarantee Syria’s political
independence and unity. It is the only solution that
could lead to internal cohesion and peace. We believe
that a political solution is inseparable from a cessation
of violence, which was the first step in the six-point
plan proposed by Kofi Annan, former Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. I wish to take this opportunity to thank him for
his work and his efforts to fulfil his responsibilities.
I also express our gratitude to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi
for having agreed to become the new Joint Special
Envoy. Jordan supports him, and we express the hope
that the international community will likewise unite
in supporting him in his extremely difficult mission.
We are confident that his experience and competence
will assist him in his work, leading to a transition in
Syria and to an agreement allowing for a return to
stability without external military intervention. Jordan
hopes that the Security Council will be able to speak
with one voice and undertake united efforts to resolve
the humanitarian situation brought on by the political
crisis.
Jordan is Syria’s closest neighbour, in geography,
population and spirit. We are affected by the tragedy
along with the Syrian people. While we clearly and
unequivocally condemn the violence and the bloodshed
taking place in Syria, and while we appeal for its
immediate cessation and for the realization of the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, at the same
time we do not accept any violation of Syria or threats
to its social cohesion and domestic peace. We condemn
and reject approaches that fuel the events in Syria that
have driven more than 180,000 Syrian citizens to cross
their borders to seek refuge in Jordan.

6

Despite the economic and financial difficulties and
our limited means in water and energy, it is with good
will, founded in our deep and organic relationship with
the Syrian people, that we share our resources with our
Syrian brothers. For the same reasons we will open the
doors of our educational institutions and health facilities,
offering them services free of charge, as if they were
Jordanian citizens. As I speak here to the Council it is
almost midnight in Jordan. As our Syrian brothers cross
the border by night their numbers may have swelled to
186,000 by the end of my statement — and even more by
the end of this meeting. I say that based on the number
of Syrians who have crossed the border in the past four
days — 12,000 refugees. It is important in that regard
to state that, despite the challenges we face, given our
limited means even under normal circumstances, we
have not taken any steps in Jordan to prevent the entry
of the increasing number of refugees.
Nevertheless, we are quickly approaching a
dangerous situation whereby we will exceed by twice
our capacity, and the massive flow could lead to
consequences for public order and general security,
forcing us to take measures to fulfil our responsibilities
to our own population for its security. I therefore appeal
to the international community to help us respond to
the humanitarian, health and educational needs of our
Syrian brothers on our territory. I thank those States
and international organizations, both governmental and
non-governmental, that have provided us assistance in
facing the difficult burden of having refugees in our
territory.
The Government of Jordan has launched a joint
appeal, along with the United Nations, detailing the
priorities and needs of our Syrian brothers now living
in Jordan. Copies of that appeal will be distributed to
those wishing to offer assistance. I reaffirm our support
to any who offer humanitarian assistance to those in
need of it inside Syria, through recognized international
mechanisms and procedures. I also reiterate that any
humanitarian assistance provided to Syria will also
help Jordan in responding to the needs of Syrians in
Jordan, especially in matters of health and education.
(spoke in English)
Human suffering requires the international
community to be united, and assisting in coping with
the humanitarian tragedy in Syria requires us all to
be committed. Our Syrian brothers and sisters in
Jordan, Turkey and other neighbouring countries are in
desperate need of serious help. The countries that are
12-47508

S/PV.6826

hosting them are in serious need of help, logistical and
otherwise, in coping with the humanitarian tragedy.
(spoke in Arabic)
The initiative to invite Syria’s neighbouring States
was a wise one. We hope that it will occur periodically
in order to facilitate a follow-up of the developing
situation in Syria at the ministerial level.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Davutoğlu (Turkey): I wish to start by
expressing our thanks to the French presidency and
to you, personally, Sir, for organizing this timely and
very important meeting on Syria and inviting us, the
neighbouring countries that have borne the brunt of the
crisis in Syria. I also extend our appreciation to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and to United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres for
their lucid and comprehensive briefings on the situation.
When I received the invitation to the meeting
I decided without any hesitation to come, as it was a
meeting of the Security Council, which is the primary
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security, on the issue of Syria that has been seriously
threatening both regional and global peace and security
for a long time. Itseemed that the meeting would
be very significant as it had been organized by the
Security Council after an absence of the action and
determination required to put an end to the brutality
and bloodshed that has been taking place in Syria for
the past 18 months.
I was particularly encouraged by the fact that the
humanitarian dimension, which calls for urgent action,
would be on the agenda, and thus became hopeful that
the Council would finally act with one voice to take
long-overdue steps in the context of the humanitarian
issue. Apparently I was wrong in my expectations. I
understand that today the Council will, yet again, be
unable to put forward a unified position to stop the
humanitarian tragedy. This meeting will not end with
even a presidential or a press statement, let alone a
robust resolution.
Not even all Council members are represented at
this meeting at the level of foreign minister. While I
regret the absence of some of my colleagues, I would
like to believe that their non-participation is not an
indication of their level of interest and concern in view
of the developments in Syria.

12-47508

The situation in Syria needs no further description.
Everything is taking place in front of our eyes. Every
day a new massacre is being committed against the
Syrian people. Now, the regime has started to deploy
fighter jets against people in the cities, in addition to
using heavy artillery and tanks.
How long will we sit and watch while an entire
generation is wiped out by random bombardment and
deliberate mass targeting, as in Azaz or Aleppo? Let
us not forget that if we do not act against such crimes
against humanity happening before our very eyes, we
will become accomplices to those crimes.
We need to ask ourselves whether our good
conscience is comfortable about such inaction. We
need to ask ourselves how we will explain such
inaction when we preach to coming generations about
being virtuous and righteous. Do we really need to
revisit experiences of the 1990s and earlier and repeat
the same mistakes? We know very well the cost of
procrastination — Srebrenica, Halabja and Gaza. In
all of those cases we lost civilians. All of those cases
have entered the annals of history as the symbols of the
heavy price paid by the civilian population because the
Security Council did not act in time. There is no reason
to make that notorious list any longer.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon acknowledged
during his recent visit to the Balkans that, “We must
learn from the lessons of Srebrenica.” He continued,
“The international community failed to provide the
necessary protection to many people who were killed at
the time when they needed our support”, in Srebrenica.
That is what is happening right now in Syria.
Although the international community has made its
position in view of the situation in Syria abundantly
clear — through several General Assembly resolutions
that each passed with more than 130 votes in favour — the
Security Council still has failed to provide the necessary
protection to the people of Syria who need our support.
We cannot again place the United Nations in such an
uncomfortable situation of apologizing for inaction or
negligence related to the tragic situation in Syria.
We in Turkey open our doors to every Syrian
brother and sister who runs for safety, regardless of
his or her religion, sect or ethnicity. We embrace every
Syrian brother and sister. The number of Syrians we are
accommodating is now greater than 80,000. Currently,
another 10,000 Syrians are waiting at our borders for
accommodation. We are constantly building new camps

7

S/PV.6826

to host them. However, it takes approximately one
month to build a camp that will usually become full
after two days, as the average number of daily entries
is about 4,000.
Currently we accommodate the Syrian refugees in
11 camps, comprising both tent and container cities.
Three new camps, each with capacity for 10,000
refugees, are under construction. We provide for all
of their needs, including education, health, vocational
training, social and psychological support and leisure.
Since the intense influx exceeds our capacity to
accommodate, we have had to mobilize every means
at hand to fill the gap. In that vein, we have opened up
student dormitories and gyms while the schools remain
on summer break. Currently, 17,000 Syrians are being
accommodated in such centres. However, the schools
will open in just a couple of days.
Yes, we are building new camps and will try to
transfer them to those camps. Yet we are fast becoming
short of suitable areas to build camps, as well as means
to support them. I have not even mentioned the tens of
thousands of Syrians who escaped to Turkey and are
living in various cities and towns and putting an extra
strain on local resources and infrastructure.
We do all of that with a sense of high responsibility
as we regard our Syrian neighbours as our brothers and
sisters with whom we share a long history and often a
common fate. We will continue to stand in full solidarity
with them and to address their needs. However, the scale
of the tragedy in Syria is growing so out of proportion
that Turkey is finding it increasingly difficult to cope
with the ensuing challenges all alone.
Up until now, we have provided funding for
accommodation, upkeep and other services. The amount
that we have spent so far has exceeded $300 million
and keeps rising each day. But the financial issue is
secondary as compared to the humanitarian issue.
We have already informed the international
community of our readiness to accept assistance offers.
While expressing our gratitude to those countries that
have responded, I must also report that the overall
response fell far short of what was required.
As to the appeal by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
for $193 million under the regional response plan,
the international community has so far funded only
$65 million, or 34 per cent. However, Turkey’s share

8

from that amount can only be considered symbolic. I
do not wish to be misunderstood. I am not here today
to mention those figures in order to complain about our
Syrian brothers and sisters coming to Turkey, nor am I
asking for more funding.
We will continue to try to do our best in providing
the best possible services in full conformity with
international rules and regulations, as UNHCR
representatives have praised our efforts and principled
approach. However, there is an increasing sense in
Turkey that, through making such a sacrifice and
tackling an enormous issue on its own, we will lead
the international community towards complacency and
inaction. We feel that the open-door policy of Turkey
and Syria’s other neighbours is in fact absorbing
any potential international reaction, as the tragic
consequences of the brutality by the Syrian regime are
all being dealt with by the neighbouring countries.
However, given the fact that we are using up all
of our capabilities and our preparations can no longer
cope with the flow of refugees, attempts to tackle the
current influx by regular measures will meet serious
difficulties. Therefore, from now on we must focus
on steps necessary within the borders of Syria. In
that vein, we have started to deliver humanitarian
aid at point zero, namely, at the border. We have also
established relief reception centres in Kilis, Gaziantep
and Hatay — our border cities — for that purpose.
Relief items stockpiled at those centres are delivered to
the Syrians by the Turkish Red Crescent.
We have formally informed the United Nations of
the operation. It was a necessary step as the millions of
people who are unable to escape are in acute need of
help. The threat of famine is looming as we approach
winter. The wounded cannot get treatment, because
Syria’s clinics and hospitals are either being bombed by
the regime or lack the equipment essential for treating
people. Although we are opening our hospitals and
treating every Syrian who is in need, many cannot
make it to the border and usually die from loss of blood.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there are more than 2 million
internally displaced people (IDPs) in Syria. In the face
of a humanitarian disaster of such proportions, the
United Nations should begin establishing IDP camps
within Syria without delay. Needless to say, such camps
should have full protection.

12-47508

S/PV.6826

Let me also be clear that there is only one side that
is responsible for this tragedy: the regime in Syria.
None of the refugees are fleeing Syria because of the
opposition groups, which are struggling to stop the
killings there. The refugees coming to Turkey and the
other neighbouring countries are fleeing the Syrian
regime, not other forces. The Syrian people are the
victims of that oppression.
The situation in Syria has long been a threat to
international peace and security. That makes it the
direct responsibility of the Security Council. It is the
Council’s duty to take action to develop the necessary
responses to the pressing challenges that Syria poses.
We therefore appeal to Council members to take on
the responsibility for putting an end to the atrocities
the regime has committed against the people of Syria,
enabling a democratic transition in accord with the
legitimate demands of the people and thereby restoring
security and stability in our part of the world.
We all have an interest in the developments in Syria.
Our views may diverge, but our objectives, I believe,
converge. We are all for Syria’s security, stability and
prosperity. The territorial integrity and national unity of
Syria is sacrosanct for all of us. None of us is interested
in imposing anything on Syria by force. No matter what
we discuss here or there, it will be the Syrian people
who will have the final say on their country and their
destiny. They will decide their life, their governance
and their future. However, all of us have a huge interest
in bringing the current conflict in Syria to an end as
quickly as possible. The longer the strife continues,
the more difficult the new period will be. Radical and
terrorist organizations and groups will enjoy fertile
ground. We cannot let that happen. Regional and global
security, as well as our own, will be at stake.
The Cold War era is long behind us. Accordingly,
we must put behind us the reflexes and mindset that
stem from that era. We must put behind us any sterile
power struggles and competing interests. The United
Nations is facing a serious test. That test is about
whether or not the Organization can represent the good
conscience of the international community and act in
accordance with it. In other words, it is about whether it
can translate humanity into practice or not. So far, the
track record has not been promising.
For instance, when Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, took up his job, on 23 February, the number of

12-47508

Syrians seeking protection in Turkey was approximately
10,000. When the first group of United Nations
monitors arrived in Syria, on 16 April, the number of
refugees went up to 25,000. When the monitors left,
on 20 August, the number had reached 70,000. Today
it is more than 80,000. The United Nations cannot
afford to fail this test. Failure on such an issue would
be irredeemable, and the regional implications in
particular could be disastrous.
We are taking the necessary steps to minimize
the negative ramifications of the Syrian situation as
they affect Jordan, Iraq and, in particular, Lebanon,
since regional security and stability is our national
priority. However, the longer the pressure from the
crisis in Syria continues to build, the more difficult
it will be to keep the countries in the region immune
to ripple effects. All this renders the task of the new
Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Brahimi, a daunting one. We
welcome his appointment and wish him every success.
He will receive our full support, as his predecessor did.
I understand that it cannot be easy for the Council
to comprehend the scope of the challenges and threats
that Syria’s neighbours are facing merely through
media reports or second-hand observations. That is why
I think it would be very useful for Security Council
members to come to Turkey and the other neighbouring
countries and visit some of the camps. I am sure that
the camp residents would be very interested in what
Council members have to say and the kinds of solutions
they would bring to their acute and tragic problems.
Similarly, I am sure that Council members would
be very interested to hear the vivid stories of the ordeals
that Syrian people have endured at the hands of the
shabiha or of the regime’s forces. Many of them may
be very disturbing. But shying away from such things
as summary executions, brutal rapes and mass killings
of entire families with babies in cradles will not make
them go away. All of them are real and are part of the
reason that such a large number of people have sought
refuge.
Under the circumstances, we wish to suggest that
the United Nations should take the following practical
steps in order to deal with the current humanitarian
disaster in Syria.
First, the Security Council should visit the camps in
the countries bordering Syria in order to see the impact
of the situation and get first-hand information about it.

9

S/PV.6826

Secondly, the Council should pursue a unified
approach to stopping the indiscriminate aerial
bombardment of residential areas, which leads to mass
internal displacement.
Thirdly, the focus should be on solving the issue of
IDPs within Syria’s borders.
Fourthly, if, despite such steps, Syrians are still
compelled to flee for safety, the necessary measures
should be taken to absorb them internationally.
Lastly, a joint committee, made up of the
neighbouring countries and UNHCR, could be
established to deal with the refugee issue. Such a
committee should be given a mandate by the Security
Council and could also facilitate the work of the Joint
Special Envoy.
As I said at the beginning, I was expecting this
meeting to produce tangible solutions to the suffering
of the Syrian people. But we still have nothing new to
say to the millions of Syrians who are suffering at the
hands of the regime, as the United Nations system finds
itself trapped in inaction. The people of Syria find this
situation extremely difficult to understand.
Nonetheless, even if the United Nations in general,
and the Security Council in particular, continues
to be paralysed while the regime in Syria violates
every known value, law and moral principle, Turkey
will continue to uphold the principles of the United
Nations — on its own, if necessary — and defend
the moral values dictated by the good conscience of
the international community. We are facing not just a
serious crisis but a test of our humanity. If we shy away
from our responsibilities today, we will be accountable
to future generations and face the harsh verdict of
history. Humanity must always prevail over insanity
and cruelty.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Faour (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the French presidency for convening this
important meeting, designed to find an approach and, it
is to be hoped, a solution to this sensitive and painful
issue.
The Arab region is facing exceptional and
historic challenges in the form of the outbreak of the
Arab revolutions and calls for basic rights such as
democracy, freedom and human rights. While some

10

Arab peoples have secured victories and rid themselves
of dictatorships, others are still suffering from killings,
oppression and displacement as they struggle to achieve
basic rights. With the outbreak of the events in Syria,
that country’s people have made enormous sacrifices
that have led to tens of thousands martyred, wounded,
missing or detained.
At Lebanon’s national level, and in view of the
organic ties and historical and geographic factors that
link it to Syria, the Lebanese Government, on the
instructions of its President, General Michel Sleiman,
and Prime Minister, Mr. Najib Mikati, has adopted a
position that has been described as one of distancing,
seeking to neutralize Lebanon from the negative
repercussions of the conflict in Syria and to prevent the
Syrian crisis from being imported into Lebanon. If that
policy has achieved a formula that will help it avoid
those negative repercussions and bridge the divisions in
Lebanese society concerning the rapid and intensifying
developments in Syria, while maintaining freedom of
expression and protecting diversity in Lebanon, the
Lebanese Government has not been idle in the face of the
influx of displaced Syrians into Lebanon.We are fully
committed to separating political considerations from
the humanitarian needs. That continues to be a basic
principle of official Lebanese policy. That clear, formal
commitment on the part of the Lebanese Government is
not just based on international legitimacy, conventions,
international law and human rights; it is also grounded
in the historical relations between the peoples of
Lebanon and Syria.
Those relations have been manifested in various
forms of brotherly solidarity at various times, free from
political considerations and interests. The most recent
example was when the Syrian people accommodated
thousands of Lebanese displaced during Israel’s
aggression in July 2006. That aggression resulted in the
killing of more than 1,000 Lebanese and the wounding
and displacement of thousands of others, as well as
the total destruction of several villages and towns.
Incidentally, that was not the first instance of Israeli
aggression against Lebanon and its sovereignty. Israel
has habitually violated our sovereignty, all too often
refusing to abide by international laws and norms or to
implement any resolution of the Security Council.
To return to the situation in Lebanon, with some
exceptions here and there, my country has been
successful in reducing the danger of the Syrian crisis
spilling over into Lebanese territory. The outbreak of

12-47508

S/PV.6826

the crisis has served to inject yet another controversial
issue into Lebanese society. However, the main political
indicators show that there is consensus in Lebanon on
the need to avoid, as much as possible, the spillover into
Lebanon of the complicated and serious crisis in Syria.
Were that to happen, it would push Lebanon once again
towards an unknown abyss of war and tension.
Needless to say, like other neighbouring States,
Lebanon has received tens of thousands of refugees
fleeing the violence and bombardment in various
regions in Syria. Lebanon’s official position on dealing
with displaced persons has essentially entailed a
humanitarian approach independent of the political
affiliations of the various sectors of Lebanese society.
That is the principle that the Lebanese Government is
seeking to consolidate and pursue in its actions.
The Lebanese Government has reaffirmed that
it is keen to protect all displaced Syrians. Given the
current situation, handing any of them over to Syrian
authorities would place their lives in danger. That is
fully in line with the principles of international law. I
should therefore like, on behalf of the Government of
Lebanon, to avail myself of this opportunity to reiterate
that Lebanon is fully committed to accommodate,
assist and protect Syrian refugees irrespective of their
political inclinations or affiliations.
Along with the displacement of thousands of Syrian
citizens, Lebanon has also faced the influx of thousands
of Palestinians — as if that oppressed people had not
suffered enough in the course of 60 years of being
deprived of their rights under Israeli occupation and in
the face of the inaction and inability of the international
community. They are facing displacement once again:
from their camps in Syria to Lebanon. In honouring our
international commitments, the Lebanese Government
affirms that it will work to coordinate and cooperate
with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East to provide support,
assistance and relief to our Palestinian brothers and
sisters seeking refuge.
It is also worth mentioning that the Syrian army’s
dropping of bombs inside Lebanese territory is resulting
in grave danger to innocent Lebanese citizens along the
borders.
Lebanon continues to face an economic and
financial crisis that is being exacerbated by the absence
of political stability, including insecurity at certain
stages. That makes it important to request assistance

12-47508

from the international Organization, including material
and moral support, so as to ensure the success of the
Lebanese Government’s efforts to accommodate and
assist tens of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons. That requires an emergency plan to help weak
and marginalized groups.
Lebanon has always been on the side of international
legitimacy. We are a founding Member of the United
Nations. We served on the drafting committee of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Lebanon
has long been independent and democratic. Lebanon
has always been committed to human rights and
fundamental freedoms. That makes it incumbent upon
us to be more concerned about refugees and their needs.
But that cannot be possible unless we receive sufficient
support from the international community.
Through its various departments and in cooperation
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the World Food Programme and various
agencies and non-governmental organizations, the
Lebanese Government has for several months provided
assistance, housing, primary medical care and treatment
for the sick and wounded. We are also accommodating
Syrian students in Lebanese schools. However, the
influx of a large number of additional displaced persons
in the past two months, in particular from Damascus
and other areas, has placed new burdens and challenges
on us. The Government has drawn up plans to face
those challenges in an organized and effective manner.
I hope that this meeting will serve as an opportunity
to come up with a comprehensive vision for providing
for the humanitarian needs of the brotherly Syrian
people, including through Lebanon’s assistance, so as
to meet our responsibilities to those displaced in Syria
at this difficult time.
The great Arabic prison has begun to collapse,
with all the grave challenges and dangers that entails.
However, as a great Lebanese martyr put it, freedom
and democracy are undertakings worth suffering for.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al-Doreky (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting at
the ministerial level to discuss humanitarian issues in
Syria, which are the subject of exceptional attention in
my country, countries of the region and the international
community as a whole owing to the humanitarian
11

S/PV.6826

dimensions and the great and dangerous repercussions
that this matter has on the future of security and stability
in the entire region.
Iraq is deeply committed to the security and
stability of the region. We have therefore from the
outset expressed our grave concern about the escalation
of the crisis in Syria, not only because it is a neighbour
and a sister country but because, more than any other
country in the region, it has been a victim of the
evils of terrorism, killing and violence. Iraq therefore
understands more than anyone else the dangers of the
events in its neighborhood. We continue to call for the
increasing suffering to be addressed responsibly, in
order to stop the Syrian bloodshed and establish the
necessary atmosphere to begin a comprehensive political
reform process, agreed upon by the representatives of
the Syrian people, that leads to the achievement of their
legitimate aspirations for democracy and reform while
simultaneously safeguarding the security, integrity and
stability of Syria, and thereby the security, integrity
and stability of the other countries of the region.
Iraq is determined to play an active role as Chair
of the Summit of the League of Arab States. We have
therefore worked tirelessly to find a peaceful solution
to the Syrian crisis by introducing an initiative focused
on establishing two negotiating tracks. The first would
be an internal Syrian dialogue, while the second would
entail an Arab-Syrian dialogue under the auspices of the
League of Arab States to peaceably resolve the crisis.
Along with its Arab brothers and friends in the
framework of the Action Group for Syria, Iraq has
also worked energetically to produce the Geneva
communiqué, which put forward a road map based
on three pillars. The first pillar entails the various
steps needed to implement the Kofi Annan six-point
plan, including the immediate cessation of all forms
of violence. The second pillar concerns principles for
a political transition process that fulfils the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. The third pillar has to
do with providing the necessary support to the efforts
of the United Nations and the Joint United NationsLeague of Arab States Special Envoy to reach the goal
of establishing a comprehensive political process with
Syrian leadership. We continue strongly to believe that
the six-point plan and the Geneva document could lead
to resolving the crisis if the necessary support were
provided to Lakhdar Brahimi’s mission.
Given Iraq’s historic responsibility dictated by the
exceptional circumstances in the Arab region, my country
12

believes that the continuation of foreign interference,
regardless of its origin or focus, in supporting one side
or the other will not lead to resolving the crisis, but will
exacerbate it and thereby worsen the Syrian people’s
humanitarian situation. We therefore feel that stopping
interference in the Syrian issue and clearing the way
for the efforts of Joint Special Representative Brahimi
are the minimum conditions necessary for achieving a
peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis.
Iraq’s position is always to stand by the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and their right to selfdetermination and to themselves decide their political
future. Iraq supports the political process of a peaceful
political transition of power and condemns the acts
of killing, violence, bombardment and violations of
human rights. It also condemns the militarization of
the conflict and calls for an end to foreign interference.
We are also concerned about the consequences of the
Syrian crisis as manifested in the spread of extremism
and terrorism. We support every Arab, regional and
international effort to help achieve a just and honourable
political solution.
Like other countries of the region, Iraq, which is
linked to fraternal Syria by bonds of neighbourliness
and brotherhood, has taken on its burden of Syrian
refugees — in addition to the thousands of Iraqis living
in Syria who have returned to Iraq. That has compelled
the Iraqi Government to deal with two issues, namely,
addressing the situation of returning Iraqis and
providing a safe haven for their brothers, the Syrian
refugees.
There are currently more than 15,000 Syrian
refugees in Iraq. Despite all the difficulties, the Iraqi
Government has decided to establish a relief committee,
chaired by the Iraqi Minister of Immigration and
including the pertinent ministries and the Iraqi Red
Crescent working in cooperation and coordination with
relevant international organizations, in particular the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. The Government has allocated 50 billion
dinars from its emergency reserves to build refugee
camps for Syrian refugees and to provide for their basic
needs.
My Government believes in the importance of every
effort to resolve the issue of refugees in neighbouring
countries, so as to face up to this humanitarian
crisis. However, such efforts should be based on the
circumstances and be governed by the developments

12-47508

S/PV.6826

in the crisis. The most viable and dynamic solution
would be to address the root causes of the crisis from
a perspective that encourages the parties to negotiate
through a framework geared towards a comprehensive
political process that spares the brotherly Syrian people
from the scourge of violence, killing and terrorism and
provides for a bright future of peace and security free
from the spectre of displacement and having to flee to a
neighbouring country.

And it is a necessity with regard to security, given the
risk of destabilization for the entire region. By bringing
Council members together today we wanted to place
each country represented here before its responsibilities.
As speakers have mentioned, we are thousands of
kilometers from towns that have just begun to enter our
public discourse — Darayya, Aleppo, Homs, Dara’a
and Damascus — martyred cities that are mourning
their dead and wounded.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France.

We receive news of suffering and distress on a
daily basis. An unacceptable humanitarian situation
prevails in the Syrian Arab Republic, but it also exists
in neighbouring countries. That is why I wanted them
to be represented here. I saw it personally when I visited
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. Those neighbouring
countries, in addition to Iraq and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, whom I thank for
being here, have come here to provide their direct
testimony. No one will henceforth be able to claim that
they did not know.

There are already 25,000 dead, 250,000 wounded,
more than 250,000 refugees and more than 1 million
Syrians displaced within their own country — including
more than 2 million people directly affected, often
without food, electricity, medicine or water. In the
courageous and magnificent country of Syria, the
situation is increasingly intolerable. I regret to say that
that is essentially because Mr. Bashar Al-Assad wants,
against all odds, to retain power through barbaric
repression and savage fighting. He is indiscriminately
using heavy weapons, helicopter gunships and fighter
jets against his population, even threatening to use his
stockpiles of bacteriological and chemical weapons.
Given that situation, which is an affront to the
human conscience, France’s conviction is that we
need to do our utmost and try everything possible to
put an end to the violence and, from the humanitarian
perspective, bring relief to the civilian population. That
is the point of today’s meeting.
Many are already acting to provide material support
to the refugees, together with the United Nations,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Europe and others. I specifically
commend the efforts of Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson and United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Guterres. For its part, France is working
on the humanitarian front while also working on the
political front by providing support to the opposition.
On the diplomatic front, we are providing support to
Mr. Brahimi and trying to put an end to the stalemate
and divisiveness that to date have impeded international
action under a Security Council mandate.
Bearing witness and responding is what we are
doing — a moral obligation in the face of the raging
violence. It is also a duty of solidarity vis-à-vis the
suffering of Syrians and of the people hosting them.

12-47508

There is emotion in my voice, as in others’, and
there is anger. I know that anger is shared by many
people worldwide who cannot understand why we allow
Mr. Bashar Al-Bassad to murder his people in this way,
or why the Security Council of the United Nations has
to date been unable to ensure neither security nor unity.
What can we do in the short term? The urgent
need is, above all, humanitarian. The divisions in the
Security Council should not prevent us from acting to
provide relief with respect to the humanitarian tragedy
in Syria.
Allow me to turn, for a moment, to the Syrian
authorities represented here to remind them of their
obligations stemming from international law and
international humanitarian law. The use of heavy
artillery against one’s own people constitutes a crime,
as do extrajudicial executions, arbitrary arrests,
forced disappearances, torture and violence against
medical personnel. It would appear that Mr. Al-Assad
is perpetrating them all. Those crimes should not go
unpunished. Many of us believe that the International
Criminal Court should consider this matter so that
those responsible can be tried.
I would also remind the representative of
Damascus here that access for humanitarian workers
to the population must be guaranteed. To date, because
of the growing insecurity as well as restrictions by
the current authorities, humanitarian workers still

13

S/PV.6826

do not have free access to those areas where civilian
populations are in distress. Some of those organizations
have even been forced to reduce their staffing levels.
I therefore call on the representative of Damascus
to comply with the agreement reached on 28 May
with the United Nations to ensure the provision of
humanitarian assistance. Local and international
non-governmental organizations — whom I join the
Council in commending — the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement and United Nations humanitarian
agencies must have free access to all populations.
I also call on the representative of Damascus to
implement the humanitarian pause that the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has for months
called for to enable humanitarian workers to evacuate
and treat the wounded, as well as to guarantee security
for medical workers in order enable them to have
access to all those who have been wounded, rather than
arresting or even killing them.
Earlier this week, I met with an international
organization of Syrian doctors that was clandestinely
and very courageously providing care to people on the
ground. Those doctors have already lost almost 100
of their colleagues, and they report that some 700 of
them have been arrested, with no news of them to this
day. They treat and operate on children, women and
innocent civilians whose blood is flowing because the
authorities have attacked them. And what reason do the
authorities cite when they come to arrest them? They
say they are arresting them because they have blood on
their hands. Of course, it is the blood of the wounded
who these doctors are in fact trying to save.
Given the refugee situation, outside assistance is
being organized, and our meeting today is aimed at
stepping up that mobilization. As many have said today,
the international community must support the host
countries, which are undertaking enormous efforts,
as well as the humanitarian workers, United Nations
agencies, local and international non-governmental
organizations and the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, in their difficult tasks. Clearly, neighbouring
countries alone cannot assume the burden posed by the
presence of Syrian refugees on their territories.
Turkey, in solidarity with the Syrian population,
is dealing with a significant influx of refugees. Jordan
has issued an appeal, together with local United Nations
agencies, to procure international assistance. In the
light of the influx of refugees, the threat exists for a
destabilization in the political and security situation.
14

In Lebanon, as we all know, the needs are enormous
and the seeds of discord are present. Lebanon must be
protected from the risk of a spillover of the Syrian crisis.
In Iraq, as we have heard, the situation is challenging.
Like a number of countries here, France is
mobilizing efforts for the Syrian people and the States
of the region. Beyond our support to non-governmental
organizations, the ICRC and United Nations agencies
such as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, we have deployed a special
surgical group to the Zaatari camp in Jordan. Our
doctors and surgeons are also providing assistance to
victims of the fighting and to refugees fleeing conflict
zones.
However, as every speaker has pointed out,
more financial resources are needed. France initially
earmarked just over €3 million for refugees and
humanitarian assistance in Syria. As the situation has
continued to worsen, I should like to announce that we
have decided to increase our support by €5 million.
We have also succeeded in having the European Union
increase its humanitarian assistance. That will bring
the overall total to €100 million to finance the response
to the Syrian crisis. France will of course assume its
share of that, namely, over €20 million.
The refugee situation is challenging for neighbouring
countries. It is serious. However, it should not lead us
to overlook the dramatic plight of many Syrians in their
own country. I am referring in particular to numbers
that speakers have already cited: the more than 1 million
people — some say nearly 2 million — who have been
displaced, or directly affected, and have found refuge
in very precarious and often unbearable conditions in
areas freed by the Free Syrian Army. Turkey has raised
the possibility of establishing buffer zones for the
displaced persons — an that idea needs to be studied.
Concerning displaced people, France has decided
to step up its support to the local solidarity networks
operating on the ground and laying the groundwork
for the Syria of tomorrow. We see that the courageous
citizens of a growing number of villages, cities and
regions have freed themselves from the yoke of the
Al-Assad regime and have begun to organize. The
needs in such liberated zones are significant and
include food, trash disposal and access to education
and care. We believe that the international community,
as represented here, is duty-bound to come to their
assistance. This week, French President François
Hollande announced our decision to provide direct
12-47508

S/PV.6826

assistance to the revolutionary committees that are
organizing the liberated areas and to establish specific
aid for these populations.

peaceful and democratic country — the Syria for which
a majority of Syrians are so bravely fighting today. We
must rise to the level of those fighters’ courage.

Of course, we cannot be content with a purely
humanitarian approach. For, as many speakers have
underscored, the humanitarian and political issues
are related, even if we indeed need a specifically
humanitarian effort.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

On the political front, a transition needs to be quickly
undertaken. To reach that goal, as the Council knows,
France encourages the opposition to form a transitional
Government to serve as Syria’s legitimate representative.
Such a Government — which is obviously not up to us
to appoint it — should be broadly representative and
guarantee the rights of all communities. We have also
said that we would recognize that Government once it
is formed.
I would like to say to those who have especially close
relations with the Al-Assad regime that, as everyone
knows, the regime will fall. However, the longer that
the conflict is allowed to fester, the longer the stalemate
will persist and the longer the transition will take; and,
in the end, the greater will be the risk of destabilization
for the entire region owing to a conflict that would no
longer be local, but regional and even international in
character.
To those who support the regime I say that if they
continue to do so, they will doubtless lose in every
respect. Mr. Al-Assad will fall. When that happens,
in the eyes of Syrians, the Arab world and all global
opinion, they will be guilty of being accessories to a
longstanding crime. They should instead do everything
possible to respond to the humanitarian tragedy, put an
end to the violence and join us in working towards a
timely political transition.
In its presidency of the Council, as I said earlier,
France sought this ministerial level meeting to help solve
the humanitarian issues, to urge all parties to live up to
their responsibilities and to send a message of support
and solidarity to the suffering Syrian people from its
friends. I hope that that message will be heard. We
know that the Council is divided. Nevertheless, there is
no other path than abiding by international law. France
remains true to its commitment to that path and asserts
the necessity of the United Nations and the Security
Council taking acting towards a settlement of the Syrian
crisis. That is necessary now and it will be necessary
when in the future Syria will have to be rebuilt as a free,

12-47508

Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me, at the outset, Mr. President, to express to
you and to your friendly country our sincere and deep
appreciation for France’s principled positions, its bold
initiatives and its prominent role as a permanent member
of the Security Council. The success of the French
presidency of the Council this month, culminating in
today’s ministerial meeting, is eloquent testimony to
France’s engagement and to the central role it plays in
the United Nations.
(spoke in Arabic)
It is our hope that this meeting will result in
a robust, unified commitment on the part of the
international community to extend a helping hand to
the Syrian people and to put an end to the spiral of
violence that it is living through. We also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson and Mr. António Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
their comprehensive briefings.
About 17 months ago, large numbers of Syrian
people from all sectors came out to peacefully voice
their legitimate demands for democracy and human
rights. They were met with oppression, violence and
the use of excessive force. Because of the failure of
the international community, especially the Security
Council, to deal resolutely and decisively with the
deteriorating situation in Syria, recent months have
seen the crisis develop into an armed conflict — a
conflict characterized by the use of heavy weapons,
tanks and warplanes against populated areas and by
the proliferation of kidnappings, arbitrary detentions,
extrajudicial executions and serious violations of
human rights and international law.
As the representative of the Group of Arab States
in the Security Council, the Kingdom of Morocco
has spared no effort, in coordination with other
Arab countries, to push for an end to the violence
and for finding a political solution that would stop
the bloodletting of the Syrian people, spare them the
scourges of war and ensure them the exercise of all
their rights under a democratic regime in which all
segments of Syrian society participate. To act on that
commitment, the Kingdom of Morocco contributed to
15

S/PV.6826

the Arab League observer mission and to the United
Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic. We did so in the hope, at a minimum, of
helping to achieve an end to the violence and finding
a political solution to the Syrian crisis. Morocco has
worked effectively in support of resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly.
Faced with the unlikelihood of a political settlement,
the widening scope of the violence now encompassing
most villages and towns in Syria and the grave threats
to Syrian civilians and to peace and security in the
region, the Kingdom of Morocco once again expresses
its profound concern over those serious developments
and reiterates its denunciation of the grave violations of
rights, especially the rights of women and children. We
call on the international community, led by the Security
Council, to adopt courageous decisions allowing for
a prompt intervention to end the violence, protect
civilians, stop the human rights violations and seek
a peaceful transfer of power. In coordination with its
brother Arab States and its fellow Council members,
the Kingdom of Morocco will continue to pursue those
objectives.
We commend the tireless efforts of Mr. Kofi Annan
towards an abatement of the crisis. We also congratulate
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi on his appointment as Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States. We wish him success in his mission in the
service of the interests of our brother Syrian people and
in restoring stability to the region.
It is with great sadness and regret that we follow
the bitter humanitarian situation our brothers and
sisters in Syria are living through, manifesting itself
especially in the acute shortage of food, potable
water, housing, sanitation, sewage treatment and
other necessities of life. According to United Nations
data, more than 3 million people have been harmed
by the conflict, including the 2.5 million who are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance and the more
than 1 million internally displaced persons who face
conditions of abject poverty. Moreover, United Nations
reports have documented that children have been
deliberately subjected to serious violations such as
arbitrary detention, abuse, torture, mutilation, murder
and the use of them as human shields. Women have also
been subjected to various kinds of violations, including
sexual and physical assault and arbitrary detention.

16

Despite the support provided by the United Nations,
its humanitarian organizations and non-governmental
organizations, the humanitarian assistance shortage
remains acute because of the lack of financial resources
and, in many regions, because of the difficulty in
reaching those in need due to the fighting. It is
incumbent upon all parties to honour the requirements
of international humanitarian law as it applies to
the protection of civilians — especially women and
children — and to human rights.
The High Commissioner for Refugees informed
us today that more than 200,000 Syrian refugees have
been registered in four neighbouring States. That is in
addition to scores of thousands who are unregistered.
The escalating violence in Syria and the systematic and
ongoing use of heavy weapons and aircraft push that
number up daily. On behalf of the Kingdom of Morocco,
I would like to take this opportunity to express to the
fraternal and friendly States of Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon
and Iraq our great appreciation for standing by the
Syrian people during this difficult and crucial period
and for generously hosting Syrian refugees in spite of
the fragile economic situation they are experiencing.
The international community is being called upon
today to take a strong position that provides for several
elements.
The first is to ensure secure access on the ground
for international relief organizations in order to provide
assistance to suffering civilians, including necessary
food and medical support. Prohibiting such access is a
crime and its perpetrators must be punished.
The second is to find a way to protect internally
displaced persons and provide them with humanitarian
assistance.
The third is to provide adequate logistical and
material support to assist States hosting Syrian refugees.

The fourth is to urgently carry out an independent
investigation into the brutal massacres and violations
that have been continuously perpetrated against
civilians. The most recent of those was the Darayya
massacre, which raised the ire and condemnation of the
international community.
The final element entails reporting the results
of that an investigation so that the international

12-47508

S/PV.6826

community can take the necessary measures against
the perpetrators.
In view of the bonds of brotherhood and the
duty of human solidarity, the Kingdom of Morocco,
in accordance with the express instructions of His
Majesty King Mohammed VI and in solidarity with
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, has established
a multipurpose field hospital in the Zaatari refugee
camp, including the necessary logistical equipment
to treat thousands of refugees. Through the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), Morocco has also supplied emergency
food and medical assistance to refugees on Jordanian
territory. The Kingdom of Morocco remains in
contact with Syrian relief organizations, neighbouring
countries and UNHCR and will continue to increase its
contribution to the relief efforts.
Finally, as members of the Security Council it
is our duty to seek to overcome existing divisions in
order to achieve a comprehensive political solution to
this prolonged crisis, while taking into account the
main interests of the Syrian people in line with their
aspirations to a better future and a guaranteed system
of rotating power in which all segments of Syrian
society may participate.
Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for their briefings.
I am grateful to our colleagues from Turkey, Jordan,
Lebanon and Iraq for their valuable insights. I thank
you, Mr. President and the Government of France
for initiating this meeting, which I believe should
stir the conscience of the whole world. The need for
humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people is urgent
and it is growing. Over 200 people are currently dying
every day. More than 1 in 10 Syrians is now in need
of United Nations assistance. Close to 230,000 people
have fled the country and, as we have heard, many
more are waiting at its borders.
It is right that the Security Council show leadership
in addressing the consequences of the conflict. But we
cannot forget that we have so far failed in the Council in
our responsibility to address the causes of the conflict.
It is a welcome fact that, months ago, we adopted
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). But we have
failed, on three occasions, to adopt a resolution that
throws the full weight of the Council behind a plan to
end the violence. We have not turned the desire for peace

12-47508

into a binding obligation to bring it about. We are now
seeing the consequences of that failure. When calling
for a resolution we warned that the Syrian Government
was bent on violence and was not committed to a
political process. We have seen whole cities laid waste
and the cold-blooded slaughter of civilians. We warned
of the risk of civil war in Syria and the creation of
refugees on a vast scale. In August alone, 50,000
new refugees have sought sanctuary in neighbouring
countries. We warned of the threat to international
peace and security and the risk of extremism. there is
now a danger of instability spreading to Lebanon and
other neighbouring countries.
We condemn any attempt to use Syrian territory
as a base for terrorist attacks in neighbouring
countries and we deplore the sectarian violence that
has happened in Lebanon. Lebanon has paid a price in
blood higher than any other country, due to decades of
coercion by the Al-Assad family. It must be allowed to
pursue an independent, sovereign future free from the
assassinations and interference of the past. We support
the efforts of the Government of Prime Minister Mikati
to maintain Lebanon’s peace and stability. We hope
that other United Nations Members will increase their
support to the Lebanese Army, as we have done in the
United Kingdom.
Like many colleagues here have already mentioned,
I have seen the plight of Syrian refugees at first-hand.
In Jordan with my colleague the Foreign Minister of
Jordan, a few weeks ago I met innocent people who had
played no part in the conflict, but whose families and
livelihoods were being torn apart. I spoke to women
refugees whose relatives had been killed and their
homes destroyed, who had witnessed atrocities and
who had walked for weeks to escape from the country. I
saw the bewilderment and fear of children, who should
be safely at home preparing for the new school year but
who are, instead, refugees. And I saw the sheer scale of
the effort to provide safe shelter, sanitation, warm food
and medical attention to those desperate people.
I applaud the Governments and the people of
Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq for their generosity,
in particular the kindness of many families who have
taken refugees into their homes. I also pay tribute to all
of the United Nations agencies for their work.
The Security Council’s responsibility to act now
is even greater than before. We will have to return
to those fundamental responsibilities in the coming

17

S/PV.6826

weeks. Today I believe that we should take a stand on
five issues.
First, we should call upon all countries to contribute
funds to the United Nations relief effort and we should
set a strong example of generosity ourselves. The
United Kingdom is the second largest bilateral donor of
international aid for the Syrian people, having already
committed $41 million. Today we are announcing
a further $4.5 million, to bring the total level of our
humanitarian assistance to $46 million. That will
include £2 million for life-saving medical aid for the
worst affected areas in Syria and £1 million to provide
clinical care and counselling to Syrian refugees in
Jordan, in particular for women who have suffered the
horrors of sexual violence.
At the General Assembly next month, the United
Kingdom will set out our plans to use the presidency
of the Group of Eight next year to help tackle sexual
violence in conflict.
In June, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) appealed for
$193 million to respond to the crisis. Three months later
that appeal for funding has not been met adequately,
while the need for it has grown. That should be a
matter of shame. The conflict has worsened. If the
bombardment of cities such as Aleppo continues, we
could see a dramatic increase in the number of refugees.
I call on all nations to make the contributions
needed to save innocent lives in Syria and to support the
neighbours of Syria. I urge citizens around the world to
ask their Governments to do what they can do to help.
To that end, the United Kingdom proposes a meeting of
development ministers with United Nations agencies to
encourage increased donations. We urge all members
of the Security Council to call on all parties in Syria
to allow the United Nations and humanitarian agencies
full access to areas of need inside Syria. We condemn
the disturbing reports that medical stocks, humanitarian
personnel and aid centres in Syria are being deliberately
targeted. We hope the Syrian Government will hear a
clear message from the Security Council today that it
must meet its humanitarian obligations.
Secondly, the Council should express its
commitment to supporting justice and accountability
for the Syrian people. The Human Rights Council’s
Commission of Inquiry has reported human rights
violations on an appalling scale by the Syrian
Government and its shabiha militia, as well as abuses

18

by some armed groups. The Government of the United
Kingdom strongly believes that the Commission’s
mandate should be extended so it can continue its vital
work, and that the Security Council must be ready to act
on its findings. We also support the Swiss Government’s
initiative to build momentum and support for a referral
of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court, and urge others to join those efforts. Those
responsible for crimes in Syria should be left in no
doubt that they will be held accountable.
Thirdly, we must face up to the need to prepare
support for Syria as it emerges from conflict. The
international community must plan now if we are to
ensure rapid support for a future Syrian Government.
This is necessary in order to minimize the risks to
regional and international security, to protect civilians
inside Syria and to lay the foundations for longer-term
stability. A new Syrian Government will face many
challenges, from reforming the security and justice
sectors and ensuring public safety to restoring health
and education services. That cannot be left to chance.
The United Kingdom will continue to work closely
with the Syrian political opposition, encouraging them
to develop their vision for a stable, democratic Syria
where all communities are respected and secure.
Fourthly, the people of Syria live in the shadow
of the threat of the Syrian regime’s stock of chemical
and biological weapons. All Security Council members
should demand that Syria adhere to its obligations to
secure and account for those stocks, and call on the
Secretary-General to ensure that the investigation
mechanism into allegations of the use of chemical and
biological weapons can be readily deployed.
Fifthly, the best way forward in Syria remains a
Syrian-led political transition, on the basis of the plan
set out by Kofi Annan and endorsed by the Geneva
Action Group, including members of the Security
Council. I thank Kofi Annan for all his tireless work.
I welcome the new Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the Arab League to his role and offer him
the full support of the United Kingdom as he takes this
work forward.
The implementation of a transition plan should now
be required by the Security Council through the adoption
of a resolution, with clear consequences for a failure to
implement the terms of previous resolutions. If it is not,
the scene is set for months of greater bloodshed, greater
suffering and greater danger to international peace and
security. Since the Council has not yet decided to do
12-47508

S/PV.6826

everything it can to end the violence, today we must
at least do what we can to mitigate its effects. That
is our focus today; but our primary aim must be the
determined and united effort to end the conflict that
this crisis demands and that the people of Syria deserve.
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of Colombia, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on France’s presidency
of the Security Council this month, as well as on your
initiative in convening this important meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Syria and in inviting Syria’s
neighbours to participate.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees António Guterres for their briefings and
clear explanations of the situation of refugees in Syria.
I would also like to thank the Ministers from Syria’s
neighbours Lebanon, Iraq, Turkey and Jordan for their
presence here and for their support to Syrian citizens
in need of protection. Let me say that their first-hand
testimony is extremely worrying.
Syria’s humanitarian situation cannot be settled
without a political solution. For long and painful months
the international community has witnessed a deepening
crisis and worsening humanitarian situation in Syria.
Despite the efforts of the international community, it
has been impossible to end the conflict. Unfortunately,
we in the Security Council have been unable to do
anything to halt the crisis. We have failed.
The impact of the conflict on the civilian
population is enormous. According to reports, more
than 2.5 million people have been affected, the majority
of them internal displaced persons, as well as almost
250,000 registered as refugees in Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey and Iraq. Beyond the thousands of displaced
people and refugees, the widespread violence also
hurts the families who have lost their loved ones. The
destruction done by the bullets and attacks to homes
and the national infrastructure, as well as to economic
activity, will affect Syria’s recovery in both the short
and long term. Unfortunately, what has been destroyed
in just a few months will take years to restore.
Colombia joins the international community in
calling on all the parties to respect their obligations as
laid down in international humanitarian law. While the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
resides with the Syrian authorities, all the parties
involved must abide by international humanitarian law,

12-47508

which sets out clear rules for that protection. We deplore
the fact that neither party has accepted the proposals
for a peaceful solution and that both have rejected a
ceasefire and a path leading to political dialogue. We
reaffirm our call for an end to all attacks and for efforts
to seek a political solution that takes into account the
legitimate aspirations of all sectors of Syrian society.
We hope that the Syrian people can find an effective
alternative that will allow negotiations to start with
the help of the international community. In the process
of reaching a political solution, we must focus on the
civilian population and on the young people and women
and men who are the victims of this war.
We acknowledge once again the mediation efforts
of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan. We hope that
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, recently appointed as Joint
Special Envoy, will be able to bring the parties together
so that they can take the path of dialogue. However,
we must bear in mind that for Mr. Brahimi’s mandate
to succeed it is essential that the parties be genuinely
committed and that we can guarantee the unified and
coherent support of the international community,
particularly the Security Council. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s decision to maintain an efficient
and flexible United Nations presence in Syria, designed
to support the Organization’s efforts and any progress
that may be achieved between the parties towards a
negotiated political settlement.
In a region crucial to international peace and
security, we must work together to prevent any
escalation of the conflict from exacerbating existing
tensions in an already complex environment. Resorting
to violence is not the right way to solve the Syrian crisis.
We reiterate that is up to the Syrians to take the lead in
the peace and reconciliation process. The international
community should promote a dialogue conducive to a
political solution in a coordinated and unified manner.
In the short term, the urgent task is to ease
the humanitarian crisis. We must strictly enforce
international humanitarian law and respect for the
human rights of the Syrian people. We welcome the
steps taken by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in seeking ways to speedily
expand relief efforts and reduce the suffering of civilians
caught in the crossfire. Attention should be given to
the most pressing needs of those affected, particularly
the most vulnerable, who are in urgent need of basic
housing, food, health, water and sanitation.

19

S/PV.6826

As we have heard, the worsening of the crisis, and
particularly of the humanitarian situation, is also having
a negative effect on those neighbouring countries
that have made huge efforts to meet the needs of the
thousands of Syrians who have sought refuge in their
territories. Those countries, as well as the humanitarian
agencies, need more international cooperation to ensure
that they are able to assist the growing number of
refugees.

sophisticated weapons, typical of a conventional war
and an internal armed conflict with serious international
implications, the Joint Special Envoy decided to
announce his resignation. My country, which regretted
that resignation, has nevertheless welcomed the quick
appointment of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as Joint Special
Envoy. I would like to reaffirm here our full support
for Mr. Brahimi and to wish him every success as he
carries out his mandate.

Colombia reaffirms its commitment to promoting a
political solution to the Syrian crisis and believes that
the six-point plan proposed in resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012) represents a consensus on the part
of the international community as to how to address
the situation. Its implementation would help to lay
the foundations for a political solution. To that end,
we must persist in bringing together the positions of
the various players involved in order to consolidate a
common strategy under Syrian leadership that solves
the most pressing problems with long-term proposals
and commitments.

Syria has now entered what one would call a civil
war in which the people pay a heavy price. The clashes
taking place in the urban areas, the number of dead,
totalling in the dozens per day and already surpassing
25,000, and the pointless destruction of property have
increased the number of displaced persons within the
country as well as the number of refugees seeking
safe haven in neighbouring countries. Turkey, Jordan
and Lebanon in particular are accommodating a huge
number of refugees, currently estimated to exceed
250,000, including women and children who have
fled massacres, summary executions and all manner
of abductions and violations of human rights. That
situation is a genuine humanitarian disaster, both in
Syria and in the host countries. From all standpoints,
the situation is worsening as the fighting intensifies
and the martyrdom of the Syrian people is heightened.

Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
let me commend the French Government for the
initiative to organize this meeting, which is focused
on the humanitarian situation in Syria and its serious
repercussions for neighbouring countries. I would also
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Elliason
and United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
António Guterres for their very detailed briefings on the
subject. I also commend the presence of the Ministers
from Syria’s neighbouring countries of Turkey, Jordan,
Lebanon and Iraq, as well as the other heads of
delegations attending this meeting.
The Syrian crisis, which has already lasted for
more than 18 months, is now in a complete stalemate
with regard to a peaceful settlement. The inability of
the Security Council so far to speak with one voice to
address this crisis is deeply regrettable. Unfortunately,
the various initiatives undertaken outside the Security
Council have not succeeded in bringing about a positive
solution to the conflict, undoubtedly they have often
been conflicting. Moreover, the six-point plan of the
Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States on Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan, was
seen as the best way to end the crisis, particularly in
that it had been agreed to by the parties involved.
Given the ongoing violations of that plan and the
surge in fighting with the use of heavy artillery and

20

In that regard, Togo would like to thank the
host countries for the untold sacrifice that they are
undertaking to protect and come to the assistance of the
thousands of refugees arriving in their countries in dire
need, some of them sick or wounded. Hosting refugees
is always a heavy burden, both for the host State and
for the humanitarian organizations that work to provide
assistance. The host countries cannot bear that heavy
burden alone, and the full cost cannot be assessed
without factoring in the insecurity that it leads to.
My country therefore calls upon the entire
international community to continue to remain engaged
with regard to the tragedy currently taking place in
Syria by providing increased material and financial
assistance to meet the needs of Syrian refugees and
displaced persons. I would like to take the opportunity
afforded by this meeting to commend the efforts
undertaken to date by States, United Nations system
entities and humanitarian agencies, as well as their
staff, who, within Syria and in the refugee camps,
are working to provide the relief and assistance to the
populations that their status requires.

12-47508

S/PV.6826

Beyond the words of support and the efforts
undertaken on the ground to help refugees and displaced
persons, we need to define strategies to reorganize and
support humanitarian action. That is the goal of this
meeting, since all of the other initiatives to date with
regard to a peaceful settlement of the conflict have
failed.
From the viewpoint of my country, the strategies
to be established need to include the adoption of
national or regional measures to provide relief to
displaced Syrians, both within the country and
outside as refugees. At the same time, we need to
firmly hold parties on all sides accountable for their
responsibilities in terms of complying with the relevant
international legal instruments of humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Proven violations
of that responsibility to protect, which is incumbent
upon all parties, must be considered within the context
of the fight against impunity and should lead to holding
those responsible accountable for their actions before
national or international courts.
The Security Council must send a strong and
unequivocal message to all parties in that regard, for
there can be no doubt that the forces who are fighting
in Syria are continuing to commit serious violations of
international law, human rights law and international
humanitarian law. The report issued in February
(A/HRC/19/69) by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
mandated by the Human Rights Council, indicates
that those violations are committed both by the
governmental forces and by the anti-Government armed
groups. Several months after the publication of the
report, and following months of violations and acts that
shock the conscious of humankind, we must conclude
that such acts have worsened owing to the increasing
intensity of the fighting and the use of military aircraft,
the use of terrorist attacks and the perpetration of
widespread massacres, with men, women and children
indiscriminately being the victims.
That litany of acts, which constitute violations
of human rights, includes impediments to providing
humanitarian assistance. My country calls on all parties
to avoid such acts and commit to opening humanitarian
passageways so that assistance can be brought to the
populations that direly need it. Humanitarian workers
must also be protected to be able to carry out that
dangerous mission. In that regard, we reaffirm that the
provision of humanitarian assistance must take place

12-47508

within the context of respect for the sovereignty of
Syria itself and respect for the neighbouring countries
that are absorbing the continuous influx of refugees.
The Syrian conflict cannot avoid being subject to the
conventional rules of conflict resolution. Its settlement
will necessarily entail dialogue, regardless of whether
one party is a winner or a loser. Syria will need all of its
daughters and sons to rebuild. Syrians will have to live
with the outcome of the tragedy that they are currently
experiencing; but dialogue and reconciliation cannot be
put off for much longer. That dialogue needs to begin
now, and to do that the fighting must stop.
The message that the Security Council has sent
since the very beginning of the crisis, although it has
not been successful in getting it implemented on the
ground, is still relevant. The fighting needs to stop to
provide an opportunity for diplomacy to convince all
of Syria’s community, political, ethnic and religious
components to engage in dialogue in order to bring
about a restoration of peace in their country.
This notion of dialogue was supported by the
independent international commission of inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, which continues to believe
that the only possible way to put an end to the violence
is an inclusive dialogue that brings about a negotiated
settlement to effectively ensure respect for human
rights for the entire population of the country.
The United Nations must remain engaged in
bringing about a political settlement to the crisis, and
Mr. Brahimi will have the challenging responsibility of
meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
The tireless support of the international community,
and specifically of the Council, is necessary to ensure
that his mission is successful. We all agree that we
need to provide relief to the refugees, but we are also
all aware that the solution to this crisis is a political
one. Therefore, we all know what remains to be done to
achieve a lasting solution.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Thank you,
Foreign Minister Fabius, for convening this important
meeting.
We gather at a sombre hour, less than a week after
some of the bloodiest days since the Syrian regime
began its crackdown almost 18 months ago. The United
States is outraged by the summary executions and
shelling that killed hundreds of Syrians in Darayya late
last week. The reports of aerial attacks on hospitals,
bakeries and breadlines in Aleppo recall some of the
21

S/PV.6826

worst atrocities of prior conflicts. The international
community has long pledged to never again allow such
crimes. Yet, for a year and a half, the Syrian regime
has waged a vicious, unrelenting campaign of terror
and bloodshed against its own suffering people. Bashar
Al-Assad and those who still stand by him are now
responsible for the deaths of more than 20,000 Syrians
and the wounding of tens of thousands more. They have
forced hundreds of thousands of civilians to flee for
their lives.
Despite the appalling environment on the ground
and the clear obstruction by the Syrian Government,
we are working with others to counter the cruelty of
Bashar Al-Assad and his clique. The United Nations,
international organizations, the United States, many
countries around the world and Syrian and other
humanitarian organizations are rushing vital aid to the
hundreds of thousands of civilians in urgent need. The
United Nations reports that up to 2.5 million Syrians
now need assistance. We commend the humanitarian
workers, who are risking their lives to save others, and
we grieve for those who have made the ultimate sacrifice.
All parties, especially the Syrian Government, must
allow safe, full and unfettered access for humanitarian
workers so they can save lives that today hang in the
balance.
The United States strongly supports the full and
immediate implementation of the Syria humanitarian
response plan, which was agreed by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Government of Syria. Only half of the $180 million
needed to address prior humanitarian needs in Syria
has been provided. The revised United Nations Syria
regional response plan, which assists neighbouring
countries hosting refugees, is underfunded as well.
My Government is pursuing every avenue to provide
humanitarian relief to those affected by the violence in
Syria. This year, the United States has already provided
nearly $82 million to the United Nations and other relief
agencies for the Syrian humanitarian crisis. Our aid has
fed the hungry and bound up the wounds of as many
of Al-Assad’s victims as we can reach. We are helping
protect internally displaced people and refugees,
working to save children from malnutrition and disease
and helping to ensure adequate water, sanitation and
hygiene. Our assistance is also enabling humanitarian
coordination and logistics support to relief agencies.
We are deeply grateful to fellow Member States
that also have made important donations. We urge all
22

Members to increase their contributions to meet the
shortfalls and to coordinate closely with the United
Nations to avoid creating parallel humanitarian response
systems. We appreciate especially the generosity of
Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and other countries that
have opened their borders to civilians fleeing violence
and persecution. We stand ready to continue to provide
support as needed. We call on all concerned to facilitate
safe passage for those seeking to flee. The United States
is deeply troubled by the spillover of Syria’s violence
into neighbouring countries, especially Lebanon,
where the Lebanese Government and security forces
are working to manage outbreaks of violence.
But this is not, at its root, a humanitarian crisis. It is
a political crisis caused by the cruelty and callousness
of the Al-Assad regime. No amount of humanitarian
assistance will end the bloodshed and suffering. That
day will come only once Al-Assad has departed and
a peaceful, Syrian-led transition to democracy has
begun. This remains our goal and should be the goal of
all nations of goodwill. We welcome the appointment
of Joint Special Envoy Brahimi and fully support his
efforts to end the violence and pave the way for a
political transition.
In parallel, the United States and our partners will
continue to work with the Syrian opposition and to
engage all elements of society to help the Syrian people
achieve a Government that represents all of its citizens,
promotes their human rights, respects the rule of law
and responds to its people’s aspirations. We are proud to
help train civil society activists and to provide Syrians
with equipment that lets them communicate securely
with one another, reach out to the outside world and
document the regime’s atrocities. We encourage the
opposition’s efforts to unite the population behind a
common transition plan that offers a viable and safe
future for all Syrians. We will continue to expand and
intensify those efforts, and we will not rest until the
Syrian people are free to realize their aspirations to
govern themselves and live without fear.
Even as the conflict rages, we condemn in the
strongest terms unlawful killings by any side. We
cannot and will not turn away from atrocities and
systematic violations of international law. Those
responsible for massacres of civilians will be held
accountable. We welcome pledges by Free Syrian
Army leaders that forbid their soldiers from harming
civilians, mistreating prisoners or killing captured
combatants. We will watch to see that those promises

12-47508

S/PV.6826

are implemented. We also reiterate our demand that the
Syrian Government refrain from using or transferring
any chemical or biological weapons. It is incumbent
upon the Syrian Government to ensure the safety and
security of all such weapons and stockpiles.
We have heard volumes today about the suffering of
the innocent and the cruelty of the guilty. My country
was founded on the belief that Governments derive
their just powers from the consent of the governed. The
Al-Assad regime has manifestly lost whatever consent,
if any, it ever had. The question is not whether it will
fall; the question is when, and at what price.
The primary responsibility for ending the carnage
rests with Al-Assad and the clique around him. But the
rest of the international community, especially our fellow
Council members, has responsibilities of their own.
Unfortunately, a few members of the Council continue
to prevent this body from responding effectively. That
is reprehensible. Yet even at this tragically late hour,
things do not have to remain as they are. The Syrian
people fully understand which countries have rallied
to their legitimate cause and which countries have
protected a doomed and desperate regime. The United
States will remain committed to pursuing a wiser
course, one that limits the harm to regional security,
staves off the risk of full-scale civil strife and produces
a new, responsible Syrian Government that will defend
and respect all of its citizens. Indeed, one day not far
away, Al-Assad will lose his bloody grip on the Syrian
people. Then the Council will have to step up to help
the Syrian people heal the wounds of war and rebuild
their battered country. When that day comes, the Syrian
people — and the world — will remember who was on
the wrong side of history and who was on the side of the
Syrian people.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to begin
by thanking the French presidency for convening this
important meeting under the agenda item “The situation
in the Middle East”, to discuss the humanitarian
consequences of the Syrian crisis. We are also grateful
to the Deputy Secretary-General and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for their briefings.
I would also like to welcome the participation of the
various Ministers at the Council’s meeting today.
Azerbaijan remains deeply concerned about
the escalation of violence and the worsening socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in Syria. Over the
period from the beginning of the crisis to now, sporadic
incidents have evolved into more brutal clashes with
12-47508

increased organizational and military capabilities,
including the use of excessive force and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians. As a result, thousands have lost
their lives in the spiral of violence, and the number
of civilians killed grows daily. It is important that
all human rights violations and abuses be thoroughly
investigated and that perpetrators be held accountable
for their crimes. We once again reiterate our appeal to all
parties to cease all acts of violence immediately and to
implement fully their commitments under international
law and relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
As the number of displaced people within Syria
and of refugees fleeing to neighbouring countries
grows, and as the security and humanitarian situation
rapidly deteriorates, the threat of the destabilization
of the whole region is particularly alarming. We
commend the Governments of Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon
and Turkey — the countries affected by repercussions
of the crisis — for the relief and protection that they are
providing to Syrian refugees.
The concerns of, and appeals by, neighbouring
countries about the impact of the continuation and
further escalation of the crisis should be taken
seriously. Those countries must be given appropriate
assistance and support to address the political, security
and humanitarian challenges that they are facing. In
that context, it is of paramount importance that all
appropriate practical measures be taken to ensure
that the crisis in Syria not be used as a pretext for
organizing, instigating, facilitating or encouraging
terrorist and separatist activity against other States, in
particular those surrounding Syria. At the same time,
careful consideration should be given to reports on the
spillover effects of the Syrian crisis on other regions.
About 2.5 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance as a result of the conflict in
Syria. We appreciate the efforts undertaken so far by
international humanitarian organizations and relief
agencies on the ground to assist people affected by the
conflict. The scale of the humanitarian crisis requires
opening greater humanitarian access and widening the
scope of organizations with which the United Nations
and others can interact to deliver relief to those in
need, in accordance with humanitarian principles and
international law. A more prompt and sizable response
to the United Nations humanitarian appeal for Syria
is critical. It is an absolute necessity to support those
requiring assistance inside Syria and in neighbouring
countries.

23

S/PV.6826

Together with the Geneva communiqué of the Action
Group, the relevant resolutions constitute a solid basis
guiding efforts towards a political settlement, involving
an inclusive and Syrian-led political process whose aim
is to address the legitimate aspirations and concerns
of the Syrian people. It is important that obligations
with respect to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Syria and all other States in
the region be fully observed and respected.
The important work that Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan undertook must continue. We welcome newly
appointed Joint Special Envoy Lakhdar Brahimi and we
wish him every success in fulfilling the very important
and crucial task of facilitating a peaceful solution. The
full cooperation of all sides in Syria with the Special
Representative and the international community’s
support for him are necessary to achieve a long-awaited
breakthrough in ending the violence and bringing
peace and stability to Syria and the entire region. It is
clear that all national stakeholders should demonstrate
determination to solve the crisis by peaceful means
rather than militarily.
Against that background, it is essential that the
Security Council speak with one voice, to ensure
that the parties comply with their commitments and
cooperate with the Joint Special Envoy responsibly and
in good faith. Maintaining the United Nations presence
on the ground is another prerequisite for supporting
the Secretary-General’s good offices, as well as for
sustaining international oversight and securing the flow
of independent and impartial on-site information. We
hope that collective efforts will finally yield results in
bringing about a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis
and in putting an end to the human suffering.
Lastly, I should like to take the opportunity afforded
by the discussion on this agenda item to express our
profound concern about the Middle East peace process,
which has been at a standstill with no substantive
progress towards resuming direct talks between the
parties. It is obvious that a solution to that problem
is essential to achieving durable peace, stability and
security in the entire region, and that respect for
international law should be an absolute priority to that
end. In assuming its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security Council
must react adequately in order to put an end to illegal
practices and policies and ensure that international law,
human rights and fundamental freedoms are observed
and respected.

24

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome France’s initiative in convening
today’s meeting. We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for the assessments he provided. Mr. Guterres
also shared critical information with us. We have paid
particular attention to the statements made by the
Ministers representing Syria’s neighbouring countries.
The trends in the developing humanitarian situation
in Syria cannot but arouse deep concern. There is
an increase in the number of civilian victims and an
increase in refugees, who now number more than
200,000. The number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) has surpassed 1 million, while 2.5 million
Syrians require assistance. The situation is even more
dramatic given that there are more than 1.5 million
refugees from other countries in Syria. The majority of
the Syrian population has experienced the consequences
of the chaos.
Both belligerent parties bear responsibility for the
plight of common citizens. We call upon the Syrian
leadership and leaders of the opposition, including the
armed opposition, to prevent a further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation.
We note the efforts of the Government of Syria
aimed at providing assistance to those suffering.
It is important that a plan has been agreed upon
for a humanitarian response. In accordance
with it, international humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations working with local
authorities and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent are
carrying out humanitarian activities in Syria. The bulk
of humanitarian assistance today is going to the refugee
camps in Syria’s neighbouring countries, and they truly
need that assistance. However, the population living
within Syrian territory clearly lacks access to the
humanitarian assistance that is being provided through
various channels. There is an urgent need to earmark
additional resources to assist all affected Syrians,
including IDPs.
Russia is actively providing Syria with
humanitarian assistance, both bilaterally and through
international organizations. We have provided targeted
donor contributions in the millions of dollars to the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the World
Food Programme and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), and direct humanitarian
assistance has also been delivered.

12-47508

S/PV.6826

We welcome the activities of the international
entities, above all OCHA, in providing international
humanitarian assistance to suffering Syrians.
Humanitarian organizations and agencies must have
access to the sites in neighbouring countries where
there are Syrian refugees, in order to properly assess
the situation and provide appropriate assistance. We
underscore the importance of implementing the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
regional plan to assist refugees.
The humanitarian situation in Syria has been
negatively impacted by unilateral economic sanctions
and restrictions imposed by individual countries and
regional associations. We fundamentally oppose such
practices. The sanctions imposed in circumvention of
the Security Council have nothing in common with
genuine efforts to assist in settling the Syrian crisis.
They simply complicate the life of common citizens
and deny them the opportunity to meet their basic needs
and fully enjoy basic human rights. That is not only our
conclusion, but also the conclusion of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. We call upon the nations that have imposed
sanctions against Syria to immediately lift them.
We cannot accept the efforts of individual States
to use pseudo-humanitarian arguments to justify their
financial, material, technical or logistical support to
illegal armed groups. When implementing humanitarian
activities, it is critical to continue to fully comply with
the principles of neutrality and impartiality. Allow me
to put this directly: not all of the ideas voiced here are
in keeping with those criteria. In general, humanitarian
assistance must be carried out strictly within the
framework of international law.
It is quite clear that the primary cause of the plight of
the Syrian people is the ongoing hostilities. Therefore,
the core challenge, at this point in time, is the ceasefire.
All belligerents must halt their activities and cease all
armed confrontation and move their conflict into the
political realm. Any other approach will lead only to
a worsening of the crisis, including the humanitarian
crisis.
Today, not only has there been no decline in the
level of violence in Syria but it has continued to worsen.
We regret that, owing to the positions of a number of
Security Council members, we were unable to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, which played a certain
deterrent role in the crisis.
12-47508

The Office of the Joint Special Envoy in Damascus,
which is being established, must quickly begin its
active work on the ground, which we hope will help
the Syrians to end the vicious cycle of violence. One of
the near-term practical jobs of the Office, as we see it,
is to assist in carrying out a careful, impartial inquiry
into all of the circumstances related to the latest tragic
events and acts of violence against civilians.
The international community cannot remain aloof
to the attempts of extremist elements and terrorists to
further destabilize the situation in Syria, in particular
the repressive acts against ethnic and religious
minorities.
We anticipate that today’s meeting will facilitate
a strengthening of the common denominator in our
positions, in the interest of coordinated leverage on
the conflicting parties so as to encourage them to
immediately end the bloodshed and make it possible
to address the pressing humanitarian problems of
the Syrian people, particularly since we already have
a consensus basis in that context in the form of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, Mr. Annan’s
plan and the final communiqué of the Action Group for
Syria.
That is the basis for Russia’s decision to continue
its persistent efforts in dealing with the Syrian
Government and with the opposition groups. We call
upon other responsible members of the international
community to do the same.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Brahimi
as Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States on Syria and will provide him
with assistance towards a political settlement in Syria
along with our firm, principled support.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
expresses its appreciation to the delegation of France
for organizing this timely meeting on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. Today’s meeting provides us yet
another opportunity to make an honest and frank
assessment of the situation in general and the increasing
humanitarian crisis in particular.
We thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his statement today. We also thank United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres
for his statement. Both of them painted a rather
gloomy humanitarian picture for both Syria and the
affected neighbouring countries. We also thank the

25

S/PV.6826

Ministers of Syria’s immediate neighbours — Turkey,
Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon — for their statements. It
will also be important to later hear directly from the
Syrian Permanent Representative about the unfolding
humanitarian situation in his country.
South Africa is on record as condemning the
ongoing violence in Syria and conveys its heartfelt
condolences to the families of all of those who have lost
their lives as a result of the Syrian crisis.
While today’s meeting is focused on the
humanitarian situation, it is essential that we remain
fully engaged in pursuing a sustainable political
solution in Syria. Divisions within the Council have
rendered it irrelevant and unable to play a constructive
role in fulfilling its Charter-mandated responsibilities
to promote peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. It is
important that the Council approach this crisis in a
balanced manner by calling on and applying pressure
on all sides to bring an end to the violence, establish a
ceasefire and comply with their respective obligations
under the six-point plan and the final communiqué of
the Action Group for Syria.
It is essential that a credible political process be
supported by a united, cohesive international effort
towards a Syrian-led negotiated political transition
aimed at establishing a democratic pluralistic society
that meets the legitimate aspirations of all of the
Syrian people. We therefore thank Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan for his outstanding leadership and
commitment to the peaceful resolution of the Syrian
crisis. We welcome the appointment of Mr. Brahimi
as the new Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States on Syria, and we express
confidence in his abilities and leadership. I assure him
of South Africa’s full support.
We also wish to commend the role played by the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria, albeit
for a limited period, serving as the Organization’s
eyes and ears on the ground and operating under very
difficult circumstances. The unending violence and the
intransigence of the parties have made it impossible to
continue that Mission.
Despite the setback, we are confident that the
Secretary-General’s proposed liaison office will be in
a position to make an assessment of the situation and
identify windows of opportunity that could be exploited
to launch a political process. We appeal to the parties
to cooperate with the Joint Special Envoy and the

26

United Nations liaison office with a view to urgently
kick-starting a credible Syrian-led and owned political
dialogue.
Needless to say, the collapse of Syria will certainly
adversely affect regional stability in the Middle East,
and could even spark a dangerous and undesirable
struggle for regional hegemony. Any tilting of the
proverbial political scales in favour of one country or
grouping of countries in the Middle East will certainly
unleash a geopolitical crisis with the potential to further
destabilize an already unstable and fragile region. We
are already seeing the impact of the Syrian crisis on
neighbouring countries, particularly Lebanon.
South Africa reiterates that the situation in Syria
cannot be solved by military means or by helping one
side, militarily or otherwise, to defeat the other. Perhaps
it is appropriate, given the allegations being made
that some are arming the opposition, to ask whether
arming the opposition in Syria is not indirect military
intervention. We contend that a military approach may
be convenient in the short term, but it will surely expose
the country’s fault lines and result in unending civil
strife, as we have witnessed in other situations where
solutions of this nature were pursued without taking
internal political dynamics and contexts into account.
We hope that humanitarian and protection-ofcivilians pretexts will not be used to effect regime
change in Syria, at least not in the name of the Security
Council. We recall that the United Nations Charter
states that
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations.”
It is evident, by any measure, that the humanitarian
situation in Syria is appalling, the more so because the
conflict continues unabated, with the parties seemingly
determined to defeat each other militarily with no
consideration for the resulting human suffering. With
more than 2.5 million people in need, including about
1.2 million displaced, the situation is indeed dire, and
also affects the most vulnerable, that is, women and
children.
South Africa appreciates the work of the United
Nations, through such relief programmes as the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Children’s
Fund, the World Health Organization and the United
12-47508

S/PV.6826

Nations Population Fund, and their efforts to alleviate
the humanitarian situation, which is compounded by,
among other things, shortages of the basic amenities of
life, as well as internal and international displacement.
We also want to thank other humanitarian relief
agencies, such as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the
numerous national and international non-governmental
organizations whose workers have risked their lives
and expended significant resources to help the Syrian
people.
We have heard numerous concerns about the
humanitarian situation in Syria but have seen very
little action aimed at providing the requisite resources
for humanitarian relief. In that regard, we applaud
the United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator
Valerie Amos for visiting Syria and engaging with the
Syrian authorities on the humanitarian situation. The
cooperation of the Syrian authorities and the opposition
in facilitating humanitarian access should also be
acknowledged and encouraged.
The situation of refugees is of equal concern. As
the conflict continues, the number of people fleeing
and seeking refuge in neighbouring countries is rising
dramatically. What is worrying about this is that these
people are fleeing to countries that already have their
own challenges. Even more worrying is the fact that
while Syrians are fleeing their country, Syria itself
is host to large refugee communities from Somalia,
Iraq, the Sudan and Afghanistan, as well as more than
500,000 Palestinians. It is not surprising that those
displaced people are concerned about the future, as they
are certainly in a precarious situation, with nowhere to
go but back home, which they fled for similar reasons.
There can be no doubt that the refugee situation is
putting increasing strain on the neighbouring countries
of Turkey, Iraq, Lebanon and Jordan, which are
hosting refugees. We must applaud them for providing
shelter and other help to those desperate people. We
should also thank the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the
Near East and other humanitarian relief agencies for
helping to ease the plight of Syrian refugees. Given the
escalating humanitarian crisis in Syria and the apparent
lack of funds, we appeal to the international community,
including the countries in the wider Middle East region,
to respond to the humanitarian appeal by the Office for

12-47508

the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Syria
regional response plan.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that all Syrian
parties must be responsible for ending the violence
immediately and commit to finding peace. As for the
Council, it is now crucial and ever more urgent that we
set aside the differences between us that are predicated
on narrow nationalistic interests and save Syria and
the region from total collapse. The international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
should work in a spirit of unity to find a solution to the
situation in Syria before it is too late.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson and High Commissioner
Guterres for their briefings. I would also like to thank
the French presidency for its initiative in calling for
today’s meeting, which comes at a very important
moment.
The Syrian people are in urgent need of our
support. We have heard today that the humanitarian
situation is dramatic and worsening by the day. We
are grateful to the Governments and people of Jordan,
Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq and commend them for the
crucial support they have provided to Syrian families
fleeing the brutal violence of the Al-Assad regime and
its militias.
My Government, as part of the international effort,
is providing substantial financial support for relief
efforts undertaken by United Nations agencies and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, both
within Syria and in neighbouring States. I assure the
Council that we will continue to do so. It is essential
that humanitarian access inside Syria be improved in
order to help the people in need. We therefore call on
all parties to facilitate humanitarian access in all parts
of Syria.
The humanitarian situation will not improve
unless the Syrian people can live free from fear. The
Al-Assad regime’s continuing attacks on civilians and
massive human rights violations must stop. The use of
heavy weapons, helicopter gunships and fighter planes
shows the extreme brutality that Damascus employs
against the Syrian people. Today’s meeting also comes
only a few days after reports of yet another massacre
committed by the regime and its militias against
civilians, including women and children.

27

S/PV.6826

Accountability for such crimes must be ensured.
The independent commission of inquiry has made
important findings and compiled a list of those deemed
responsible. That provides a solid base for possible
follow-up action, including by the International
Criminal Court. We also call on the opposition to
respect international humanitarian law and protect
civilians. More leadership and dedication is required.
The publication of a code of conduct for the Free Syrian
Army is a first step in the right direction. Humanitarian
law applies to all sides.
My Government will continue to work towards a
political solution to the crisis. That includes a political
transition aimed at achieving a democratic and tolerant
Syria that embraces all Syrians and assures their
human rights, irrespective of origin or religion. The
United Nations should continue to play a central role in
supporting the Syrian people in their quest for a political
settlement and embarking upon a democratic transition.
The same is true for the Arab League, which has played
an active and constructive role from the start. I would
like to assure the Joint Special Envoy Lakhdar Brahimi
of Germany’s full support for his challenging new task.
We are also engaging closely with the opposition,
both bilaterally and within the Friends of Syria Group,
to prepare the ground for a post-Al-Assad Syria. It is
in all our interests to avoid a total breakdown in Syria,
which would also pose a serious threat to regional
stability. Our position is clear: there can be no future
for President Al-Assad in a new Syria. We call on him
to step aside to avoid further bloodshed.
The stocks of chemical weapons in Syria pose
a serious threat. The use of chemical weapons would
be a disastrous escalation of the situation, with
unpredictable consequences for Syria and the entire
region. We urge Syria to strictly abide by its obligation
under international law not to use chemical weapons
under any circumstances. We also call upon Syria to
guarantee the secure and safe storage of those weapons
of mass destruction.
Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): At the outset, let me
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Ministers
from Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey, Colombia, France,
Morocco, Togo and the United Kingdom for their
participation in today’s meeting and for their statements.
Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, in March
2011, the situation has steadily deteriorated. More than

28

2.5 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance,
more than 1 million are internally displaced and more
than 200,000 are refugees. The continuing military
operations by all sides have prevented the timely and
adequate delivery of humanitarian assistance to those
in need. Efforts by the international community have
so far failed to address the crisis, which is increasingly
affecting the region as a whole.
It is unfortunate that neither side to the Syrian
conflict has implemented its obligations under the
six-point plan, which was endorsed by resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). The conflict has become
increasingly more militarized and has been exploited
by well-known terrorist groups. A number of terrorist
acts have been committed against State institutions and
public infrastructure. There have been gross violations
of human rights by all sides. Unfortunately, the Syrian
parties, instead of seriously commencing a Syrian-led
political process, have pursued a military approach to
realize their objectives.
We strongly condemn all violence and violations
of human rights irrespective of who their perpetrators
are. We also condemn in the strongest possible terms
the terrorist acts that have been and continue to be
committed in Syria. We call upon all parties, Syrian as
well as foreign, to dissociate themselves from terrorist
groups and ensure that no space or justification is
provided for terrorist acts.
Under the prevailing circumstances in Syria, there is
an urgent need for the international community to close
ranks and send a united message to the Syrian parties to
renounce their military approach and resolve the crisis
through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process. There
is no other way to bring about a sustained cessation of
violence in all its forms by all parties. That is also the
only way to end human rights violations and create
an atmosphere conducive to the safe and unhindered
delivery of urgently needed humanitarian assistance.
Any further militarization of the conflict will not only
make it more difficult to reach a political solution,
but also exacerbate the humanitarian situation. In that
connection, any militarization of the humanitarian
situation will worsen the security situation and the
humanitarian conditions for millions of Syrians; it must
therefore be avoided.
In order to assist the Syrian parties, change their
course and address the crisis through political dialogue,
it is important that all parties, inside and outside Syria,
fully abide by their obligations under resolutions 2042
12-47508

S/PV.6826

(2012) and 2043 (2012). The parties must be prevailed
upon to implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the final communiqué issued on
30 June in Geneva.
India firmly believes that it is critical for the
United Nations to remain strongly engaged with the
Syrian parties and other actors in the search for a way
forward. Unilateral action of any kind will not resolve
the crisis. It will only exacerbate the problem and cause
greater instability and violence, even beyond Syria’s
borders. We also believe that the leadership of Syria
is for Syrians to decide through a democratic process.
The task of the international community, anchored in
the United Nations, is to assist the Syrian parties in that
process.
India has consistently called for and supported
international efforts to assist the Syrian parties in
resolving the crisis and bringing about peace through
dialogue and political processes. Accordingly, we
strongly supported the efforts of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan. We now welcome the appointment of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as the new Special Envoy and
urge all sides, Syrian and foreign, to cooperate with him
in good faith so that the Syrian crisis can be resolved
without any further bloodshed.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for organizing and presiding
over this meeting, which draws our attention to the
dramatic humanitarian situation in Syria. We regret the
absence of our own Minister for Foreign Affairs, who
had a prior commitment and is on an official mission.
We thank the Ministers of Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon,
Iraq, the United Kingdom, Morocco, Colombia and
Togo for their presence here. We also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres for
their briefings.
It is difficult to separate the humanitarian situation
from the political situation in Syria, an issue which has
been on our agenda for almost a year and which led to
the adoption of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012)
and to certain well-known subsequent developments.
The internal conflict has given rise to a humanitarian
crisis and that crisis is laying the groundwork for a
worsening of the conflict. The most recent report of
the independent international commission of inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/19/69) and the
recent attacks in Damascus and Aleppo show that there
has been an increase in acts of violence in the country.
12-47508

The battles being waged in cities, with little respect for
civilians, including through the use of heavy weaponry,
tanks, helicopters and airplanes, must end. It has been
called easy, but we all know how difficult it has been
to persuade the parties to the conflict to lay down their
weapons.
When that does not happen, we usually appeal, not
only to the Government but also to the armed opposition
to respect the human rights of the civilian population
and to avoid actions that could later be classified as
war crimes, including murder, extrajudicial execution
and torture. The idea of creating buffer zones within
Syrian territory is also being discussed. That entails
some obviously appealing aspects, but also raises legal
and practical questions that have not been considered
by the Council.
While this debate is being held, the number of
Syrian refugees is increasing every day. In that regard,
the efforts that countries such as Turkey, Lebanon, Iraq
and Jordan have undertaken to receive those people are
commendable. The efforts undertaken by the United
Nations, especially by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to meet
the most immediate needs of the affected population,
above all the internally displaced persons, is also
commendable and must be emphasized. Humanitarian
staff have worked heroically under difficult and
dangerous circumstances, often facing the ill will of the
authorities and now facing a lack of funds. That situation
is compounded by the increase in the number of victims
of violence, most of them women and children.
Therefore, while respecting the norms of
international humanitarian law, the Syrian Government
must allow its population access to humanitarian
assistance. We cannot allow those people to go without
timely access to medical care, assistance, water and
food. That is also why we appeal to the international
community to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance in support to the affected population.
In conclusion, we think that a greater outpouring
of violence in Syria can still be prevented. In our view,
we cannot allow more acts of violence or violations of
human rights to be committed by any of the parties,
much less for such acts to continue with impunity while
increasing in magnitude and brutality. As members
of the international community, it is our obligation to
promote truth, transparency and the responsibility of
all those responsible for those violations. Above all, we
29

S/PV.6826

must undertake the greatest possible efforts to prevent
further atrocities from being committed. In that regard,
we would like to publicly thank Kofi Annan for his
devoted service, and we welcome Lakhdar Brahimi, to
whom we extend our full support.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson and United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres for their
briefings, and we also thank France for convening
today’s debate. We are also grateful to all the Ministers
who have joined us this afternoon.
The large number of people displaced from
their homes and those who have taken refuge in
neighbouring countries serves to indicate how the
continued crisis in Syria is exacting a heavy toll on
the civilian population. We commend the efforts by the
neighbouring countries, including Turkey, Jordon, Iraq
and Lebanon, in providing humanitarian assistance and
shelter to the people displaced. Having been host to
millions of Afghan refugees for decades, Pakistan is no
stranger to the magnitude of the responsibility that such
situations entail. The need for wholehearted support by
the international community is clear.
The initial joint needs assessment carried out by the
United Nations, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Syrian Government kindled optimism that
things might start moving in the right direction.
However, subsequent developments have dashed all
such hopes. We urge all parties to the conflict to ensure
the availability of humanitarian relief, particularly to
those in urgent need.
The current humanitarian crisis in Syria cannot
be addressed in isolation. It needs to be considered in
a holistic manner. The resolution of disputes through
violence is against the very ideals that the United Nations
espouses. Political differences should be resolved
through inclusive dialogue with the participation of all
protagonists.
The Syrian people have suffered enough. The
bloodshed in Syria must come to an immediate end.
We strongly condemn the use of force by all sides
in Syria. The Syrian people need political space to
regain the societal equilibrium that is so essential for
peacebuilding.
The primary responsibility for ensuring the safety
and security of the Syrian people rests with the Syrian
Government. We call upon the Syrian Government to

30

make sure that the rights of all its citizens are protected
in conformity with its national and international
obligations. The Syrian opposition should also abjure
the use of force.
It is essential that the Syrian Government and other
forces create the conditions necessary for national
dialogue and reconciliation. It is only through inclusive
dialogue and a political process that Syria can chart out
a course towards a stable, secure and prosperous future.
The irresponsible and indiscriminate use of arms by
whoever must cease forthwith.
Regrettably, efforts by the international community
have thus far not borne fruit, as violence continues to
escalate. There is a need for creative thinking and a
departure from stated positions. We still feel that the
six-point plan presented by outgoing Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan offered the best possible solution
to end the fratricidal conflict in Syria. We reiterate
our call on the Council to send a united message to all
parties for a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Syria.
We welcome the appointment of Joint Special
Representative Lakhdar Brahimi. He needs our full
support for a successful conclusion of his mission to
bring an amicable end to the killings and violence in
Syria. We urge all parties, in and outside Syria, to
cooperate with the Joint Special Envoy for the success
of his mission. An international community working
with unity and clarity of purpose is the only hope for
the people of Syria. Our ultimate objective remains a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political solution without
outside interference.
The ongoing crisis in Syria should not distract the
international community’s attention from the unresolved
Palestinian issue, which remains at the heart of the
tension and conflict in the Middle East region. Pakistan
condemns illegal Israeli settlements on Palestinian
land and efforts to change the Arab character of the
holy land. Pakistan supports the Palestinian people’s
inalienable right to self-determination and the creation
of an independent and viable Palestinian State on
Palestinian land, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
To conclude, let me reiterate that we remain
committed to a peaceful resolution of the crisis in Syria
and will continue to support the efforts of the Joint
Special Envoy in that regard. We feel that the revival
of efforts aimed at a political settlement is the need of
the hour. The six-point plan and the final communiqué
of the meeting of the Action Group on Syria provide a

12-47508

S/PV.6826

sound basis to that end. The international community
should work to build upon them in a constructive spirit.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Portugal would like to thank France for having
organized this extremely timely debate.
As the months go by, the world helplessly watches
as a most savage repression is unleashed against a
people who are only asking for the recognition and
respect of their most basic rights. The Damascus regime
responds to such legitimate requests with only force,
bombing civilians with heavy weapons, destroying
entire neighbourhoods, killing and wounding thousands
and forcing thousands of others into exile.
We have waited too long to put an end to this
appalling and unacceptable situation. We have failed
too long in our duty as the Security Council and have
too long allowed the worst violations of fundamental
rights to continue as if nothing were happening. I very
much hope that today’s debate will provide a muchneeded jolt to the international conscience and finally
bring about a new desire to act together to put an end to
this tragedy and the suffering of an entire people.

Entire families have been uprooted from their
homes. Essential services are denied to thousands.
Women and children are particularly vulnerable. Large
refugee communities within Syria have also been
seriously affected, be they Palestinian, Iraqi or of other
nationalities.
The tragic situation is placing enormous strain
on host communities both inside and outside Syria.
As we have also heard, local response mechanisms
and support networks have exhausted their capacities
and are no longer able to respond to such urgent and
overwhelming needs. In neighbouring host countries,
humanitarian assistance resources are rapidly reaching
the breaking point.

(spoke in English)

Portugal is deeply thankful to the Governments
and people of Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan and Turkey for the
generosity, solidarity and selflessness with which they
have harboured all those fleeing persecution and violent
repression in Syria. We also praise the heroic efforts of
the humanitarian relief organizations on the ground,
which, despite the many constraints and security risks,
continue to work diligently, bringing much-needed
relief to an increasing number of people. There is clearly
a pressing need to scale up humanitarian assistance
inside Syria and to increase support to the countries
hosting Syrian refugees. The needs of both must be
urgently met, so that all Syrians in want, whether
inside Syria or outside its borders, can be assisted.
We also recall the humanitarian commitments the
Government of Syria undertook within the framework
of the six-point plan, and we urge the Syrian authorities
to enable greater humanitarian access to the country.
Finally, we underscore the obligations of all sides under
international humanitarian law and call upon all parties
to respect civilians and do their utmost to ensure
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need.

As I said, this human tragedy could have been
averted had the Syrian Government not responded to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people with
sheer brutal force and by resorting to the use of tanks,
helicopter gunships and fighter jets against civilians.

For over 18 months now, the Syrian Government
has sought to crush dissent through brutal repression
and widespread and systematic gross violations of
human rights. It has killed, maimed and tortured, and
carries on doing so.

Let us be clear: such actions are illegal under
international law and totally unacceptable, no matter
the circumstances. The humanitarian impact of
increasing Government violence against ordinary
people, including women and children, is extremely
severe and places hundreds of thousands at risk. As we
heard, the numbers are absolutely shocking.

Portugal vehemently condemns all human rights
violations and abuses, for which there can be absolutely
no tolerance, regardless of the perpetrator. Those
responsible for such violations and abuses must be and
will be held accountable. We regret that the Syrian
Government has shunned every opportunity to search
for a political settlement of the present situation. That

We have heard Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Guterres speak
of the seriousness and extent of the situation. I would
like sincerely to thank them for their statements. We
have also heard from the Ministers of Iraq, Jordan,
Lebanon and Turkey, and I thank them for being here
and for their important statements.
We are indeed facing a genuine humanitarian
disaster, which, beyond its direct impact on the Syrian
people, is likely to further destabilize an already fragile
region. Even worse, this situation is deteriorating every
day as the violence and repression increase.

12-47508

31

S/PV.6826

was particularly the case when it refused to engage
with Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan in his efforts to
end the violence and to open the way for the peaceful
transition desired by the majority of the Syrian people.
Instead, the Syrian Government preferred to blatantly
disregard its commitments under the six-point plan, to
consistently and systematically violate resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012) and to intensify its military
operations against populated areas, thus exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis even further.
That criminal choice of action has launched the
country into a destructive spiral of violence, pushing it
to a full-ledged civil war and threatening the integrity
of Syria itself, while destabilizing its neighbours and
menacing regional peace and security. Another very
worrisome aspect is the risk posed by the existing
stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons inside
Syria. Not only is the use of such arms prohibited
under international law, but the Syrian authorities are
responsible for ensuring their safe storage.
Further militarization of the conflict can only lead
to additional human suffering and will aggravate the
humanitarian crisis even more. There is no alternative
to a political solution based on the six-point plan and a
Syrian-led political transition, as set forth in the 30 June
final communiqué of the Action Group. Even at this late
hour, we appeal to the Syrian Government to engage
seriously in such a political solution.
In that context, we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as the Joint Special Envoy of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States. We
wish to assure him of our full support. His chances
of success will indeed depend greatly on the support
he receives from the international community and
the Security Council. It is crucial that all parties and
stakeholders view his appointment as an opportunity to
end the violence and engage seriously in an inclusive
political transition that meets the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people.
It is time for the Security Council to finally live up to
its responsibilities, to learn from the lessons of the past
and to stand on the right side of history. To be effective
and credible, the Council has to exert united, sustained
and effective pressure on all sides, and on the Syrian
authorities in particular, in the light of their primary
responsibilities under the six-point plan. Portugal will
continue to engage with all members of the Council,
the League of Arab States and the Group of Friends of
Syria with a view to ending all forms of violence and
32

ensuring a political transition that promotes stability
and peace in Syria and the region.
Finally, on behalf of Portugal, I would like to
conclude by thanking Special Envoy Kofi Annan for
his tireless efforts to promote a peaceful resolution of
the crisis in Syria. His service to the Syrian people and
the cause of peace deserves to be highly commended.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
France for its initiative in convening this meeting, and
I welcome Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius, who is
presiding over the meeting. My thanks also go to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres for
their briefings. I have also listened very carefully to
the statements by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Jordan and Turkey, the Minister for Social Affairs of
Lebanon and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq.
The persistent tensions encompassing Syria have
not only caused huge casualties but have also seriously
damaged the infrastructure and people’s lives in Syria.
With the economy in serious decline, food, drinking
water, medical facilities and housing are in short
supply. The number of internally displaced persons and
refugees continues to increase. About 2.5 million people
are in dire need of humanitarian relief. Neighbouring
countries, such as Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey,
are sheltering a large number of refugees, and as a result
they face mounting economic and social pressures.
China is gravely concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We hope that the Syrian Government
will continue to cooperate with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We appreciate
the efforts of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other humanitarian relief agencies inside
and outside Syria that are carrying out their work
under very difficult conditions. We also appreciate
the important contribution of Syria’s neighbours in
properly resettling refugees.
The Chinese Government has always supported the
United Nations and other international organizations
in their efforts to alleviate humanitarian situations on
the ground. We have provided emergency humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people and are prepared to
provide more emergency supplies to relevant countries
in the near term in order to improve the humanitarian
situation for the Syrian refugees on their territories.

12-47508

S/PV.6826

Concerning the emergency measures to be taken by
the international community to ease the humanitarian
situation in Syria, I wish to stress the following three
points.

six-point plan and the final communiqué of the Action
Group for Syria should continue. The Syrian issue
should be resolved through a political process led by
the Syrian people.

First, efforts to ease the humanitarian situation in
Syria must be guided by the humanitarian principles
of neutrality, impartiality and respect for Syria’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. The politicization of humanitarian issues must
be avoided. Humanitarian relief efforts should never
be militarized. We should especially guard against
and oppose any act of interference in Syria’s internal
affairs or military intervention under the pretext of
humanitarianism. Only with the trust and support of the
Syrian people can our actions be successful.

China opposes any externally imposed solution
aimed at forcing a regime change. We welcome
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi’s appointment as the new Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States on Syria and we will, as always, support
and cooperate with him in his political good offices.

Secondly, the United Nations should play a leading
role in coordinating international humanitarian
relief efforts for Syria. China calls on all parties in
Syria to observe relevant international law and to
maintain cooperation with the United Nations and
other humanitarian relief agencies, so as to ensure the
timely delivery and distribution of supplies. Given the
considerable financial shortfall in the international
humanitarian relief for Syria, China calls on relevant
countries to fully honour their assistance pledges in a
timely manner.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Syria must
be addressed with an eye to dealing with both the
symptoms and the root causes. The failure on the part
of all parties in Syria to deliver on their commitment to
a ceasefire and a cessation of the violence has caused
the situation to worsen. Mr. Annan’s six-point plan and
the Action Group’s Geneva communiqué have not been
implemented, although they reflect the consensus of
the international community. The top priority now is
to halt all forms of terrorism and violence in Syria as
soon as possible. Any encouragement of or conniving
to prolong continued military action will only lead to
more bloodshed, increased civilian causalities and a
deterioration of the humanitarian crisis in Syria. An
immediate ceasefire and end to the violence is the only
way out, followed by a transitional political process led
by the Syrian people themselves.
China’s position on the Syrian issue is consistent
and responsible. We support a political settlement of the
issue in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the basic norms
governing international relations. The implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, Mr. Annan’s
12-47508

We stand ready to work with the international
community on joint and sustained efforts aimed at a
peaceful, fair and appropriate solution of the Syrian
issue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
French): I take the opportunity to begin my statement
by thanking you, Sir, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council.
(spoke in Arabic)
Mr. Annan’s six-point plan was stillborn. First Arab
observers and then United Nations observers bore false
witness by saying no to a peaceful political solution
and national dialogue, offering no other solution than
providing weapons to the opposition. They have said
that foreign military intervention and the fall of the
regime are non-negotiable points. Safe corridors,
buffer zones and provisional Governments must be
established.
The struggle against the authority of the Syrian
State and the fall of its institutions are irreversible.
The Syrian President has lost all legitimacy and should
relinquish power. Those are quotes from official
statements attributed to representatives of certain
countries represented here in the Council, and from
others of our region. Those words represent the very
substance of the statements and tendencies of certain
Arab, regional and international parties supporting the
armed groups and representing them outside of Syria.
How is it possible, then, to put an end to the
violence and resolve the crisis in Syria by peaceful
means? Is it not high time for us all to learn the lessons
of the disasters brought about by foreign interventionist
policies carried out by certain influential international
Powers aimed at interfering in the internal affairs of
other Member States?
33

S/PV.6826

As a counterpart, the Syrian Government has
responded with openness and a positive spirit to the
legitimate claims of its people and all initiatives aimed
at settling the crisis by peaceful and political means,
including Mr. Annan’s six-point plan, which is clearly
supported by Syria. To implement the plan, Syria
has fully cooperated with the Supervision Mission
by making all the necessary facilities available in
accordance with agreements made with the United
Nations through the efforts of Mr. Annan and based on
respect for national sovereignty.
Syria also welcomed the final communiqué of
the Action Group for Syria, issued after its meeting
in Geneva on 30 June. In accordance with an official
communiqué issued by the Syrian Foreign Minister, my
country consented to the appointment of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi as the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States on Syria. I take
this opportunity to warmly welcome him.
But what is odd is that certain States that rallied the
consensus for the final communiqué then did everything
they could to stifle it just hours after its issuance.
They did so through non-consensual parallel efforts
aimed at ending all endeavours towards a peaceful end
to the crisis in Syria. Such efforts would put an end
to the national Syrian-led dialogue by promoting an
inevitable and imminent military intervention under
humanitarian pretexts, which confirms the existence of
a virtually hysterical obsession among the leaders of
those countries to target Syria both as a country and as
a people.

on a discussion of the best possible ways of providing
humanitarian aid to the Syrian people, why then
have some insisted on promoting actions outside the
framework of the United Nations, in clear contravention
of the text of the Charter of the United Nations?
We fail to understand how it is that certain countries
provide their modest sums of humanitarian aid via the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) while imposing prior conditions. At the same
time, those States have imposed unfair economic
sanctions, which have had serious humanitarian
repercussions on the lives of the Syrian people, inflicting
damage on their means of subsistence and wellbeing, even depriving them of medicines and medical
equipment. Who can understand why certain States
have done everything in their power to suspend Syria’s
membership of the Arab League and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation on the pretext of sympathy with
the Syrian people? And speaking of humanitarian aid in
Syria, some of those States have not even contributed
funds to the regional response plan approved by OCHA
and the Syrian Government, although they are aware
that funding is the major obstacle to the implementation
of the plan.

Today, we would like to see the clear intentions of
those who talk of addressing the humanitarian aspects
of the crisis. There are those who claim that they wish
to help the Syrian people, provided, however, that such
assistance goes only to the last Syrian in Syria.

In that regard, I would like to recall a well-known
Chinese saying that states that wisdom begins with
calling things by their real names. In that context we
believe that, to the extent that the intentions are sincere,
the best way to aid the Syrian people is, first of all,
by dealing with the causes of the suffering, since the
continuing efforts of the armed groups, which are
operating with external support, to destroy the means
of subsistence — such as infrastructure, health and
education institutions, communication channels, power
sources, places of worship and museums — while
encouraging violence and intimidating peaceful
citizens, are all factors that explain this intolerable
suffering, exacerbated by the armed groups’ attempts
to exercise military control over residential areas
in various principal cities, using civilians as human
shields. I would urge the Council to read an article by
the British journalist Robert Fisk in The Independent
on what he saw in Aleppo. It corroborates what I have
been talking about here.

It is patently clear, alas, that certain States can only
view the issue of humanitarian aid in the framework of
their own biased political agenda. They refer to aid to
support their own interests in interfering in the internal
affairs of other States. If this meeting is truly focused

His description tallies precisely with what has been
admitted by senior United Nations officials, such as
Major General Mood and others. There is further proof
in the fact that the armed groups refer to the Battle of
Homs, the Great Battle of Damascus and the Battle

The erroneous and subjective reading of the
situation by certain people, policies based on internal
interference in Syrian affairs, and the failure on the
part of certain countries to cooperate with the six-point
plan are all factors that contributed to the resignation
of Mr. Annan and the decision not to extend the
Supervision Mission in Syria.

34

12-47508

S/PV.6826

of Aleppo as if they were battles happening beyond
Syria’s borders or between Syria and a foreign State. It
is undeniable, after all, that Homs and Aleppo are both
Syrian cities.

of those camps into military centres where terrorists
gather to train so that they can then be sent to Syria
to commit their vile crimes, as is still happening in
Aleppo.

In that regard, we must ask if there is any State in
the world that would allow armed elements, terrorists
and mercenaries supported by foreigners to control
neighbourhoods in its towns? Is there any Government
that would agree to suspend its duty to protect its
citizens, leaving them at the mercy of extremism,
terrorism and violence? Let me back up my statements
with facts. Here is a list of 107 names of Arab and
non-Arab terrorists who have died in Aleppo, killed by
the forces of order. It includes names, nationalities and
other details, and we are happy to provide it to anyone
who is interested. It includes Tunisians, Libyans,
Saudis, Palestinians, Jordanians, Egyptians and so on.
Those persons were not Syrian citizens.

What certain capitals may be planning and plotting
for Syria is one thing; what the Syrian people want is
another, namely, genuine reforms and a better life. The
challenges are not only about legitimate aspirations
for reform; the greater challenge right now is to
protect Syria as an independent State, and to counter
the extremist terrorist agendas that aim to condemn
Syria — a country with a history of tolerance and
civilization — to the dark ages and to inquisitional
tribunals. Syria has always been and will remain a land
for Syrians of every stripes; it was a civilization even
before it was a State.

For decades, Syria has hosted millions of refugees
from Iran owing to hostile acts that had nothing to do
with Syria. Mr. Guterres, who is at this meeting, knows
full well what we are talking about, because he has
personally witnessed the hospitality Syria has shown
towards Arab and non-Arab refugees, freely welcomed
by my country, without seeking to promote or profit
from them in any international forum or authority.
My country has not just put up tents to shelter the
refugees who have sought asylum on our territory. It has
not just welcomed them in camps on its borders or in the
desert in order to exploit or manipulate their hopes. On
the contrary, Syria has done its duty, sharing its meagre
resources with them and treating them just as it treats
its own citizens, sharing the brotherly ties of humane
responsibility and in accordance with its international
commitments.
Today we Syrians feel deep bitterness and sorrow
at the sight of some of our brothers, living in terrible
conditions in tents on our borders while attempts are
made to intimidate them into not returning home.
Their dignity is being insulted; they are being turned
into refugees, prisoners of those camps. At best, one
would describe them as detention camps. We ask those
countries that have taken in Syrian refugees to allow all
those who wish to return to do so, and not to prevent
them from returning to their motherland, Syria. That
said, we would also like to thank all who have extended
the hand of friendship to Syrian refugees without
imposing preconditions, let alone transforming some

12-47508

We listened attentively to the statement made by
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France on 29 July. He said, “they are being supplied
with weapons. According to the information we have,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and probably others are supplying
weapons.” We understand “them” to mean the armed
groups in Syria.
Given that statement, we would like to know if
France, with that information on arms trafficking to
Syria, would take the appropriate measures necessary
as a permanent member of the Security Council and
current Council President in order to ensure scrupulous
respect for the articles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and the spirit of resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). No one can ignore the fact
that turning a deaf ear to arms trafficking to armed
elements in Syria flouts all those provisions.
Major Turkish and international newspapers have
reported the role played by the Turkish Government,
not the Turkish people — those neighbourly, friendly
people linked to us historically and geographically. The
international press has referred of the role of Turkey in
spillilng Syrian blood. Why do we say that? Mr. Kofi
Annan attributed his lack of success to three main
causes, one of which involved the lack of cooperation
on the part of States and parties that have influence
over the armed groups. Certainly, everybody knows
that if the neighbouring country, in this case Turkey,
had merely hosted Syrian refugees, it would have
done nothing. However, given the fact that Turkey
is harboring armed elements that perpetrate crossborder crimes on my country’s territory and the fact

35

S/PV.6826

that Turkey is allowing those groups to set up training
camps for Salafist extremist groups and for groups that
are attempting to go back to prehistoric times, in that
regard, the Turkish Government — its Government, not
the Turkish people — is becoming Syria’s executioner.
I would have liked to have said that directly to His
Excellency the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs,
and not to my friend and brother the Ambassador of
Turkey, whose moral integrity and great moral probity
I know full well.
The arms trafficking through Lebanon is being
perpetrated by Lebanese political parties, and not
officially by Lebanon. The President says that it is
Lebanon’s turn. When the Lebanese Government
confiscated the Lutfallah II loaded with arms coming
from Libya, it must have truly called down the wrath
of God. The seizure by the Lebanese authorities of that
weapons-loaded vessel bound for Syria is an event that
is not worthy of the very close links between the two
countries. That vessel was followed by seven others,
also loaded with arms and intended for Syrian armed
groups.
His Excellency the Minister for Social Affairs of
Lebanon regretted the presence of 20,000 Syrians in
Lebanon. I would like to remind him that, after the
Israeli aggression against Lebanon in 2006, our aircraft
welcomed tens of thousands of Lebanese in Syria.
We did not turn to the Council to ask for help. On the
contrary, we welcomed our Lebanese brothers with
open arms.
The closure by certain States of their Embassies
in Damascus means that it is no longer possible for
those States to follow the real events as they happen
in Syria. In turn, that means that they are not able to
accurately analyse the facts and the situation. I therefore
cannot reproach the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Morocco for what he said because
I do not wish to rub salt in a wound. I invite him to
adjust his aim and readjust Morocco’s relationship
with other countries by responding to the demands
of the Moroccan people and renouncing certain royal
practices that have become archaic. Morocco should
renounce such practices which involve, for example,
kneeling before His Majesty the King and kissing his
hand. Also, with regard to the border, there are people
living in the Sahara who are demanding their rights.

(spoke in French)
At the beginning of my professional career,
more precisely during the first seven-year term of
Mr. François Mitterand, I spent a lovely part of my
life as a young diplomat in the Syrian Embassy in
France. I retain excellent memories from the time I
spent among the French and at the centre of French
and, more specifically, Parisian academic, cultural
and educational establishments. At the time, I learned
about the values of national independence and having
an uncompromising attitude in the face of foreign
interference in the internal affairs of any country. I
was obviously also familiar with the major universal
messages of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Montesquieu,
Voltaire and others.
Among the fine principles of international law of
which I learned during my post-graduate studies in Paris,
I recall today one in particular that I hold very dear,
namely, the principle of respect for the most sovereign
of State symbols in each nation: a country’s President.
I shall therefore refrain from making the slightest
criticism of France and its senior representatives.
That said, as the Minister spoke to me directly as the
representative of my country, I would like, on behalf of
my people and Government, to express our most serious
concern regarding the new shadow that has been cast
on our troubled relations and memories going back to
the period of the occupation. We have endeavoured to
expunge those memories since 1946.
(spoke in Arabic)
To conclude, I would like to turn to my colleague,
His Excellency the representative of Germany, who
called for the establishment of the Syria of the future
for all Syrians, irrespective of their origin. He also
said that there was no future for Bashar Al-Assad in
the new Syria. I would like to ask him who authorizes
him to speak on behalf of the Syrian people. Is that
not a violation of diplomatic practice in the Council?
Secondly, if the Permanent Representative of Germany
really wants to build the Syria of the future for all
Syrians, why did the German daily newspaper Die Welt
publish an article two days ago stating that
“The German Government is currently working
in the Bundestag on a plan to make the necessary
arrangements to host the Christians from Syria”?
I reiterate that that plan refers only of hosting
Christians from Syria. Why only Christians? Why do

36

12-47508

S/PV.6826

we want to dismantle this Syrian society that we have
all praised? The answer is in the Council’s hands.
The President (spoke in French): As the
representative of Syria has referred to the mandate
that France exercised in Syria on behalf of the League
of Nations, I would recall that President Al-Assad’s
grandfather was part of a delegation that, in 1936,
requested that France not grant Syria its independence.
We can provide the text of the petition that was signed
on that occasion. I will not add any more on that point,
but since he did refer to French authors, I would advise
him to meditate on Talleyrand, who said “what is
excessive is insignificant”. What the representative of
Syria has said is truly excessive.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I will be brief. We had not
intended to take the floor again, but we find ourselves
obliged to do so.
I have listened to my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Syria. I think an attempt was made
to represent the facts about our position with regard to
Syria. In that respect, the crisis in Syria, which is, for
us, a threat to regional and global peace and security,
does not need further description. That is taking place
right before our eyes.
As a country that neighbours Syria and shares not
only a long border but also a long history and close
cultural ties, we have always stood for the security,
stability and prosperity of Syria. Its territorial integrity
and national unity is sacrosanct for all of us. What
could be a more relevant and important vested interest
for Turkey than bringing an end to the crisis in Syria
without further delay? We will continue to stand by the
Syrian people, who must be the masters of their own
future. We will never leave them in the cold.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Faour (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
this meeting is devoted to the issue of Syrian refugees.
We are not here to conduct a political debate. That is a
general comment.
In addition, the Lebanese Government has chosen a
policy of keeping its distance from the Syrian crisis, but
we do have some comments that we would like to make.
With respect to the trafficking of weapons through
Lebanon by certain parties that are not official Lebanese

12-47508

parties, the official Lebanese parties are doing
everything possible to stop any type of trafficking.
Lebanon does not want to be part of the Syrian crisis.
I would recall the historic request of Lebanon with
respect to the demarcation of borders and promoting
security at the borders. That has not been upheld, nor
has it been taken into consideration. On the contrary, in
the past, it has been denied.
With respect to the Lutfullah II, I would recall that
the official Lebanese parties did seize that ship. There
are investigations under way on that matter, and thus
the legal and security sectors in Lebanon are carrying
out their duties. With respect to the other vessels, I
think they may be imaginary. We have not heard about
them.
The last issue I would raise is the idea that we are
complaining about the presence of Syrian refugees in
Lebanon. I think I was absolutely clear in that regard.
We are not complaining about Syrian refugees in
Lebanon. What we said is that the Syrian people hosted
some of the Lebanese people in 2006. This is a chance
to repay the favour to the Syrian people. We are not
complaining, nor are we asking for assistance in that
area. We chose to participate in this meeting on a
different basis, the humanitarian basis.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
When our Minister took the floor in the Council, he
conveyed certain convictions of Morocco and our
commitment with regard to the entirety of the Syrian
people. A few moments ago, the representative of Syria
decided to openly attack virtually all the members of
the Council. I understand his distress. He is unable to
rise to the expectations of the international community
with respect to a political solution, a cessation of the
violence and respect for human rights. It seems that he
has chosen to believe that the best defence is a good
offence.
He presumed to talk about Morocco in response
to what our Minister said. The representative of Syria
presumed to talk about Morocco’s reforms and the royal
protocol. When our Minister spoke, he spoke on behalf
of the 32 million Moroccans. He expressed the beliefs
of the entire Moroccan people, who throughout history
have never faltered in taking the side of Arab peoples,
starting with the Syrian people. Morocco’s Royal
Armed Forces have spilled their own blood to defend
Syria’s territorial integrity. But we did it willingly,
expecting neither recognition nor gratitude.

37

S/PV.6826

The Moroccan monarchy is an ancestral monarchy,
and one that adapts, evolves and reforms itself. For that
reason Morocco distinguished itself in the Arab Spring
by a peaceful, forward-looking road to change whereby
our country now has one of the most progressive
Constitutions, which brought about profound reforms
supported by the vast majority of Moroccans. I can
therefore assure the Syrian representative that the
32 million Moroccan citizens take great pride not only
in the work of His Majesty the King but also in the
Moroccan monarchy itself and what it brings with it.
And when they express respect for the institution of the
monarchy they do it willingly and do not need anyone’s
approval, least of all that of the Syrian representative.

As far as him bringing up the question of the
Sahara, I will very simply remind him that we are here
to discuss Syria in the context of the situation in the
Middle East. If he wants to discuss the Sahara we can
talk about it when the time comes.
The last thing I will say is that the Syrian
representative’s words make me think of something he
will certainly understand — a most eloquent passage of
Arabic poetry by Al-Mutanabbi:
(spoke in Arabic)
“Being criticized by a lesser person proves that
I am perfect.”
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker in this meeting.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

38

12-47508
