Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Committee

5. Invites Governments to appeal once more to
their national organizations and institutions for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
6. Appeals to all States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system, as well as other organizations havmg a special
interest in Namibia, to make financia! contributions
to the Institute for Namibia through the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system for their assistance to Namibians, and
in particular to the United Nations Development Programme for having established an indicative planning
figure for Namibia, and requests the Programme to
give priority to the allocation of funds and other material assistance to the Institute for Namibia;
8. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
9. Requests the speciali2:ed agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
all necessary assistance to the Secretary-General and
the United Nations Council for Namibia in implementing the work programme of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia;
1O. Calls upon all specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system-in
particular, the Intemational Labour Organisation, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United N ations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization,
the Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Intemational Monetary Fund, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research-to assist the
Institute for Namibia, particularly by providing specialists, lecturers and researchers;
11. Decides, pending the entry into full operation
of a comprehensive programme, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistance through the United
Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2419th plenary meeting
26 November 1975
3420 (XXX). lnformation from Non-Self-Govern•
ing Territories transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of
the D~claration . on the Granting of Independence to
~olomal C<;mntnes and Peoples to study tbe informatlon transm1tted to the Secretary-General under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to take
s?ch _infor~ation fully into acc_ount in examining the
s1tuat10n w1th regard to the 1mplementation of the
Declaration,

107

Recalling a/so its resolution 3293 (XXIX) of 13
December 1974, in which it requested the Special
Committee to. continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
H aving examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter18 and the
action taken by it in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on tbis ítem, 17
Deploring that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the Special Committee, sorne Member States having responsibilities for
the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories
have ceased or have failed to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the information from Non-Self-Govemmg Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Reatfirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-govemment
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concemed should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect
to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concemed to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
tbe Charter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the
Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3421 (XXX). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the ítem entitled "Implementation
of the_ Declaratio~ on the Granting of Independence to
Colo~ial Countnes and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the intemational institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
and the programme of action for the full implementa~
tion of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
16 lbid., Supplement No. 23

t, A/ 10307.

(A/10023/Rev.l) chap. XXXII
'
.

1os··

General AHemhly-Thirtieth Session

Having examined the reforts submitted on the itero
by the Secretary-General,1 the Economic and .Social
Council19 and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 20 as well as the related report of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, 21
T aking into account the statements of the representatives of the national liberation movements of the colonial Territories in Africa who partici~ated as observers
in the work relating to their respective countries, and
conscious of the urgent and pressing need of the peoples
concerned far concrete assistance from the specialized
agencies and other institutions associated with the
United Nations,
Rea/Ji,rming the responsibility of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system to take all effective measures, within
their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the
full and speedy implementation of the Declaration and
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly in the provision of moral and material assistance, on a priority basis, to the peoples of the colonial
Territories and their national liberation movements,
Noting with concern that, although progress has been
maintained in the extension of assistance to refugees
from the colonial Territories in Africa, the actions
taken hitherto by the organizations concerned in the
provision of assistance to the peoples of the Territories
through their national liberation movements continue
to remain inadequate to meet the urgent needs of these
peoples,
Noting with satisfaction the measures initiated by
sorne of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United N ations system, in particular
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
Development Programme, to provide assistance on a
priority basis to the peoples of the Territories farmerly
administered by Portugal, and expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General far the initiative he has
taken in that regard,
Expressing its appreciation to the General Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity far the
continued co-operation and assistance extended by it
to the organizations within the United Nations system
in connexion with the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the United N ations,
Mindjul of the necessity to keep under continuous
review the activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in the implementation of the various United Nations
decisions relating to decolonization,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the item;20
2. Reajfirms that the recognition by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United
Nations organs of the legitimacy of the struggle of
colonial peoples to achieve freedom and independence
entails, as a corollary, the extension by the United
Nations system of organizations of all the necessary
1s A/10080 and Add.1-4, A/10319.
19 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/10003), chap. VI, sect. E.
20 /bid., Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1 ), chap. VII.
21 lbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/10024).

moral and material assistance to the peoples of the
colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those speci~ed
agencies and organizati<?ns within the Unite~ Nati?ns
system which have contmued to co-operate m varymg
degrees with the United N ations in the implem~ntation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly;
4. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including
the World Bank and the InternatloJ\al Monetary Fund,
to take or · continue to take the necessary measures
towards the full and speedy implementation of the
relevant provisions of those resolutions;
5. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the Unired Nations system to render
or continue to render, as a matter of urgency, all possible moral and material assistance to the colonial
peoples in Africa struggling far their liberation from
colonial rule and, in particular, recommends that the
organizations concerned should initiate or broaden contacts and co-operation with these peoples in consultation with the Organization of African Unity and should
work out and implement concrete programmes for such
assistance with the active collaboration of the national
liberation movements concerned;
6. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to extend all
moral and material assistance to the newly independent
and emerging States;
7. Reiterates its urgent request that the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system should take measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to increase the scope
of their assistance to refugees from colonial Territories,
including assistance to the Governments concerned in
the preparation and execution of projects beneficia! to
those refugees, and, in that connexion, to introduce
the greatest possible measure of flexibility in their
relevant procedures;
8. Urges once again the specialized a,gencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, to take
all necessary measures to withhold any financia!, economic, technical or other assistance from the Govemment of South Africa and the illegal régime of Southem
Rhodesia, to discontinue all support to them until they
restore to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
and to refrain from taking any action which might
imply recognition of the legitimacy of the domination
of the Territories by those régimes;
9. Notes with satisjaction the arrangements by severa! specialized agencies and organizations enabling
representatives of the national liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity to
participate fully as observers in their proceedings relating to the countries concerned, and calls upon those
organizations which have not yet done so to make the
necessary arrangements without delay, including the
requisite financia! provisions as recommended by the
Economic and Social Council, 19 particularly so as to
ensure that assistance projects of the agencies and
organizations are carried out to the benefit of the
peoples concemed and their national liberation movements;

Rnolatlom adopted on the reporta of the Foarth Commlttee

10. RecommeRds tha! all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and othér
organizations within the United Nations system of
which they are members to ensure the fu11 and effective
implementation of the Declaration and other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and, in that connexion, should accord priority to the question of providing assistance on an emergency bas1s to peoples in
the colonial Territories and to their national liberation
movements;
11. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system, with a view to facilitating the implementation of paragraph 1O above, to formulate and
submit to theit respective goveming bodies or legislative organs, as a matter of priority and with the
active .co-operation of the Organization of African
Unity, concrete proposals for the full imJ?lementation
of the relevant United Nations decisions, 1D particular
specific programmes of ali possible assistance to the
peoples m colonial Territories and their national llberation movements;
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
concerned with related aspects of the present item, with
the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system, a report on the action taken since the circulation of bis
previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolutíon and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thhty-first session;
13. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Speclal
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
14. Requests tbe Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3422 (XXX). United Nations Educational and
Training Programm.e for Southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United N ations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa, in particular resolution 3301 (XXIX) of 13
December 1974,
Further recalling its request to the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa to arrange, in consultation with the Secretary-General, for an evaluation
of the achievements of the Programme and of the ways
and means for its further development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for• 1974/75,12
22 A/10331.

109

Noting wlth :atisfaction the further increase in contributions to the Programme and the corres~nding
increase in assistance for the education and traming of
persons froip. the Territories concerned,
l. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southem Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and
expanding the Programme;
2. Endorses the conclusions of the Advisory Committee based on the recommendations of the Evaluation Group;28
3. Notes, in particular, the conclusion to the effect
that the Programme has been a significant and worthwhile effort of the intemational community, and that
a continuation and expansion of the Programme is
desirable to meet the increased needs arising from
recent developments in the Territories concemed;
4. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the Programme and
appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to
make generous contributions to the Programme in
order to ensure its continuation and expansion, particularly during this moSl important period;
5. Decides that, as a transitional measure, provision
shall be made, under the regular budget of the United
Nations for the financia! year 1976, for an amount of
$US 100,000 to ensure continuity of the Programme
' pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3423 (XXX). Oft'ers by Mem.ber States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3302 (XXIX) of 13 December 1974,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Goveming Territories,14
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites ali States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible,
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating
to offers of study and training facilities made by States
and to provide ali the necessary facilities to enable
students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;
23 /bid., paras. 27 and 28.
24 A/10329 and Add.l and Add.1/Corr.1.
