S/PV.8558

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8558th meeting

Thursday, 20 June 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Zawieja
Mr. Repkin
Ms. Tshabalala
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2019/498)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-18562 (E)
*1918562*

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2019/498)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
Mr. Matias Bertino Matondo, African Union Special
Representative and Head of the African Union Office in
the Central African Republic; and Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa, European External
Action Service.
Mr. Matondo and Mr. Vervaeke are joining this
meeting via video tele-conference from Bangui and
Brussels, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/498, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ndiaye.
Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): Following the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in the Central African Republic, and
pursuant to resolution 2448 (2018), I am pleased to
inform the Security Council about recent developments
on the ground and in the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA).
2/24

20/06/2019

It cannot be repeated enough: the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic on 6 February gave rise
to many hopes, both in the country and the region as
well as within the international community, including
that there would be a definitive end to the long and
violent crisis that the Central African Republic has
been experiencing for decades. Since the signing of the
agreement, the Government and partners of the Central
African Republic have redoubled their efforts to
implement it. A new, more inclusive, Government was
established on 22 March following the Addis Ababa
consultations. The international community, under the
auspices of the United Nations, the African Union and
the European Union, met in Bangui on 17 April within
the framework of the International Support Group on
the Central African Republic in order to reactivate
regional and international actors.
On 31 May, a joint high-level mission made up of
the Government of the Central African Republic, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States and MINUSCA was deployed to the field
to demand that the leader of the Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation group cooperate with judicial authorities
with a view to arresting those responsible for the 21 May
massacres, dismantling all their bases and immediately
integrating their elements into the national programme
on disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation. A second joint mission visited Koui on
18 June, in the subprefecture of Paoua, the group’s
stronghold. At the end of the mission, the head of that
armed group committed to beginning the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of its elements on
29 June, in order to enable the establishment of the
agreement of the first Unités spéciales mixtes de
sécurité in the west of the country. He also committed to
continuing to cooperate with the judicial investigations
into the massacres.
I would also like to inform the Council that,
following those events, and in addition to our good
offices, the Mission launched a military operation,
thereby bringing additional pressure to bear to
strengthen the protection of civilians, prevent further
attacks or reprisals on civilians and stop all movements
of armed elements in the area of Paoua. Those joint
efforts, conducted under our mandate and in accordance
with the peace agreement, resulted in the arrest of three
members of the group suspected of having participated
in the massacres on 21 May.
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

As the incidents in Ouham-Pendé demonstrate,
the situation remains fragile. Every week, 50 to
70 violations of the peace agreement are reported,
committed mainly by armed groups against civilians.
Violence against civilians, illegal taxation, the
obstruction of the deployment of State authority and
the occupation of public buildings continue and are a
source of deep frustration for the people of the Central
African Republic.
Against that backdrop, MINUSCA continues to
implement the multidimensional mandate the Council
entrusted it with, while using its good offices to urge
the parties to scrupulously implement the commitments
made under the peace agreement and support them.
Despite the immense challenges, we continue to
work with the Government, the guarantors and other
facilitators and partners to provide the parties with
all the political and logistical support necessary
for the success of the agreement. We support all the
structures provided for under the agreement, including
the various monitoring mechanisms established at the
local and national levels, the Unités spéciales mixtes de
sécurité, the inclusive commission that is responsible
for addressing justice related to the conflict, and the
future truth, justice, reconciliation and reparations
commission, whose consultations President Touadera
launched on 6 June.
We are also mobilizing to carry out an awarenessraising campaign to inform local actors about the
peace agreement and solicit their cooperation in its
implementation. MINUSCA also continues to support
local peace and reconciliation committees throughout
all the country’s prefectures. But the success of the
agreement will depend above all on the commitment
of the parties to put an end to all forms of violence and
promote dialogue to resolve all forms of disputes, as
provided for in the agreement.
In order to maintain a level of trust in the
agreement, armed groups must comply with the security
arrangements to which they committed themselves on
6 February. In that regard, yesterday’s announcement
by the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique, which is the main armed group, that it
would dismantle all illegal barriers is an encouraging
sign that I hope will be followed by concrete action.
The full implementation of the security provisions
under the peace agreement, including the establishment
of the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité, which

S/PV. 8558

should contribute to reducing transhumance-related
violence, will be a crucial step in restoring security
and redeploying State authority. Rapid progress
in
disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and repatriation is also needed to ensure lasting
improvements in security and stabilization.
I am pleased to report that the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration operations conducted
in May and June resulted in the demobilization of 90
combatants from the Révolution et justice Movement,
under the command of Armel Ningatoloum Sayo,
which had already begun to disarm in December 2018.
MINUSCA is working with the Government, guarantors
and other partners to launch the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme for other
groups in the coming months, which will enable the
rapid establishment, training and deployment of the
Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité.
We also continue to support security sector reform.
I commend the Government’s efforts to make the
defence and security forces more representative of the
population, more professional and more effective. In
line with that triple objective, the Government recently
completed a national recruitment campaign for the
Central African Armed Forces. A similar recruitment
campaign for the police and gendarmerie will take
place in all prefectures in the coming months.
Central Africans expect a lot from peace. They
want to be able to go about their activities safely and
have access to clean water, health care, education,
employment and justice. It is therefore necessary to
create the conditions conducive to economic recovery
that creates employment opportunities for young
people, in order to avoid the future creation of armed
groups. The Mission and the United Nations system
are therefore working together closely to ensure that
security, development and peacebuilding efforts are
coordinated to create the necessary synergies for
sustainable peace.
The dire humanitarian situation continues to
hamper the prospects for lasting peace, as people
are unable to meet their basic needs. Approximately
2.9 million people, half of whom are children, are in
need of humanitarian assistance and protection, while
2.1 million people face food insecurity. It is essential
that the peace agreement contribute to creating the
conditions for better access to humanitarian aid and
that development activities be launched in already

19-185623/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

stable areas. Adequate support must also be provided to
the 622,000 displaced persons and the 590,000 Central
African refugees registered in neighbouring countries.
Our 2019 humanitarian response plan, which requires
just over $430 million, is only 28 per cent funded,
which is grossly inadequate. I appeal to the generosity
of donors to help those many vulnerable people.
(spoke in English)
The successful implementation of the peace
agreement will also depend upon its ability to address the
many human rights violations that have characterized
the crisis and whose victims demand redress. In that
regard, I am glad to stress that the national consultations
for the creation of the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission will allow Central Africans
to contribute their views on how best to ensure redress
for victims of abuse, the application of justice for those
involved in grave crimes, and the path towards national
reconciliation. Progress towards national reconciliation
and the integration of armed groups into State forces
and society will be critical for allowing elections to
take place in 2020 and 2021, as planned.
(spoke in French)
In that regard, the Constitutional Court declared
certain articles of the electoral code, recently adopted
by the National Assembly, to be unconstitutional.
The Assembly will soon be called upon to sit in
extraordinary session in order to adopt the text revised
by the Court, failing which the country could face a
serious institutional deadlock. A delay in the adoption
of the electoral code could lead to a delay in the
preparations for the elections. However, the elections
are a crucial step in strengthening democracy in the
Central African Republic. Everything must therefore
be done to ensure that the elections, the preparations for
which will require substantial international financial,
technical and operational support, take place within the
deadlines set by the Central African Constitution.
Similarly, for elections to take place in peaceful
conditions, all actors involved must henceforth exercise
restraint and wisdom. I have noted the establishment of
a political platform composed of 20 opposition political
parties and four civil society organizations that are
strongly opposed to the peace agreement. I hope that
this opposition to the agreement will not lead to the
rejection of the peace process, but rather to constructive
proposals for the development of the country.
4/24

20/06/2019

MINUSCA will always be able to count on the
support of the Security Council and that of all Member
States of the international community so as to ensure
the success of its mandate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ndiaye
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Matondo.
Mr. Matondo (spoke in French): First of all, in my
capacity as Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for the Central
African Republic and Central Africa, I would like to
highlight what an honour it is to be able to review the
situation in the Central African Republic four months
after the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
The political dialogue process led by the African
Union through the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic was
completed at the end of 2018, paving the way for talks
in Khartoum between the Government of the Central
African Republic and the armed groups. The talks
began on 25 January and ended on 5 February this year
with an agreement between the Government and the
14 armed groups. An initial signing ceremony of the
agreement concluded between the parties took place on
5 February in Khartoum, followed by a formal signing
ceremony by the parties on 6 February in Bangui.
Against that backdrop, the topic it is my honour to
address in the Security Council today is the status of
the implementation of the agreement, in particular
with regard to the progress achieved, the difficulties
encountered, the actions taken by the guarantors and the
facilitators, the main challenges and recommendations.
With regard to the progress made as of 20 June, much
more has been achieved by the Government. To date,
four months after the signing of the agreement, I would
note at the political level, for information purposes, the
appointment of a Prime Minister, Mr. Firmin Ngrebada,
on 25 February, and the formation of an inclusive
Government, on 22 March, after the rejection of a first
Government deemed less inclusive by the parties to
the agreement.
In terms of monitoring the agreement, I would
note the adoption of all the regulatory texts setting
up the monitoring implementation mechanism as
well as the structures provided for by the agreement
and the operationalization of the structures for the
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

implementation and monitoring mechanism, including
the Executive Monitoring Committee, which has
already held three meetings, the Technical Secretariat to
support the Executive Monitoring Committee, and the
National Implementation Committee, the Prefectural
Implementation Committee and the Technical Security
Committee, which are currently being set up. As part of
the transitional security arrangements, the regulatory
texts for the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité have
been adopted, and they are in the process of being
stood up. With regard to reconciliation and transitional
justice, an inclusive commission has begun its work,
and the national popular consultation in preparation for
the establishment of the truth, justice, reparation and
reconciliation commission was launched on 6 June,
with work is ongoing.
In terms of security, since the signing of the
agreement, there has been an overall decrease in
tension and in the number of clashes between armed
groups and the Central African Armed Forces,
supported by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), despite a few regrettable cases
of assassination, rape and theft of livestock, especially
in the west, north and east of the country.
As for the difficulties encountered, while the
Government can be pleased with the efforts made
to honour commitments, the armed groups for
their part are not really enthusiastic. The update on
the implementation of the agreement made by the
Executive Monitoring Committee during its three
working meetings indicated that the results remain far
from what was hoped for or expected. Indeed, cases of
violations of non-compliance with the implementation
of the agreement continue to occur on the ground,
and mostly involve violations and abuses against
civilian populations and humanitarian workers, sexual
violence against women and girls, obstruction of the
free movement of persons and goods, the erection of
barriers and the collection of illegal taxes, a failure
to return public buildings and military camps and the
theft of livestock.
The most serious, and intolerable, violation of
the agreement took place on 21 and 22 May in the
communes of Koundjili, Bohong and Lemouna, in the
prefecture of Ouham-Pendé, where more than 40 people
were massacred by members of the Mouvement pour
le retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, supposedly in
retaliation after several Peul herders were killed during

S/PV. 8558

an incident of cattle raiding. It should be pointed out
that the massacre seriously undermined the peace
agreement, to the extent where it gave certain elements
of the media and parties to the agreement an opportunity
to further disparage it.
Despite the strong pressure on the Government
and the guarantors and facilitators to the agreement
to confront the perpetrators of the massacre directly,
thus far they have shown wisdom in using the crisisresolution mechanism provided for in the agreement.
Furthermore, the training and deployment of the Unités
spéciales mixtes de sécurité could serve to rein in
once and for all the causes of the recurring conflict
between herders and farmers in certain regions of the
country. It is also worth noting that, in the light of the
upcoming elections, some people could exploit this
most unfortunate event by politicizing it.
As for the steps taken by the guarantors and
facilitators to the agreement, we would like to highlight
the consultations convened by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission from 18 to 20 March, with
a view to finding a solution to the crisis following the
formation of the first inclusive Government on 3 March.
The tripartite African Union-European Union-United
Nations deployed a mission from 14 to 18 April to
evaluate the agreement and advocate for inviting all
political forces across the nation to join and support
the agreement. A second meeting of the International
Support Group for the Central African Republic was
held on 17 April, with a view to harmonizing the
interventions of the various actors and mobilizing
resources in support of the agreement.
The actions of the guarantors and facilitators
following the tragedy on 21 and 22 May included
three joint missions made up by the Government,
the guarantors, including the African Union and the
Economic Community of Central African States,
and facilitators, including the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, to visit the areas in
question and gain insight into the events, support and
comfort the population and alleviate tensions.
They also met with the leader of the Mouvement
pour le retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, Mr. Sidiki
Abass, to hear his version of the facts and to communicate
the requirements of the Government and the guarantors
to the agreement. The main demands conveyed to him
following the massacre in Paoua were that he arrest

19-185625/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

20/06/2019

and indict the perpetrators of the massacre, as well as
those who absconded from the competent authorities,
so that they might be tried and punished in accordance
with the law; that he dismantle all barriers and military
bases associated with the group; that he enrol individual
combatants in the national disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme; and that he
cooperate fully with the competent authorities and the
agreement guarantors to combat impunity.

especially with regard to DDR and the setting up of the
Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité; fostering a climate
of peace and national solidarity among all Central
Africans; preventing the emergence of new armed and
political groups hostile to peace and stability within the
country; and, finally, establishing favourable conditions
for the holding of the upcoming elections, while taking
into consideration time constraints and others related to
limited material resources.

The Mouvement pour le retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation has recently shown its willingness to
cooperate by identifying three perpetrators of the
tragedy in Paoua, but we are still awaiting news on the
whereabouts of other suspects. The second joint meeting
of the Government, the guarantors and the facilitator
with Mr. Abass was held on 18 June in Bocaranga,
just two days ago, during which he affirmed his
adherence to the peace process; his commitment to the
implementation of the agreement, especially with regard
to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of all of the group’s elements as from 29 June; his active
participation in the formation of the Unités spéciales
mixtes de sécurité and his commitment to search for all
alleged perpetrators of the May 21 massacre and hand
them over to the competent authorities.

Against that backdrop, and taking into account the
progress made as well as the difficulties encountered
by the guarantors and facilitators, including the
main challenges to implementation, we would like to
make the following recommendations to the Security
Council: to appeal to the international community
regarding the need to mobilize the necessary
resources for the reconstruction of the Central African
Republic and the implementation of labour-intensive
development projects; to encourage the Government
of the Central African Republic to maintain the same
spirit of openness and dialogue with armed groups
and all stakeholders in Central African society; to
maintain the framework of dialogue with armed groups
by, among other things, exerting political pressure on
them to respect their commitments; and to ensure all
the necessary conditions for the swift initiation of the
national DDR programme and the formation of the
Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité.

Similar efforts are being made by the guarantors
and facilitators with regard to the other leaders of
armed groups — including Ali Darassa of the Unité
pour la paix en Centrafrique on 12 June — to remind
them of the need to respect their commitments in the
framework of the implementation of the agreement. We
should nevertheless note the constructive attitude of
certain armed groups, such as the Front populaire pour
la renaissance de la Centrafrique, which is committed
to removing all its illegal barriers and releasing the
buildings it continues to occupy illegally in the areas
under its control.
One of the main challenges we face includes
combating unemployment and poverty through the
implementation of an intensive, large-scale programme
aimed at former members of armed groups, youth and
local communities for the construction and rehabilitation
of priority infrastructure throughout the national
territory of the Central African Republic. There are
also the challenges of mobilizing sufficient resources
required to operationalize the mechanism for the
implementation and monitoring of structures relating
to the peace agreement; creating conditions conducive
to the effective implementation of the agreement,
6/24

We also recommend that the Council further
mobilize resources for the effective operationalization
of the agreement’s implementation and monitoring
mechanism for preparations for the forthcoming
elections; intensify efforts to popularize the agreement
among the armed groups of all political forces active in
the Central African Republic so that they appropriate and
fully adhere to its letter and spirit; urge all such forces
to refrain from committing acts that are detrimental to
social cohesion and national reconciliation; reinforce
the mechanisms for transitional justice and the truth,
justice, reparations and reconciliation commission
in order to put up a firm fight against all forms of
impunity; and help the subregion become more involved
in the quest for a peaceful and lasting solution to the
crisis in the Central African Republic, in particular by
reactivating bilateral mixed commissions.
Our final recommendation is that the Council
lead the call for the strengthening of humanitarian
assistance in the fight against malnutrition and for the
reintegration of displaced persons and refugees.
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

We commend the countries of the subregion that
have kindly included the search for a peaceful and
lasting solution to the crisis in the Central African
Republic on their agendas. I would also like to reiterate
my thanks to the United Nations for its contribution and
cooperation with the African Union in the peace and
stabilization process in the Central African Republic.
Finally, I take this opportunity to commend all partners
of the Central African Republic for their readiness and
assistance in the implementation of the agreement and
development projects in the country.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Matondo for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Vervaeke.
Mr. Vervaeke: I am honoured to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the European Union (EU). I
recognize the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, and
the Special Representative of the African Union,
Mr. Matias Matondo.
Five months after the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic was
signed in Bangui, we are now at a crucial moment.
Let me pay tribute to all those who contributed to
achieving the agreement, in particular African Union
Commissioner Smaїl Chergui. We remain deeply
convinced that the agreement provides a real chance for
a better future in the Central African Republic — if it is
implemented by all sides in good faith, with a real sense
of responsibility. The buy-in of the population and the
support of the region will also be critical elements.
The Government has so far delivered on several
counts. A largely inclusive Government has been put in
place, and now all armed groups are represented in the
Government. The different follow-up mechanisms have
been established. We wish to congratulate President
Touadera and the Prime Minister on their leadership
and sense of compromise.
A governmental seminar is scheduled to take place
in the next few days with the support of partners,
including the European Union, to reinforce governmental
cohesion and team spirit with a view to strengthening
internal confidence. We will also be providing support
to the Technical Secretariat of the follow-up monitoring
mechanism, and soon start providing parallel support
to the armed groups to reinforce their ownership of the

S/PV. 8558

agreement and coach them to help them deliver on their
own engagements.
Let me say a few words on the Unités spéciales
mixtes de sécurité, a critical element of the peace
agreement as a temporary security measure. A legal basis
for the units has now been prepared and initial funding
via the Peacebuilding Fund has been secured. The
European Union has also made an initial contribution
of €3.4 million to finance the African Union support
to the unit; we will consider further support once they
are deployed. In addition, the European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic
is ready to conduct a train-the-trainers course for
designated Central African Armed Forces trainers once
they are identified. What we now need is a clear process
and chain of command placed under State authority.
Manning lists for the units, however, are still
incomplete, both on the part of the Government and the
armed groups, which is delaying their deployment. The
establishment and deployment of the first units is now
envisaged for October, after a two-month training that
will have to start in July. We must act with urgency. It is
also important that the Central African Armed Forces
fully own the process. Additional efforts are urgently
needed to fill the confidence gap. Otherwise, progress
will be impossible.
As mentioned by previous speakers, five months
after its signing, regrettably, the peace agreement
continues to be violated, notably by armed groups.
We remain deeply concerned about the slow progress
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as certain groups’ lack of compliance and acts of
violence. Violence is irresponsible and inadmissible,
notably by parties to a peace agreement.
Events like the recent attack in Paoua run counter
to the peace agreement and cannot go unanswered.
They undermine our collective efforts and credibility,
and further weaken the trust generated by the peace
agreement. The parties, guarantors and facilitators
must use all their tools to respond to and prevent
violations, including early-warning mechanisms,
enhanced dialogue, appropriate follow-up mechanisms
and a clear strategy on addressing violations. The peace
agreement provides for all such measures, including
sanctions, and they must be fully exploited to preserve
the credibility of the process and, finally, to achieve
real and sustainable peace. In that context, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization

19-185627/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
must continue to actively engage non-compliant
armed groups — through pressure and use of force,
if necessary.
That brings me to the issue of justice, which plays
a crucial role in the peace agreement. The people of
the Central African Republic clearly expect justice
to be delivered impartially and speedily. Those who
are responsible for committing crimes and serious
violations must be brought to justice. We look forward
to the putting in place of transitional justice. The
European Union has contributed technical and financial
support to ongoing consultations. We will soon be ready
to consider financing for the truth, justice, reparations
and reconciliation commission, the setting up of which
is becoming increasingly urgent.
The region also has a role to play in the success of
peace process. In that regard, we welcome the recent
bilateral Cameroon-Central African Republic mixed
commission on cooperation as a positive development.
We encourage the strengthening of relations with all
of the neighbours of the Central African Republic, in
particular Chad.
The Central African Republic will hold elections in
18 months’ time. Those elections are part of the peace
agreement and are a crucial step to consolidating the
country’s gains, including its democratic achievements.
Holding timely, credible and legitimate elections is key
to the peace process, as it ensures greater inclusivity.
Elections and electoral competition also bring about
tension. As such, all political actors should act
responsibly. Calling for violence and using hate speech
should be considered a violation of the peace agreement.
We are ready to support the elections and call
on all partners to the Central African Republic to
mobilize their support. MINUSCA’s mandate should
be adapted to reflect the Mission’s necessary role in
the peace agreement’s implementation and in support
of the upcoming elections. The European Union will
continue to coordinate and cooperate fully with the
African Union and the United Nations through its
integrated multidimensional approach. I was recently
privileged to represent the European Union on a joint
mission, together with Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix and Commissioner Smaїl Chergui.
Projecting together the coherent and complementary
support of our institutions for the peace agreement sent
a powerful message.
8/24

20/06/2019

Finally, I would like to update the Council on
the European Union’s support of the Central African
Republic. I already mentioned the European Union
Military Training Mission. Apart from training and
advising the national forces, we will soon start training
new recruits in Camp Kassai and in Bouar. The Training
Mission also provides strategic advice to the presidency,
the Defence Ministry, the headquarters of the Central
African Armed Forces, the Interior Ministry and the
Directors-General of the gendarmerie and the police, in
accordance with its mandate. Our substantial support
for mediation and the implementation of the peace
agreement will continue.
On the development front, I inform the Council
that the European Union, together with its member
States, has mobilized over €850 million to support
the population since the beginning of the crisis. We
will provide an additional €60 million for the specific
purpose of adapting activities to support the peace
agreement by operating in new geographic areas, such
as the east. Governance, justice, the rule of law and
support for democratic institutions will remain core
considerations of all of our actions and engagement.
On the humanitarian side, as the Special
Representative highlighted earlier as a critical issue, the
European Union remains fully committed, particularly
with regard to increasing access to remote areas
and communities.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains complex and fragile. A protracted humanitarian
crisis will exacerbate structural weaknesses. It is
therefore essential to continue to focus on structural
reforms, especially in the security and governance
sector, and to stay actively engaged in finding a longterm solution.
For its part, the European Union will continue to
work with its partners in the Government and civil
society, with the African Union and the United Nations
and with the region. High Representative Federica
Mogherini is planning to visit the Central African
Republic in July as a testament to the European Union’s
exceptional support for the people of the Central
African Republic and the peace process.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Vervaeke for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Central African Republic; Mr. Matias Bertino
Matondo, African Union Special Representative; and
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of
the European Union External Action Service, for their
very enlightening briefings. In particular, I would like
to welcome Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ndiaye, who is here in the Chamber for the
first time. I commend his efforts since he assumed his
post and pledge France’s full support in helping him
carry out his important tasks.
The signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, on
6 February in Bangui, created genuine prospects for
emerging from the crisis and achieving lasting peace
in the Central African Republic. We are therefore fully
committed to its implementation and welcome the first
measures taken by the Central African authorities, under
the direction of President Touadera, for the agreement to
be translated into action. I would mention in particular
the formation of a new inclusive Government, the work
undertaken to expedite the operationalization of the
Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité, the establishment
of structures for monitoring the implementation of the
agreement, including the first meetings of the executive
monitoring committee, and the revival this past May
of the joint commission between the Central African
Republic and Cameroon.
Nonetheless, we remain alarmed by the continued
violence by armed groups, which continue to recruit
children into their ranks and violate the arms embargo
to re-arm themselves. The humanitarian consequences
are horrific, primarily impacting the most vulnerable
populations: internally displaced persons, children and
women. The recent violence perpetrated by the Retour,
réclamation et rehabilitation group in the Paoua region,
which claimed the lives of more than 50 civilians, is
unacceptable. It constitutes a serious violation of the
peace agreement, and we strongly condemn it, as we do

S/PV. 8558

some armed groups’ targeting of humanitarian workers,
who at times pay with their lives for their commitment.
We have taken note of the reaction of the leaders
of Retour, réclamation et rehabilitation group following
the attack in late May to put an end to such acts. We
expect them to locate the individuals responsible within
their ranks and deliver them without delay to justice to
answer for their crimes.
We also welcome the response of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in adopting a
firm and robust posture towards the Retour, réclamation
et rehabilitation group, thereby safeguarding the peace
agreement. That posture is indispensable and must
continue to be deployed towards armed groups. In that
regard, too, MINUSCA can count on our full support.
Against that backdrop, we believe that the priority
in implementing the peace agreement must be to stop
the violence perpetrated by armed groups, disarm
and demobilize them and to gradually re-establish
State authority throughout the territory. The Central
African Government, for its part, must also continue its
communication efforts on the peace agreement, embark
upon the process towards the adoption of a law on
decentralization and make progress in the establishment
of the truth, justice, reconciliation and reparations
commission. Those are ways to ensure greater
involvement by the people, especially women and young
people, in implementing the agreement, to make local
Government closer to the population and to respond
to the demands of the Central African population for
justice, which also entails the continuation of its work
by the Special Criminal Court and the strengthening of
the national judicial system.
For the implementation of the peace agreement
to succeed, the international community’s full and
coordinated engagement in support it, both politically
and financially, is indispensable. In that regard, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the countries of the region,
as guarantors of the peace agreement, have a crucial
role to play. We therefore encourage the African Union
and ECCAS to continue their efforts, together with the
United Nations and the countries of the region.
For its part, France is and will remain fully
committed to supporting the implementation of a peace
agreement. France has thus far — and this is not an
exhaustive list — provided €10 million in budgetary

19-185629/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

20/06/2019

support to strengthen public administration in the
Central African Republic, and we are continuing to
train 200 national public servants. On the security
front, we are providing complementary training for
between 850 and 950 members of the Central African
Armed Forces trained by the European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic
(EUTM-RCA). In terms of rehabilitation, we are
funding quick-impact projects totalling €28 million
for the development of economic activities and the
integration of the population.

in that regard will therefore be considered with the
greatest attention. We call on all Central African actors
to assume their responsibilities to ensure that the
preparations for the elections can take place in a calm
and constructive environment.

Beyond our bilateral commitment, I would also
like to welcome the commitment of the European
Union, which is the leading development partner of the
Central African Republic. The EUTM-RCA, of which
France will take command on 1 July, remains the point
of reference in the training of Central African Armed
Forces. It has trained and qualified more than 3,000
Central African soldiers and began training another
1,000. It will contribute to the establishment of the
garrison army model with the redeployment of Central
Africa Armed Forces contingents in Bouar.

Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Ndiaye for his briefing. The
United States looks forward to a collaborative and
productive relationship with him, and we appreciate
the seriousness with which he has taken up his new
role to implement the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to its fullest.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
reaffirm France’s full support for MINUSCA. As we all
know, MINUSCA operates in a difficult environment,
but it plays a vital role in stabilizing the Central African
Republic. It plays a crucial role in the implementation
of the peace agreement. In that regard, I would refer to
the establishment and deployment of Unités spéciales
mixtes de sécurité, which must help improve security
across the country and restore State authority. That is
why we will continue to ensure that MINUSCA has the
necessary means to fulfil its mission.
I would like to pay tribute here to troop- and
police-contributing countries for their commitment
in the Central African Republic and to commend all
the efforts undertaken by MINUSCA to increase its
mobility, improve its operational performance where
shortcomings had been identified and continue the
work undertaken to prevent cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse and ensure that they do not go unpunished.
Finally, with the elections of 2020 and 2021 on
the horizon, which must anchor the Central African
Republic in democracy, we believe that MINUSCA
should be able to play a supporting role to the conduct
of the elections, in support of the Central African
authorities. The recommendations that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will make
10/24

The peace agreement can and must mark a new
beginning for the Central African Republic, which
is why it is essential for the Security Council and the
international community to remain mobilized and
united in supporting the Central African Republic
and MINUSCA.

I thank Director Vervaeke for his briefing today
and for the European Union’s important work in the
Central African Republic. To Special Representative
Matondo, I say that we appreciate the African Union’s
efforts, alongside those of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) and MINUSCA, to
pursue accountability and prevent reprisals following
the May massacres in Lemouna and Koundjili. The
United States condemns those horrific, premeditated
attacks, which were flagrant violations of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, of 6 February.
We take note of and appreciate the role of
the Government of the Central African Republic,
MINUSCA, the African Union and ECCAS in securing
the handover of the three suspects and stopping the
spread of violence. We call on the Retour, réclamation
et rehabilitation armed group that conducted the attacks
to hand over additional perpetrators, dismantle its bases
and barriers in the area of the attack and demobilize and
disarm immediately. The peace agreement is the Central
African Republic’s best prospect for ending violence
and achieving lasting peace and security. There must
be accountability for violations of the agreement.
Despite those troubling attacks, there has been
noteworthy progress since February. We welcome
the momentum in the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation (DDRR) process,
including the receipt of many armed groups’ lists of
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

candidates for DDRR and the work of MINUSCA’s
first mobile demobilization team with the Revolution
et justice-Sayo armed group in Bouar. That work,
including proper vetting for former armed-group
members, is essential because Central Africans will
trust their national military and mixed brigades to
protect them only when they are confident that those
soldiers are indeed committed to protecting, and not
targeting, civilians.
Central African Republic citizens told us in clear
terms during the 2015 Bangui Forum that justice
and accountability are high priorities. They are also
priorities for the United States. We commend the
signatories to the agreement for acknowledging the
need for justice and accountability and for their work
to establish the inclusive commission. We urge all
parties to fully support and cooperate with the Special
Criminal Court.
The United States is watching the situation in the
Central African Republic and the progress towards
implementation of the peace agreement closely. We
are committed both to ensuring that the signatories to
the peace agreement keep their word and to applying
consequences both through United States domestic
authorities and the Security Council for individuals and
groups undermining the agreement. We hope that we
will not need to resort to such mechanisms. Instead,
we urge the parties to the agreement and all partners to
work to advance the many signs of hope for the Central
African Republic. That means participating fully in the
executive follow-up committee, holding the individuals
or groups that have violated the terms of the peace
agreement accountable and pursuing justice for those
responsible for mass atrocities.
We look forward to continuing to work with the
United Nations, the African Union, ECCAS and other
partners in pursuit of the faithful implementation of the
peace agreement and the lasting peace and security that
the signatories can bring to the people of the Central
African Republic as a result.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers.
I thought their briefings today were particularly
insightful and clear.
While it is good to hear that security has broadly
improved in some areas over the past six months, I
would like to start by offering my condolences to the
families of those killed in the attacks by members of
the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation group near

S/PV. 8558

Paoua on 21 May. That kind of violence, perpetrated
by members of armed groups that are signatories to the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, demonstrates a flagrant
disregard for the integrity of the peace process. The
United Kingdom fully supports the peace process in
the Central African Republic, just as we supported
the African Union-led peace agreement on which it
is founded. I again congratulate the African Union on
its leadership and ongoing work. It is vital that we all
send our clear and unambiguous backing for the peace
agreement and the peace process. With coordinated and
sustained international support, especially from the
region, the Central African Republic can achieve longlasting peace and stability. We call on all the armed
groups to cease all forms of violence and engage in the
implementation of the peace agreement.
We also reiterate the Secretary-General’s call to
reinforce local peace and reconciliation committees,
which offer agency to women, members of civil society,
religious leaders and young people. As we know from
many of the conflicts discussed in this Chamber,
an inclusive peace agreement is more likely to be
a sustainable one. It is vital that the Central African
people feel ownership of the peace agreement and its
implementation. We need to see a better understanding
of the peace process take shape, taking into account the
views and needs of Central Africans.
There can be no peace without justice. I am
afraid that incitements to violence, including on
religious and ethnic grounds, and attacks on civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers will continue
if the perpetrators are not held to account. Again, as
we have seen in so many conflicts, accountability is
vital if the people of the Central African Republic are
to see peace and stability in their country. The United
Kingdom recognizes the efforts by the Government of
the Central African Republic, together with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the United Nations Development Programme,
to bring some of the perpetrators of serious crimes
to account. In particular, we welcome the progress
made in establishing the Special Criminal Court and
initiating the first investigations. We note that the
Court is conducting a nationwide campaign to raise
awareness of its mandate. But more has to be done,
and we urge the Central African Republic to work with
the international community to expedite progress on

19-1856211/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

transitional justice, which is an essential component of
peace and stability.
More than one in four Central Africans are
displaced and half of the population is in desperate need
of humanitarian assistance. The United Kingdom is
committed to supporting the humanitarian effort in the
Central African Republic and since 2014 has provided
more than $140 million in funding in that regard. In
2018, however, only 36 per cent of the humanitarian
response plan was funded. A stable, secure and peaceful
Central African Republic continues to be in all of our
interests and we encourage all Member States to help
fill the gap.
The United Kingdom fully supports the work
of MINUSCA and is committed to working with the
Security Council in support of MINUSCA’s stabilization
mandate. We agree with the Secretary-General’s
observation that there should be a renewed focus on
the peace process, with MINUSCA’s participation,
and that more responsibility should be taken by the
guarantors and facilitators of the peace agreement.
Enhanced United Nations political engagement will
support political, peacebuilding and security efforts
in the Central African Republic. Today I want to pay
tribute to all the work done by MINUSCA and send our
thanks, via the Special Representative, to those who
represent the Council in blue on the ground. However,
we should also be communicating clearly with the
people of the Central African Republic in order to show
them and help them understand how much MINUSCA
is delivering for them.
In conclusion, the international community and
the Government of the Central African Republic are
making progress towards implementing key elements
of the peace agreement. But there is much at stake. We
must continue to focus on building peace and stability
and creating the conditions for safe and credible
elections in 2020, which will help us achieve the longterm protection and prosperity that the people of the
Central African Republic deserve.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by expressing my delegation’s
warm congratulations to Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye on
his appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). I thank him for the excellent
12/24

20/06/2019

quality of his briefing on the situation in the Central
African Republic and assure him of Côte d’Ivoire’s
full support in fulfilling his duties. We would also
like to thank Mr. Matias Bertino Matondo, African
Union Special Representative, and Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa, European External
Action Service, for their in-depth briefings. Lastly, we
welcome the participation of Ambassador Ambroisine
Kpongo, Permanent Representative of the Central
African Republic.
The signing on 6 February of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic represents a genuine source of hope
for the Central African people and the international
community. It can be seen as a prelude to the restoration
of lasting peace, security and stability in our brother
country, despite the multiple challenges that are the
Secretary-General rightly points out in his report
(S/2019/498).
Among the challenges to be met, we note the
reluctance of armed groups to translate commitments
to which they freely subscribed into concrete action, a
reluctance that is demonstrated by, among other things,
the continuation of illegal activities contrary to the
spirit of the peace agreement across a large part of the
national territory, including all kinds of trafficking,
the levy of illegal taxes, the creation of obstacles to the
restoration of State institutions and violence against
civilians. In that regard, my delegation condemns the
recent violence perpetrated by armed groups in the
north-west of the country, as well as the attacks on
schools, hospitals, humanitarian personnel and the joint
patrols of MINUSCA and the Central African Armed
Forces. In its capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire
notes that those serious acts correspond perfectly to the
designation criteria for persons or armed groups to be
sanctioned, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of resolution 2399 (2018).
However worrying they may be, these challenges
should not overshadow the significant progress that has
been made in operationalizing the peace agreement,
including the creation of mechanisms to promote
the implementation of its relevant provisions. We
were pleased to see the establishment of monitoring
and implementation mechanisms at the national and
regional levels, the inauguration on 15 May of the
executive follow-up committee, the establishment
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

of a legal framework for the Unités spéciales mixtes
de sécurité and the recent deployment of the Central
African Armed Forces in Kaga Bandoro.
Côte d’Ivoire believes that protecting civilians
is an absolute priority. We therefore encourage the
Government and the signatories to the peace agreement
to continue their efforts to implement the provisions
relating to the Constitution and the operationalization
of the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité as quickly
as possible. That should also include implementing
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme and restoring State authority
throughout the national territory.
Besides this, in view of the persistent challenges, it
is urgent that the international community, the friends
of the Central African Republic and the facilitators and
guarantors of the peace agreement, that is, the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central
African States, combine their efforts to achieve the
full implementation of the agreement. In that regard,
we commend the joint mission to Bangui in April of
the African Union, the European Union and the United
Nations aimed at generating international support for
the peace agreement.
Subregional cooperation should also play an active
role in all initiatives to restore peace and stability to
the Central African Republic, through mechanisms
such as the mixed commissions for cooperation among
the States of the region. The mixed commissions have
the advantage of serving as appropriate frameworks for
developing joint solutions to common political, security
and humanitarian challenges. My delegation welcomed
the relaunch on 6 May of the mixed commission for
cooperation between Cameroon and the Central
African Republic.
We want to emphasize the importance of
national ownership, an inclusive peace process and
accountability in the process of emerging from the
crisis, and we therefore commend the creation of
local peace and reconciliation committees. We also
encourage the involvement of civil society, including
women and young people, in the process, in line with
the recommendations of the International Support
Group on the Central African Republic. In that regard,
my delegation is pleased with the start of public
consultations aimed at establishing the truth, justice,
reparations and reconciliation commission, as provided
for in the peace agreement.

S/PV. 8558

Preserving the achievements of the peace
agreement undoubtedly depends on the holding of
peaceful elections in 2020 and 2021. All Central African
political and social actors should contribute to fostering
a peaceful atmosphere, without which free, transparent
and inclusive elections are impossible.
We commend MINUSCA on its important
participation in the Central African Republic peace
efforts, and it should continue to play an active role
with the range of tools at its disposal. In that regard,
we concur with the concerns of the Government of the
Central African Republic and its international partners
about the limited scope of MINUSCA’s mandate for
electoral support, and we will be interested to see the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on that issue.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate Côte d’Ivoire’s
full support for MINUSCA and for President
Touadera, whose commendable efforts, leadership and
determined personal commitment should contribute to
the return of lasting peace and stability in the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): We thank
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of
the European External Action Service, and Mr. Matias
Matondo, African Union Special Representative
and Head of the African Union Office in the Central
African Republic, for their briefings on the situation in
the Central African Republic.
I would like to raise three key issues in response to
the briefings today, regarding political developments,
the negative activities of some armed groups and the
role of the region and the international community in
the Central African Republic.
At the outset, we reiterate our support for the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and welcome the
progress that has been registered since its signing four
months ago. We fully support the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, especially the role played by the African
Union (AU) and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS). In that regard, South Africa
commends the cooperation between Ambassador
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, the African Union Commissioner

19-1856213/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

for Peace and Security, Special Representative Ndiaye
and Ambassador Adolphe Nahayo of ECCAS on
initiating consultations among the signatories to the
political agreement in order to resolve the political
stalemate and avert the nascent political agreement’s
potential collapse. We reject any external interference
or attempts by anyone to fight their own regional issues
by using Africa as a playing field at the expense of
African lives.
We are encouraged by the national efforts aimed at
promoting peace, including the adoption of the electoral
code establishing the legal framework for the elections
in 2020 and 2021, the signing of a peace deal in Bria
by six armed groups and the creation of 26 peace and
reconciliation committees in various prefectures. We
are also encouraged by the progress registered within
the inter-ministerial committee for the follow-up of
the sanctions regime in the Central African Republic,
whereby the Government has elaborated a work plan
for monitoring and following up the implementation of
the benchmarks, demonstrating its political will with
regard to progressively easing the sanctions regime.
It is our considered view that if fully implemented,
the political agreement will assist the Government
of the Central African Republic in focusing on its
quest for economic and social recovery by addressing
the existing gaps in the State’s authority and, most
fundamentally, the capacity of the security sector to
protect the people of the Central African Republic, the
country and its borders.
South Africa notes that the military confrontations
that characterized the peak of the transhumance period
in late 2018 subsided during the period under review.
However, some armed groups continued activities
that violate the provisions of the political agreement,
including attacks on civilians, peacekeepers, United
Nations personnel and humanitarian workers, and
that continues to be a concern for my delegation. We
commend the efforts of MINUSCA and the Central
African Armed Forces in addressing the threat posed
by those groups, which have improved the security
situation in some areas. We also recognize the role
of women as essential agents of peace in the broader
nationwide reconciliation efforts. We call on all
signatories to refrain from acts that jeopardize the spirit
and letter of the political agreement and to commit to
the political process as a whole.
14/24

20/06/2019

Continued cooperation and coordination between
the AU, ECCAS, the United Nations, the European
Union and all other bilateral and multilateral partners
within the International Support Group of the Central
African Republic remain important for the country’s
security and development. That cooperation is critical
to ensuring the successful implementation of the
political agreement and the Central African Republic’s
national recovery and peacebuilding plan. We commend
the critical role that MINUSCA has played in bringing
peace, stability and development to the Central
African Republic. South Africa supports MINUSCA’s
continued presence in the country and underscores the
importance of strengthening the Mission’s resources so
that it can discharge its mandate effectively.
The prevailing situation in the Central African
Republic provides the United Nations with a significant
opportunity to align and synchronize its peacekeeping
with the peacebuilding activities of the European
External Action Service peacebuilding activities. In
that regard, there should be greater involvement and
prioritization of development and recovery activities on
the part of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. In that context, we
want to thank the configuration’s Chair, Ambassador
Omar Hilale of Morocco, for his good work in helping
the Central African Republic authorities to address
their challenges. The Security Council should also
address the ongoing illegal exploitation and trade of the
Central African Republic’s natural resources.
We are of the firm view that it is imperative for
the international community, through the United
Nations, the AU, ECCAS and international partners,
to continue to maintain solidarity with the people of
the Central African Republic and provide it with the
political, financial and other support it needs to ensure
that there is no reversal of the gains made so far. We
look forward to receiving the Secretary-General’s
next report on the situation in the Central African
Republic and the activities of MINUSCA, especially
his recommendations on the scope of MINUSCA’s
electoral mandate.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like
to thank Mr. Matias Bertino Matondo, African Union
Special Representative and Head of the African Union
Office in the Central African Republic, Mr. Koen
Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of the European
External Action Service, and Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
information they have provided on the current situation
in the Central African Republic. I am also glad to see
the Permanent Representative of the Central African
Republic, Ambassador Kpongo, here today.
Equatorial Guinea is very pleased that during
the period covered by the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/498) not only did the signatories commit to
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, signed on 6 February
in Bangui between the Government of the Central
African Republic and 14 armed groups, but progress
was also made in implementing the agreement. An
inclusive Government was created in which leaders of
armed groups were appointed to key advisory positions
that are crucial to the presidency, the Prime Minister’s
Cabinet and prefectures and sub-prefectures.
In Equatorial Guinea we feel the problems that are
affecting our Central African brothers as if they were
our own, which is why we particularly welcome the
recent positive and promising advances in the country
following the signing of the agreement. Equatorial
Guinea is ready to assist the Central African Republic
during this process. While there are reasons to be
optimistic that this agreement will be different, it is still
important to consolidate it with secure governmental
measures that focus on peace, security, justice,
economic recovery, good governance, social cohesion
and humanitarian action.
Where our brother people of Central Africa are
concerned, one thing is certain, that justice is an
essential component of the peace process. That is why
we commend the Government, which, with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), has promoted the creation of 26 peace and
reconciliation committees in various cities around the
country, such as Bangassou, Bouar and Bria, to name only
a few. Their objective is to promote peace processes at
the local level and to support the national reconciliation
campaign, as provided for in the agreement, since it is
important to ensure that the population is a legitimate
actor in the full implementation of the peace process
rather than continuing to be merely a witness to it.
We welcome the efforts of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) to improve bilateral
relations between the Central African Republic and its
neighbours, including my own country, and we call on

S/PV. 8558

all the countries of the region to further strengthen and
support their brother country by helping it to launch
commercial strategies that will promote its development
in various areas. However, we regret that advances
such as these are being diminished by the arbitrary
violence being inflicted by some armed groups,
such as the incident of 21 May in which combatants
from Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation killed 42
people, mostly civilians, in several villages near the
city of Paoua. Equatorial Guinea firmly condemns
those attacks and hopes that the perpetrators will not
go unpunished. We therefore commend the launch
of inclusive consultations on establishing the truth,
justice, reparations and reconciliation commission, in
accordance with the requests of the Bangui Forum on
National Reconciliation. The humanitarian situation
remains fragile, owing to general insecurity, a weak
Government presence and poor infrastructure, which
make it difficult for civilians and humanitarian workers
to carry out their normal activities.
Before I conclude, I would like to express Equatorial
Guinea’s congratulations to President Faustin Touadera
of the Central African Republic on his leadership
and firm commitment to the peace agreement. We
continue to urge the armed groups to comply with
their commitments. Lastly, we welcome the important
contribution made by the African Union and ECCAS
as the guarantors of the political agreement, as well
as the support of MINUSCA and the other United
Nations agencies and other international actors that are
contributing to the Central African process.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would first like to thank
our briefers: the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Mr. Matondo and Mr. Vervaeke for
their very comprehensive and enlightening briefings.
And perhaps I should start by saying how strongly we
support MINUSCA and the Special Representative’s
work, which are indispensable and much appreciated.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the Central African Republic (S/2019/498) and its
observations. To name only a few, they include, first,
the importance of the full commitment of all parties
to the implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, signed on 6 February, and the important role
of the African Union and the region; secondly, deep

19-1856215/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

concerns about the ongoing violence and the disastrous
humanitarian situation, and the condemnation of the
attacks on civilians and humanitarian aid workers; and
thirdly, the concrete steps taken by the Government
of the Central African Republic in implementing the
peace accord.
The peace agreement signed on 6 February is
a light at the end of the tunnel. At the same time, it
is also true that the situation in the Central African
Republic, in terms of political developments, security
and the humanitarian situation, continues to be very
fragile. The peace agreement has not yet changed those
fundamentals, and that is why we call on all actors
in the Central African Republic, the region and the
international community to help the Central African
Republic in producing peace dividends quickly. To a
great extent the success of the peace agreement will
depend on that.
Germany remains committed to the issue, especially
through its humanitarian efforts — we are the secondlargest contributor in humanitarian terms — and its
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund. Like South
Africa, we believe that the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund can play an important
role in bringing sustainable peace to the Central
African Republic.
We fully support the peace agreement and the
political process and believe that they can bring peace
to the Central African Republic. We commend all the
parties involved at the national level, but also the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the whole region for their
work in this process. It is important that all parties
honour their obligations. The key is mustering the
political will to cease fighting and engage in genuine
and honest political dialogue. At the same time,
the follow-up and monitoring mechanisms and the
formation of the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité will
also be vital. We therefore call on all signatories and the
international community to remain committed. Creating
visible peace dividends is now absolutely crucial. The
African Union and the Central African Republic’s
neighbours now have particular opportunities and also
responsibilities. In particular, we welcome the holding
of the first cooperation commission between the Central
African Republic and Cameroon since 2010. We also
very much encourage local peace initiatives and young
people and women’s active participation and inclusion
16/24

20/06/2019

in them. We are encouraged by MINUSCA’s efforts to
promote intercommunal dialogue and de-escalation at
the local level.
At the same time, we welcome the Government
of the Central African Republic’s efforts to push
implementation of the peace accord ahead with
concrete measures, such as consultations on the truth,
justice, reparations and reconciliation commission.
We encourage the authorities to actively pursue the
formation of the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité,
along with disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation efforts and the vetting of former
combatants. Questions of accountability will be
crucial to the peace process. We should also strengthen
communication efforts to educate the population
about the next steps of the implementation of the
peace agreement.
I will now say a few words about the situation on the
ground. Despite some positive developments following
the peace agreement, we remain very concerned about
the ongoing violence and attacks on civilians, such as
the attacks by the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation
movement in Paoua in May. We strongly condemn those
killings, and especially the attacks committed by rebel
groups that were signatories to the peace agreement.
We call on the authorities of the Central African
Republic, supported by MINUSCA, to investigate
rebel attacks and hold perpetrators accountable.
Monitoring mechanisms will remain key to effective
implementation, and bolstering the national justice
system and the Special Criminal Court will be crucial
to ending impunity and ensuring sustainable peace and
institutional trust.
Before I conclude, I have a few final comments
to make on the humanitarian situation, which
unfortunately remains disastrous and of great concern
to us, especially for internally displaced persons and
refugees. A quarter of the population is displaced.
Women and children, as is so often the case, are
suffering the most. The international community must
do more. Right now, the funding for the humanitarian
response plan is only at approximately 30 per cent. We
strongly condemn the violence against humanitarian
aid workers and call on all parties to respect their status
and protection against attacks.
role

In conclusion, we reiterate MINUSCA’s important
in protecting civilians, especially women,
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

facilitating the delivery of basic services and monitoring
human rights violations.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ndiaye, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic; Mr. Matondo, African Union Special
Representative; and Mr. Vervaeke, Managing Director
for Africa at the European Union External Action
Service, for their briefings.
On 6 February, the parties to the conflict in
the Central African Republic signed the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which represents an important,
indeed historic opportunity for the peace process in
the country. Significant progress has been made in the
implementation of the agreement during the past four
months. China appreciates the firm political will that
President Touadera has shown in leading the peace
process and the measures he has taken to implement
the agreement, including the establishment of the
follow-up monitoring mechanisms at the national and
prefectural levels. The 26 peace and reconciliation
committees established with the help of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
have helped to effectively enhance mutual trust among
the signatories to the agreement and to prevent and
mitigate conflicts.
At the same time, the Central African Republic
is still facing challenges on the security, political,
humanitarian and other fronts. China is concerned
about the violence that some armed groups continue to
perpetrate and urges all the parties to keep the overall
interests of the country and the people in mind, abide
by their commitments under the agreement and cease
actions that threaten the safety and security of civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. China
supports the countries of the region and regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
in bringing influence to bear on the situation. We
encourage the parties in the Central African Republic
to continue their political dialogue, jointly promote the
implementation of the agreement and fully participate
in the follow-up monitoring mechanisms.
MINUSCA has played an important role in
promoting peace and stability in the country.
China supports Special Representative Ndiaye and
MINUSCA in actively performing their duties. We

S/PV. 8558

expect MINUSCA to continue to help the Government
of the Central African Republic enhance its governance
capacity, promote security-sector reform and implement
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme.
Long-term stability in the Central African Republic
cannot be achieved without the continuing support of
the United Nations, the African Union, countries of the
region and international partners. All parties should
provide assistance tailored to the needs and situation on
the ground and on a basis of respect for the ownership
of the Government of the Central African Republic.
The Central African Republic will hold presidential
and legislative elections at the end of 2020 and the
beginning of 2021, which will be a crucial step for the
country in moving towards peace. The United Nations
should enhance its communication and coordination
with the Government of the Central African Republic,
assist it with its preparations for the elections and
continue to create conditions conducive to a resolution
of the issues in the Central African Republic as soon
as possible.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would first to thank the briefers for their informative
and detailed briefings. Today I would like to emphasize
three issues — the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, national
ownership and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
We welcome the political agreement and support
the political process, which is the only acceptable
solution to the crisis in the country. Central Africans
have had enough of the violence, and that message must
be heard by the leaders of the armed groups, which are
signatories to the agreement and must respect their
commitments. That means ending the violence and the
cycle of retaliation that led to the recent massacre in
Paoua, which we firmly condemn. Those responsible
must be brought to justice. The armed groups must
also cease their predatory activities and human rights
violations, such as the recruitment of children, and
the movements of unauthorized troops, and they must
realize that serious violations of the agreement will not
be without consequences.
We welcome the establishment of the prefectural
implementation committees and the technical security
committees, which are encouraging signs of the

19-1856217/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

commitment of the parties. The operationalization
of the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité is a major
challenge. Given the magnitude of that endeavour, it is
fortunate that the European Union can provide financial
support without any delay.
With regard to national ownership, the Central
African authorities naturally have a role to play in the
implementation of the agreement. Belgium welcomed
the launch on 15 June of the national implementation
committee. The national disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme is crucial in assisting
with the dissolution of armed groups. The lack
of access to health services, education, economic
development opportunities and justice, and above all
security, jeopardize ownership of the peace agreement
by the Central Africans, especially those living outside
the capital. Fortunately, the Central African Republic
does not have to face those challenges alone. It can
count on the support of the international community,
including the European Union. It should also rely on
the guarantors of the political agreement, such as the
countries of the region, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the African Union. We
encourage President Touadera to use his contacts to
forge strong partnerships with neighbouring countries,
including by re-activating the mixed commissions.
With respect to justice, we believe that the fight
against impunity is not at odds with the implementation
of the political agreement. The fact is that the quest for
justice is part and parcel of the reconciliation process.
Lastly, it must be recognized that MINUSCA is also
facing major challenges. The very serious incidents that
have occurred in the past few months have shown that
its mandate for the protection of civilians is painfully
relevant. Apart from overseeing the deployment of the
Central African Armed Forces, MINUSCA must now
also supervise the deployment of the Unités spéciales
mixtes de sécurité. We believe that it will be important
to consider enhancing logistical deployment support for
MINUSCA. MINUSCA also has a crucial role to play
in exercising its good offices and providing support
for the peace process, the expansion of State authority
and security-sector reform. Good cooperation among
all partners of the Central African Republic is key to
success, and we believe that MINUSCA can contribute
to that unity. The approaching elections are another
factor that must be taken into account in the peace
process. We call on the political leaders of the Central
African Republic to refrain from reviving tensions
18/24

20/06/2019

among communities for electoral purposes. We believe
that MINUSCA will have a major support role to play
in the organization of the elections.
In conclusion, I would like to commend Special
Representative Ndiaye for his energetic approach to his
work. I can assure him of Belgium’s full support.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting,
and the briefers for their valuable briefings. We would
particularly like to welcome Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
the newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
and to wish him every success in his work.
We want to begin by underscoring the commitment
and efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic in implementing the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation, which shows that
Central Africans are determined to put an end to
more than five years of conflict. We are encouraged
by the recent progress made in the political arena,
such as the formation of an inclusive Government,
the establishment of monitoring and implementation
mechanisms and the signing of reconciliation
agreements at the intercommunal level. Nonetheless,
we reiterate that the peace agreement’s true impact will
be in its full implementation. Its results must lead to
tangible improvements in the country’s security and
socioeconomic development, as well as in the serious
humanitarian situation. We would like to mention
some aspects that we believe should be prioritized in
that context.
First, on the political front, it is essential to ensure
as soon as possible that the relevant authorities can
complete the drafting of an electoral code that provides
the guarantees and legal framework for preparing
and holding the presidential, legislative, regional and
municipal elections in 2020 and 2021. It is also vital
that the Government of the Central African Republic
work for gradual decentralization, which has the
potential to promote the country’s development,
starting with the involvement of communities that have
been marginalized by the conflict. We also reiterate
the importance of implementing a gender parity law,
which is an effective way to ensure that Central African
women can play a key role, together with young people,
in determining the kind of society they wish to build.
Secondly, with regard to security, we are concerned
about the fact that the signatory armed groups continue
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

to violate various provisions of the agreement, and we
believe that the Government should consider possible
measures to counter such conduct. We consider it
particularly important to address the difficulties of
redeploying the national defence and internal security
forces throughout the territory of the Central African
Republic, since they are needed to tackle the ongoing
violence against the civilian population, illegal taxation
and the obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian
aid. We want to commend President Touadera’s
establishment of the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité
and to emphasize the importance of continuing to
work to accelerate the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme.
Thirdly, with respect to development, it is vital
to work to provide basic social services and establish
infrastructure across the national territory. The peace
agreement places particular emphasis on recovery
and development programmes to complement the
political and security reforms. We welcome the efforts
made to align the implementation of the agreement
with the national recovery and peacebuilding plan.
At the same time, we consider it essential to work
towards establishing the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission, which by ensuring access
to justice and accountability will make it possible to
assist victims of sexual violence and address the issue
of the recruitment of children by armed groups, among
other things.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
participation of the African Union, the various
subregional and regional bodies, neighbouring countries
and the United Nations in seeking to overcome the crisis
in the Central African Republic and reach a solution to
it. We hope that the recent peace agreement will be the
first step in the joint effort to achieve sustainable peace
in that country.

S/PV. 8558

take advantage of that window of opportunity, and the
international community should render them every
assistance. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) has an important role to play
in this context. We realize that the Blue Helmets’ task
is not an easy one, given the size of the country, the
logistical problems and the fragile security situation.
The Mission can of course count on our support.
We see signs of progress in the efforts to overcome
the crisis and move towards national reconciliation. The
most important thing right now is to make the process
as inclusive as possible, ensure a balanced approach
and take the interests of all stakeholders in the Central
African issue into account. We support President
Touadera’s efforts aimed at conducting a political
dialogue, carrying out speedy reforms of the security
sector, improving the capacity of the armed forces and
expanding State institutions throughout the country.
We agree that it is important to combat impunity, but
the approach to that should be a carefully ordered one
and subordinate to the goal of national reconciliation.
The issues of transitional justice and amnesties should
be addressed at the national level. Support mechanisms
must not undermine the progress towards a settlement.
Another important issue is the implementation
of the idea of forming so-called Unités spéciales
mixtes de sécurité for ensuring security in the areas
controlled by armed groups. We believe that realizing
initiative will make a significant contribution to the
reintegration of combatants and generally benefit
national reconciliation. We hope that MINUSCA will
provide the necessary assistance in that regard.

Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the situation in the Central African Republic.
We listened with interest to all of today’s briefers and
their assessments of the situation in the country.

We are ready to actively participate in the work
of the multilevel monitoring mechanisms to follow up
on the implementation of the Political Agreement. We
intend to support the work of the provincial peace and
reconciliation committees and the technical security
committees in using peace volunteers and civilsociety representatives to raise awareness among the
inhabitants of the Central African Republic’s northern
and north-eastern provinces regarding the content,
implementation and impact of the peace agreement.

We agree that the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed on 6 February, is an important starting point
towards the eventual resolution of the situation in the
country. The Government and armed groups should

Russia is making a significant contribution to
strengthening the combat capacity of the Central
African Republic’s security forces. At the request of
the country’s leadership, we are providing Bangui with
free military and technical assistance. In 2018, with the

19-1856219/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

permission of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic, the Russian Ministry of Defence sent small
arms and ammunition to the Central African army.
Preparations are currently under way for a second
shipment of military material. With the Committee’s
knowledge, Russian instructors have been officially
dispatched to Bangui to assist in training Central
African military personnel. On 27 April in Berengo
the seventh graduation of the Central African Armed
Forces, a 318-strong marine amphibious battalion, was
attended by the country’s leadership and representatives
of the diplomatic corps. The number of national armed
force troops trained by Russian instructors now totals
2,236, 126 of them officers, and the Central African
Republic’s leadership has repeatedly praised their
combat readiness.
During their time in the Central African Republic,
Russian specialists have been carrying out a number of
measures aimed at normalizing the humanitarian and
social situation of the population, creating conditions
conducive to establishing an interfaith and inter-ethnic
dialogue. Three hospitals have been set up in the cities
of Bria, Ouadda and Mbaiki, with each treating 300
patients a month and providing humanitarian assistance
to all in need. We organized a humanitarian convoy
of more than 15 trucks from Khartoum to Bangui
through remote and inaccessible areas of the Central
African Republic. Russian representatives have visited
the Muslim enclave near the main mosque in Bangui
several times to distribute humanitarian assistance to
low-income families and help with funerals. In the cities
of Berengo and Bria we have provided assistance for
rebuilding prayer houses. We have organized more than
10 round tables on peacebuilding issues in the Central
African Republic and conducted joint football training
for athletes from Christian and Muslim communities.
We will continue to provide comprehensive assistance
to the Central African Republic and work actively
to establish lasting peace in the country. We are
ready to coordinate our efforts with all who are
involved in seeking to normalize the situation without
hidden agendas.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
the briefers for their presentations today and for their
efforts in support of peace and security in the Central
African Republic.
20/24

20/06/2019

The Dominican Republic commends the
Government and the armed groups for overcoming their
differences in order to achieve the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic and for joining their efforts, together with
civil society, to take concrete steps in the initial phase
of implementing the Political Agreement, as evidenced
by the formation of an inclusive Government. We
commend the representatives of the communities for
conducting intercommunal dialogues and concluding
intercommunal reconciliation agreements aimed
at ending hostilities, promoting peaceful dialogue
and ensuring freedom of movement. We would also
like to acknowledge the steps taken to implement
the agreement and the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the African Union, the European
Union and the Government of the Central African
Republic to mobilize international support for the
political agreement.
We welcome the adoption of the electoral
code, which constitutes the legal framework for
the presidential, legislative, regional and municipal
elections to be held in 2020 and 2021. We hope that the
code will be enacted, and we welcome the Constitutional
Court’s readiness to comply with the parity law, which
provides for a minimum representation of 35 per cent of
women in State and private institutions during a 10-year
transition period. In that spirit, we hope to see a similar
minimum representation level set for young people in
recognition of their potential to transform societies.
We are concerned about the security situation in the
country, where some armed groups that are signatories
to the agreement have been committing acts of violence
with a view to winning new concessions in the peace
process. We urge them to cease all destabilizing actions
and to surrender their weapons, as laid down in the
peace agreement, and further urge them to submit the
remaining lists of their combatants so that they can
be considered for the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme.
We deplore the prevailing dire humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, where we
continue to see unacceptable obstacles to humanitarian
access and violations of human rights. We call on all
the parties to the conflict to guarantee full, security,
sustainable and unhindered humanitarian access to
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners,
including child protection advocates, in order to enable
19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

humanitarian assistance to be provided to the affected
populations as quickly as possible.
We commend the efforts of the Government
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to facilitate consultations on the
legislative framework of the truth, justice, reparations
and reconciliation commission, which is so important
to transitional justice. We also want to highlight the
establishment of the legal framework of the Unités
spéciales mixtes de sécurité, composed of members
of the national defence and security forces and
eligible members of the demobilized and disarmed
armed groups, whose deployment is necessary for the
reduction of violence in the Central African Republic.
Despite the challenging realities facing the Central
African Republic, the current political landscape also
represents a unique opportunity. We therefore urge all
political actors to put aside their differences and see
this moment of transition as an opportunity to face the
country’s current challenges together. Consultations
must continue through intercommunal dialogue and
reconciliation at the local level, based on the provisions
of the national agreement, in order to provide Central
Africans with the stability and lasting peace they
all deserve.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge and support
the role played by MINUSCA, the African Union and
all the actors that are working hand in hand with the
Central African Republic in order to achieve lasting
peace and stability.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would first like to join
others in thanking the briefers for their updates. As
this is the first time that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ndiaye has briefed the Council, I
want to welcome him and offer him the full support
of my delegation. I will focus my comments on three
pertinent points.
First, the international community should increase
its support for the Central African Republic. We join the
Secretary-General in welcoming the important progress
that has been made in the initial four months since the
February signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We
note from the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/498)
the progress made by the Government in a number of
areas, ranging from facilitating the conditions for the
sustainable return of internally displaced persons to the

S/PV. 8558

launching of popular consultations on the truth, justice,
reparations and reconciliation commission. We also
note President Touadera’s leadership in his commitment
to dialogue and willingness to seek compromise in
the pursuit of peace. It should serve as a source of
encouragement for the international community, as
it testifies to the fact that its partnership and support
has borne fruit. We can use that momentum to further
support the Central African Republic.
Despite a number of encouraging developments
and progress following the peace agreement, we remain
deeply concerned about various violations of the
agreement by some armed groups. We strongly believe
that they must be seriously addressed in order not to
jeopardize the implementation of the peace agreement,
which is still in its infancy.
Secondly, the Council should support the work of
regional and subregional organizations in the region.
In that regard, we recognize the important efforts of
the African Union and the Economic Community
of Central African States and other regional and
subregional organizations such as the European Union.
We also welcome the efforts of the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security and the United
Nations, through the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, in garnering international support for
the peace agreement. The fact is that partnership is key.
We encourage regional organizations and the United
Nations, as well as other stakeholders, to continue their
collaboration, and call for the international community
to provide its support. We also recognize the role of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in
providing a bird’s-eye view of the region and liaising
with neighbouring Governments. To that end, we
welcome Special Representative Fall’s report to the
Council earlier this month (S/2019/430) on the overview
of the situation in the region.
Thirdly, after hearing the updates from the briefers,
we believe it is clear that the role of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) is more
important than ever. The Mission’s work is crucial to
security-sector reform in the country, and its work
on justice and the rule of law provide the necessary
technical support for investigations by local authorities.
Those are two important tools in enabling the
Government to protect its people. In order to enhance
MINUSCA’s effectiveness, peacekeepers should also
be able to win the hearts and minds of the locals and

19-1856221/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

protect civilians. To that end, we once again emphasize
the importance of training and capacity-building for
peacekeepers, including enabling them to use the tools
of mediation, negotiation and community engagement.
For its part, Indonesia currently contributes
214 military personnel to MINUSCA, including an
engineering company that we have deployed since 2013.
We are also increasing our contribution by providing
140 police officers in a formed police unit. We
should preserve the momentum sparked by the peace
agreement, support its implementation and continue to
monitor its progress. Let this peace agreement be the
last and ultimate agreement that will serve as a bridge
to peace.
Mr. Zawieja (Poland): I would like to begin
by thanking our briefers for their comprehensive
briefings today.
Poland appreciates the progress made so far in the
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
We fully support all the efforts of the Central African
Republic authorities, which are a testament to their
leadership and sense of responsibility.

20/06/2019

significantly to the success of the initiative and the
normalization of the situation in the longer term.
The reconciliation process should be conducted
in parallel with the strengthening and deployment
of the State’s authority throughout the country, as
well as the delivery of basic services. We call on the
legislative institutions of the Central African Republic
to accelerate their work on necessary political reforms,
including the laws on decentralization and on the status
of former Heads of State, as well as the bill on political
parties. It will be impossible to promote peace without a
functioning justice system. Poland welcomes the launch
of consultations for the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission. However, the transitional
justice process and the fight against impunity must
be significantly accelerated if the basic aspirations of
Central African society are to be met. Poland supports
the plans to reinforce local peace and reconciliation
committees as part of broader nationwide reconciliation
efforts to overcome intercommunal tensions, and
welcomes the fact that women play such an important
role in those processes.

We nevertheless remain seriously concerned about
the persistent violence against the civilian population
and other significant violations of the agreement by
armed groups, including illegal taxation and obstructing
the deployment of State institutions. Poland strongly
condemns attacks on the people of the Central African
Republic, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.
We call on all armed groups to immediate cease the
violence against civilians, honour their obligations and
ensure the full implementation of the agreement. We
also call for the continued constructive engagement of
stakeholders in the region, notably the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African States,
as well as the Central African Republic’s neighbours.

The redeployment of the national security forces
remains a key component in the restoration of State
authority. We appreciate the work being done by the
European Union Training Mission to enhance the
capacities of the Central African Armed Forces.
At the same time, the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to the
redeployment of the security forces of the Central
African Republic remains indispensable. The Unités
spéciales mixtes de sécurité are also an essential element
of the peace agreement as one of its confidence-building
measures, but they cannot succeed without the prior
vetting of combatants, comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and training
processes and the establishment of a clear chain
of command.

A peace agreement is critically important, but
the process will not be complete without the holding
of credible and inclusive elections in late 2020 and
early 2021. Poland commends the Government of the
Central African Republic for initiating preparations for
the elections, and we call on the National Assembly to
swiftly finalize its work on the electoral code, including
respect for the gender parity law, as decided by the
Constitutional Court. The inclusivity of the process,
especially for women and young people, will contribute

In conclusion, the political agreement should be not
just a promise of normalization for the people of the
Central African Republic but also an actual platform
for dialogue among the authorities, armed groups
and civil society, with a view to preventing further
conflict, de-escalating tensions and building trust.
Poland calls on all the stakeholders on the ground, as
well as regional and international partners, to work
constructively together for a better future for the
people of the Central African Republic. We commend

22/24

19-18562

20/06/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

the important work being done by MINUSCA, the
European Union Training Mission and other partners
in the Central African Republic. I would like to assure
Mr. Ndiaye and his team of our full support.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset we would very much like to thank
our briefers, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Mr. Matias Bertino
Matondo and Mr. Koen Vervaeke. I will focus my
statement on three basic issues.
The first is the political developments and the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic. The most important
development since the last official meeting of the
Security Council in February to discuss the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/PV.8467) was
the signing of the political agreement between the
Government and 14 armed groups. Like all the previous
speakers, I would like to say how much we welcomed
the signing of the agreement on 6 February. The most
important stage has gone beyond the mere signing of the
Agreement, which has now been in place for more than
four months, and represents the full commitment of the
signatories to implementing all of its provisions. We
would like to say how pleased we are that the 14 armed
groups have sat down together with the Government to
engage in dialogue and have begun talks following the
signing of the Agreement.

S/PV. 8558

Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), in order to bring together local authorities,
civil society and representatives of armed groups in the
quest to settle differences and prevent the outbreak of
conflict. The National Assembly enacted the electoral
law for 2020 and 2021 and a draft budget and timeline
for the elections unanimously. We hope the elections
will be held as scheduled without any delays.
The Government has also taken measures to
foster cooperation with regional and international
organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union and the United Nations, embodied in the
visit to the Central African Republic in April of
Mr. Smaїl Chergui, the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of
the European External Action Service, with the aim of
mobilizing regional and international support for the
political agreement.

We welcome the steps that President Touadera of
the Central African Republic has taken to ensure that
the Muslim community also shares ministerial positions
and participates in the decision-making process. We
also support his decision to engage women in forming
the Government and call for those positive steps to
continue in the future. We would like to pay tribute to
another initiative of President Touadera, who joined the
Muslim community during Eid Al-Fitr prayers in one of
the mosques of the country’s capital of Bangui. We urge
all citizens of the Central African Republic to work
together to promote peaceful coexistence between the
various components of the society and to address the
problem of hate speech so as to ensure that everyone
can enjoy peace and security.

Secondly, on the security situation, acts of violence
against civilians in the Central African Republic still
constitute a great challenge to the Government. Despite
the signing of the agreement and the political progress
that has been achieved, as well as the decline in violence
in some areas, the security situation remains fragile
in others. Looting and the illegal taxation of civilians
persist. In that regard, we are very concerned about the
repeated violations and aggressions by armed groups
against United Nations staff, members of MINUSCA
and humanitarian workers. We strongly condemn the
attacks by the anti-balaka and Retour, réclamation
et réhabilitation groups on civilians, as well as other
military groups, the latest of which was an attack by
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation in May near the
city of Paoua that killed 39 civilians, including one
child. If such attacks continue they will undermine all
the efforts put into reaching the political agreement and
hinder the implementation of its main provisions. We
urge the Government to take immediate steps to ensure
that the perpetrators of acts of violence and crimes
against civilians are held accountable and brought to
justice with a view to maintaining security, establishing
peace and ending impunity.

We welcome the steps taken by the Government
to implement the main provisions of the political
agreement, such as establishing technical committees
in various regions and governorates, with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated

Thirdly, we deplore the very critical humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic. Millions
of people, by some estimates half of the country’s
population, are still in dire need of urgent humanitarian
assistance. The number of people who need assistance

19-1856223/24

S/PV.8558

The situation in the Central African Republic

and protection and suffer from food insecurity continues
to rise, and it is very worrying that many of those who
need assistance are children.
Before concluding, I would like to affirm that the
only path to a resolution of the crisis in the Central
African Republic is a political dialogue among all
the stakeholders. It was dialogue that produced the
political progress that culminated on 6 February with
the signing of the political agreement. If the dialogue
can succeed in leading to a sustained consensus among
all the country’s political stakeholders, it will have a
positive impact on the humanitarian, economic and
development situations, as well as ensuring the return
of internally displaced persons to their regions and of
refugees from neighbouring countries.
We would like to express our appreciation for
Mr. Ndiaye’s efforts in the past few months since
he took office as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, and for the efforts of all the
Mission’s personnel.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2019/498). I also want to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for his comprehensive presentation of
the first report issued since the signing in Bangui on
6 February by the Government and 14 armed groups of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic. I also want to thank all the
other speakers for their informative and enlightening
briefings and statements. My delegation supports them
in every way.

24/24

20/06/2019

We see from the report that security challenges
and the protection of civilians continue to be a source
of serious concern, although we had hoped that with
the leaders of armed groups participating in political
life, the situation would improve significantly.
Unfortunately, the Paoua massacres have brought us
back to sad reality. The Government’s considerable
efforts to implement the peace agreement are sufficient
proof of its willingness to respect the commitments it
outlines. The signatories have an obligation to respect
what they have freely signed, which includes ceasing
all acts of violence against the civilian population and
others such as the levying of illegal taxes and the illicit
exploitation of natural resources. However, as with
any peace agreement, we need time to implement and
effectively enforce it and for everyone to truly own
it. I welcome the leading role of the guarantors of the
agreement in being ready to intervene as soon as the
need arises.
The humanitarian situation remains alarming,
owing to the abuses suffered by the populations in
areas where armed groups continue to operate despite
MINUSCA’s continuing security efforts. The facts
described in this report illustrate how precarious the
situation in my country is and suggest that the road to
a lasting peace will be a long one. But with the support
provided to MINUSCA and the Government by the
international community and bilateral and international
partners, the Central African people will be able to
hope for a peaceful future. We are pleased with the
comments in that regard in the report, and this is the
right place to acknowledge the leadership of the Special
Representative, who has spared no effort since taking
office to advocate with countries and international
institutions in order to mobilize and support the efforts
under way, with a view to the upcoming elections. I
wish the Council every success in its consultations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

19-18562
