United Nations

A/RES/62/215

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 March 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 77 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2007
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/62/L.27 and Add.1)]

62/215. Oceans and the law of the sea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/28 of 6 December 1994, 52/26 of 26 November 1997,
54/33 of 24 November 1999, 57/141 of 12 December 2002, 58/240 of 23 December
2003, 59/24 of 17 November 2004, 60/30 of 29 November 2005, 61/222 of
20 December 2006 and other relevant resolutions concerning the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (“the Convention”), 1
0F

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 2 the addendum
thereto, 3 the report of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study
issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
beyond areas of national jurisdiction (“the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group”) 4 and also the reports on the work of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea (“the Consultative
Process”) at its eighth meeting 5 and on the seventeenth Meeting of States Parties to
the Convention, 6
1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

Noting with satisfaction the twenty-fifth anniversary of the opening for
signature of the Convention, and emphasizing the pre-eminent contribution provided
by the Convention to the strengthening of peace, security, cooperation and friendly
relations among all nations in conformity with the principles of justice and equal
rights and to the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples
of the world, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as for the sustainable
development of the oceans and seas,
Emphasizing the universal and unified character of the Convention, and
reaffirming that the Convention sets out the legal framework within which all
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
A/62/66.
3
A/62/66/Add.1.
4
A/61/65.
5
A/62/169.
6
SPLOS/164 and Corr.1.
2

07-47667

A/RES/62/215

activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out and is of strategic importance as
the basis for national, regional and global action and cooperation in the marine
sector, and that its integrity needs to be maintained, as recognized also by the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in chapter 17 of
Agenda 21, 7
6F

Recognizing the important contribution of sustainable development and
management of the resources and uses of the oceans and seas to the achievement of
international development goals, including those contained in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration, 8
7F

Conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need
to be considered as a whole through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral
approach, and reaffirming the need to improve cooperation and coordination at the
national, regional and global levels, in accordance with the Convention, to support
and supplement the efforts of each State in promoting the implementation and
observance of the Convention, and the integrated management and sustainable
development of the oceans and seas,
Reiterating the essential need for cooperation, including through capacitybuilding and transfer of marine technology, to ensure that all States, especially
developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, as well as coastal African States, are able both to implement the
Convention and to benefit from the sustainable development of the oceans and seas,
as well as to participate fully in global and regional forums and processes dealing
with oceans and law of the sea issues,
Emphasizing the need to strengthen the ability of competent international
organizations to contribute, at the global, regional, subregional and bilateral levels,
through cooperation programmes with Governments, to the development of national
capacity in marine science and the sustainable management of the oceans and their
resources,
Recalling that marine science is important for eradicating poverty, contributing
to food security, conserving the world’s marine environment and resources, helping
to understand, predict and respond to natural events and promoting the sustainable
development of the oceans and seas, by improving knowledge, through sustained
research efforts and the evaluation of monitoring results, and applying such
knowledge to management and decision-making,
Recalling also its decision, in resolutions 57/141 and 58/240, to establish a
regular process under the United Nations for global reporting and assessment of the
state of the marine environment, including socio-economic aspects, both current and
foreseeable, building on existing regional assessments, as recommended by
theWorld Summit on Sustainable Development, 9 and noting the need for
cooperation among all States to this end,
8F

_______________
7

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
8
See resolution 55/2.
9
See Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.

2

A/RES/62/215

Reiterating its concern at the adverse impacts on the marine environment and
biodiversity, in particular on vulnerable marine ecosystems, including corals, of
human activities, such as overutilization of living marine resources, the use of
destructive practices, physical impacts by ships, the introduction of invasive alien
species and marine pollution from all sources, including from land-based sources
and vessels, in particular through the illegal discharge of oil and other harmful
substances, the loss or release of fishing gear and the dumping of hazardous waste
such as radioactive materials, nuclear waste and dangerous chemicals,
Expressing its serious concern over the current and projected adverse effects
of anthropogenic and natural climate change on the marine environment and marine
biodiversity,
Expressing its deep concern over the vulnerability of the environment and the
fragile ecosystems of the polar regions, including the Arctic Ocean and the Arctic
ice cap, particularly affected by the projected adverse effects of climate change,
Encouraging States to continue to contribute to the specific efforts deployed
within the framework of the International Polar Year with the goal of enhancing the
knowledge of the polar regions by strengthening scientific cooperation,
Recognizing that there is a need for a more integrated approach and to further
study and promote measures for enhanced cooperation and coordination relating to
the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction,
Recognizing also that the realization of the benefits of the Convention could
be enhanced by international cooperation, technical assistance and advanced
scientific knowledge, as well as by funding and capacity-building,
Recognizing further that hydrographic surveys and nautical charting are
critical to the safety of navigation and life at sea, environmental protection,
including the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems, and the economics of the
global shipping industry, and recognizing in this regard that the move towards
electronic charting not only provides significantly increased benefits for safe
navigation and management of ship movement, but also provides data and
information that can be used for sustainable fisheries activities and other sectoral
uses of the marine environment, the delimitation of maritime boundaries and
environmental protection,
Noting with concern the continuing problem of transnational organized crime
and threats to maritime safety and security, including piracy, armed robbery at sea,
smuggling and terrorist acts against shipping, offshore installations and other
maritime interests, and noting the deplorable loss of life and adverse impact on
international trade, energy security and the global economy resulting from such
activities,
Noting the importance of the delineation of the outer limits of the continental
shelf beyond 200 nautical miles and that it is in the broader interest of the
international community that States with a continental shelf beyond 200 nautical
miles submit information on the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200
nautical miles to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (“the
Commission”), and noting in this regard that some States have already made
submissions to the Commission,
Noting also that some States may face particular challenges in relation to
preparing submissions to the Commission,
3

A/RES/62/215

Noting further that financial and technical assistance may be sought by
developing countries for activities in relation to preparing submissions to the
Commission, including through the voluntary trust fund established by resolution
55/7 of 30 October 2000 for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of
submissions to the Commission for developing States, in particular the least
developed countries and small island developing States, and compliance with
article 76 of the Convention, as well as other accessible international assistance,
Recognizing the important role for developing countries of the trust funds
established by resolution 55/7 for the activities of the Commission, and noting with
appreciation the recent contributions made to them,
Reaffirming the importance of the work of the Commission for coastal States
and the international community as a whole,
Noting the important role of the Commission in assisting States parties in the
implementation of Part VI of the Convention, through the examination of
information submitted by coastal States regarding the outer limits of the continental
shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, and acknowledging in this regard the anticipated
workload of the Commission owing to an increasing number of submissions, placing
additional demands on its members and on the Division for Ocean Affairs and the
Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat (“the Division”), and
the need to ensure that the Commission can perform its functions under the
Convention effectively and maintain its high level of quality and expertise,
Recognizing the importance and the contribution of the work over the past
eight years of the Consultative Process established by resolution 54/33 to facilitate
the annual review of developments in ocean affairs by the General Assembly and
extended by resolutions 57/141 and 60/30,
Noting the responsibilities of the Secretary-General under the Convention and
related resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular resolutions 49/28, 52/26
and 54/33, and in this context the increase in activities of the Division, in particular
in view of the growing number of requests to the Division for additional outputs and
servicing of meetings, the increasing capacity-building activities, the need for
enhanced support and assistance to the Commission and the role of the Division in
inter-agency coordination and cooperation,
Emphasizing that underwater archaeological, cultural and historical heritage,
including shipwrecks and watercrafts, holds essential information on the history of
humankind and that such heritage is a resource that needs to be protected and
preserved,
Reaffirming the importance of the work of the International Seabed Authority
(“the Authority”) in accordance with the Convention and the Agreement relating to
the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 (“the Agreement”), 10
9F

Reaffirming also the importance of the work of the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea (“the Tribunal”) in accordance with the Convention,

_______________
10

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1836, No. 31364.

A/RES/62/215

I
Implementation of the Convention and related agreements and instruments
1.
Reaffirms its resolutions 49/28, 52/26, 54/33, 57/141, 58/240, 59/24,
60/30, 61/222 and other relevant resolutions concerning the Convention;1
2.
Also reaffirms the unified character of the Convention and the vital
importance of preserving its integrity;
3.
Calls upon all States that have not done so, in order to achieve the goal
of universal participation, to become parties to the Convention and the Agreement;10
4.
Calls upon all States that have not done so, in order to achieve the goal of
universal participation, to become parties to the Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (“the Fish Stocks Agreement”); 11
10F

5.
Calls upon States to harmonize, as a matter of priority, their national
legislation with the provisions of the Convention and, where applicable, relevant
agreements and instruments, to ensure the consistent application of those provisions
and to ensure also that any declarations or statements that they have made or make
when signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention do not purport to exclude or
to modify the legal effect of the provisions of the Convention in their application to
the State concerned and to withdraw any such declarations or statements;
Calls upon States parties to the Convention to deposit with the Secretary6.
General charts or lists of geographical coordinates, as provided for in the
Convention;
Urges all States to cooperate, directly or through competent international
7.
bodies, in taking measures to protect and preserve objects of an archaeological and
historical nature found at sea, in conformity with the Convention, and calls upon
States to work together on such diverse challenges and opportunities as the
appropriate relationship between salvage law and scientific management and
conservation of underwater cultural heritage, increasing technological abilities to
discover and reach underwater sites, looting and growing underwater tourism;
Notes the effort made by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
8.
Cultural Organization with respect to the preservation of underwater cultural
heritage, and notes in particular the rules annexed to the 2001 Convention on the
Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage 12 that address the relationship
between salvage law and scientific principles of management, conservation and
protection of underwater cultural heritage among parties, their nationals and vessels
flying their flag;
1F

Welcomes the decision taken by the General Conference of the United
9.
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirty-fourth session
to increase the resources available for the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission for the next biennium, 13 which will enable that Commission to increase
12F

_______________
11

Ibid., vol. 2167, No. 37924.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference,
Thirty-first Session, Paris, 15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum: Resolutions,
resolution 24, annex.
13
Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Paris, 16 October–2 November 2007, vol. 1: Resolutions, resolution 93.
12

5

A/RES/62/215

its activities on an incremental basis and strengthen its capacity within the
framework of the Organization;
II
Capacity-building
10. Calls upon donor agencies and international financial institutions to keep
their programmes systematically under review to ensure the availability in all States,
particularly in developing States, of the economic, legal, navigational, scientific and
technical skills necessary for the full implementation of the Convention and the
objectives of the present resolution, as well as the sustainable development of the
oceans and seas nationally, regionally and globally, and in so doing to bear in mind
the interests and needs of landlocked developing States;
11. Encourages intensified efforts to build capacity for developing countries,
in particular for the least developed countries and small island developing States, as
well as coastal African States, to improve hydrographic services and the production
of nautical charts, including electronic charts, as well as the mobilization of
resources and building of capacity with support from international financial
institutions and the donor community;
12. Calls upon States and international financial institutions, including
through bilateral, regional and global cooperation programmes and technical
partnerships, to continue to strengthen capacity-building activities, in particular in
developing countries, in the field of marine scientific research by, inter alia, training
personnel to develop and enhance relevant expertise, providing the necessary
equipment, facilities and vessels and transferring environmentally sound
technologies;
13. Also calls upon States and international financial institutions, including
through bilateral, regional and global cooperation programmes and technical
partnerships, to strengthen capacity-building activities in developing countries, in
particular least developed countries and small island developing States, to develop
their maritime administration and appropriate legal frameworks to establish or
enhance the necessary infrastructure, legislative and enforcement capabilities to
promote effective compliance with, and implementation and enforcement of, their
responsibilities under international law;
14. Recognizes the need to build the capacity of developing States to raise
awareness of, and support implementation of, improved waste management
practices, noting the particular vulnerability of small island developing States to the
impact of marine pollution from land-based sources and marine debris;
15. Also recognizes the importance of assisting developing States, in
particular the least developed countries and small island developing States, as well
as coastal African States, in implementing the Convention, and urges States,
intergovernmental
organizations
and
agencies,
national
institutions,
non-governmental organizations and international financial institutions, as well as
natural and juridical persons, to make voluntary financial or other contributions to
the trust funds, as referred to in resolution 57/141, established for this purpose;
16. Encourages States to use the Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of
Marine Technology, adopted by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental

6

A/RES/62/215

Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 14 and recalls the important role of the secretariat of that
Commission in the implementation and promotion of the Criteria and Guidelines;
13F

17. Calls upon States to assist developing States, and especially the least
developed countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African
States, at the bilateral and, where appropriate, multilateral level, in the preparation
of submissions to the Commission regarding the establishment of the outer limits of
the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, including the assessment of the
nature and extent of the continental shelf of a coastal State through a desktop study,
and the delineation of the outer limits of its continental shelf;
18. Calls upon the Division to actively disseminate information on relevant
procedures related to the trust fund established for the purpose of facilitating the
preparation of submissions to the Commission and to continue its dialogue with
potential beneficiaries with a view to providing financial support to developing
countries for activities to facilitate timely submissions to the Commission, and
welcomes in this regard the recent adoption of a new procedure to facilitate the
access of developing countries to the trust fund;
19. Notes with appreciation the successful conduct by the Division of
regional training courses in Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean and
the commencement of subregional workshops by the Division, most recently in
Brunei Darussalam from 12 to 16 February 2007 and South Africa from 13 to
17 August 2007, the purpose of which was to train technical staff of coastal
developing States in the delineation of the outer limits of the continental shelf
beyond 200 nautical miles and in the preparation of submissions to the Commission,
and requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with States and relevant
international organizations and institutions, to continue making such training
courses available;
20. Also notes with appreciation the development by the Division, in
cooperation with other partners under the TRAIN-SEA-COAST Programme, of a
training course on the development, implementation and management of marine
protected areas and the successful delivery of the first regional training course, in
Honiara from 15 to 20 January 2007;
21. Further notes with appreciation the regional workshops of the Tribunal,
held in Libreville on 26 and 27 March 2007, Kingston from 16 to 18 April 2007 and
Singapore from 29 to 31 May 2007, on the role of the Tribunal in the settlement of
disputes relating to the law of the sea;
22. Invites Member States and others in a position to do so to support the
capacity-building activities of the Division, including, in particular, the training
activities to assist developing States in the preparation of their submissions to the
Commission, and invites Member States and others in a position to do so to
contribute to the trust fund established by the Secretary-General for the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat to support the promotion of international law;
23. Recognizes the importance of the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe
Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea, advises the Secretary-General to
continue to finance the Fellowship from resources made available through an

_______________
14

See Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, document IOC/INF-1203.

7

A/RES/62/215

appropriate Office of Legal Affairs trust fund, and urges Member States and others
in a position to do so to contribute to the further development of the Fellowship;
24. Takes note with satisfaction of the ongoing implementation of the United
Nations and the Nippon Foundation Fellowship Programme, focusing on human
resources development for developing coastal States parties and non-parties to the
Convention in the field of ocean affairs and the law of the sea or related disciplines;
III
Meeting of States Parties
25. Welcomes the report of the seventeenth Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention;6
26. Requests the Secretary-General to convene a special Meeting of States
Parties to the Convention, in New York on 30 January 2008, to fill a vacancy that
has occurred following the resignation of one of the members of the Tribunal and to
convene the eighteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention, in New York
from 13 to 20 June 2008, and to provide the services required;
27. Calls upon States parties to transmit to the Secretariat the credentials of
representatives attending the Meetings as far in advance as is practicable, and no
later than 29 January and 12 June 2008, respectively;
IV
Peaceful settlement of disputes
28. Notes with satisfaction the continued and significant contribution of the
Tribunal to the settlement of disputes by peaceful means in accordance with
Part XV of the Convention, and underlines the important role and authority of the
Tribunal concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention and the
Agreement;
29. Welcomes, in this regard, the establishment by the Tribunal of the
Chamber for Maritime Delimitation Disputes;
30. Equally pays tribute to the important and long-standing role of the
International Court of Justice with regard to the peaceful settlement of disputes
concerning the law of the sea;
31. Notes that States parties to an international agreement related to the
purposes of the Convention may submit to, inter alia, the Tribunal or the
International Court of Justice any dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of that agreement submitted in accordance with that agreement, and
notes also the possibility, provided for in the statutes of the Tribunal and the Court,
to submit disputes to a chamber;
32. Encourages States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to
consider making a written declaration choosing from the means set out in article 287
of the Convention for the settlement of disputes concerning the interpretation or
application of the Convention and the Agreement, bearing in mind the
comprehensive character of the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in
Part XV of the Convention;

8

A/RES/62/215

V
The Area
33. Notes the progress of the discussions on issues relating to the regulations
for prospecting and exploration for polymetallic sulphides and cobalt-rich
ferromanganese crusts in the Area, and reiterates the importance of the ongoing
elaboration by the Authority, pursuant to article 145 of the Convention, of rules,
regulations and procedures to ensure the effective protection of the marine
environment, the protection and conservation of the natural resources of the Area
and the prevention of damage to its flora and fauna from harmful effects that may
arise from activities in the Area;
34. Also notes the importance of the responsibilities entrusted to the
Authority by articles 143 and 145 of the Convention, which refer to marine
scientific research and protection of the marine environment, respectively;
VI
Effective functioning of the Authority and the Tribunal
35. Appeals to all States parties to the Convention to pay their assessed
contributions to the Authority and to the Tribunal in full and on time, and also
appeals to States parties in arrears with their contributions to fulfil their obligations
without delay;
36. Urges all States parties to the Convention to attend the sessions of the
Authority, and calls upon the Authority to continue to pursue all options, including
making concrete recommendations on the issue of dates, in order to improve
attendance in Kingston and to ensure global participation;
37. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding
to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the Tribunal 15 and to the
Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the Authority; 16
14F

15F

38. Emphasizes the importance of the Tribunal’s rules and staff regulations
promoting the recruitment of a geographically representative staff in the
Professional and higher categories, and welcomes the actions taken by the Tribunal
in observance of those rules and regulations, as reported by its President to the
seventeenth Meeting of States Parties; 17
16F

VII
The continental shelf and the work of the Commission
39. Encourages States parties to the Convention that are in a position to do
so to make every effort to submit information to the Commission regarding the
establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles,
in conformity with article 76 of the Convention and article 4 of annex II to the
Convention, taking into account the decision of the eleventh Meeting of States

_______________
15

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2167, No. 37925.
Ibid., vol. 2214, No. 39357.
17
SPLOS/164 and Corr.1, para. 22.
16

9

A/RES/62/215

Parties to the Convention 18 and noting discussion of this issue at the seventeenth
Meeting of States Parties; 19
17F

18F

40. Notes with satisfaction the progress in the work of the Commission, 20
that it is giving current consideration to a number of submissions that have been
made regarding the establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond
200 nautical miles and that a number of States have advised of their intention to
make submissions in the near future;
19F

41. Notes that the anticipated heavy workload of the Commission, owing to
an increasing number of submissions, places additional demands on its members and
the Division, and in that regard emphasizes the need to ensure that the Commission
can perform its functions efficiently and effectively and maintain its high level of
quality and expertise;
42. Takes note of the decision of the Commission to maintain, to the extent
possible given the term of office of the members of the Commission, continuity in
the composition of subcommissions throughout the consideration of a submission; 21
20F

43. Also takes note of the decision of the seventeenth Meeting of States
Parties to the Convention to continue to address, as a matter of priority, issues
related to the workload of the Commission, including funding for its members
attending the sessions of the Commission and the meetings of the
subcommissions; 22
21F

44. Calls upon States whose experts are serving on the Commission to do
their utmost to ensure the full participation of those experts in the work of the
Commission, including the meetings of subcommissions, in accordance with the
Convention;
45. Takes note with concern of the information provided by the Division
regarding the inadequacies in the current level of staffing as well as the hardware
and software available to it which are required to support the Commission in the
fulfilment of its functions, as reflected in paragraph 69 of the report of the
seventeenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention; 23
2F

46. Endorses, in this regard, the request by the Meeting of States Parties to
the Convention to the Secretary-General to take timely measures, before the twentyfirst session of the Commission, to strengthen the capacity of the Division, serving
as the secretariat of the Commission, within overall existing resource levels, in
order to ensure enhanced support and assistance to the Commission and its
subcommissions, in their consideration of submissions, 24 as required by paragraph 9
of annex III to the rules of procedure of the Commission; 25
23F

24F

_______________
18

SPLOS/72.
SPLOS/164 and Corr.1, paras. 56–78.
20
See CLCS/54 and CLCS/56.
21
See CLCS/56, paras. 12–14.
22
See SPLOS/162.
23
See SPLOS/164 and Corr.1.
24
SPLOS/162, para. 6.
25
CLCS/40.
19

10

A/RES/62/215

47. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to take all necessary actions to
ensure that the Commission can fulfil the functions entrusted to it under the
Convention;
48. Encourages States to make additional contributions to the voluntary trust
fund established by resolution 55/7 for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of
submissions to the Commission and to the voluntary trust fund also established by
that resolution for the purpose of defraying the cost of participation of the members
of the Commission from developing States in the meetings of the Commission;
49. Approves the convening by the Secretary-General of the twenty-first and
twenty-second sessions of the Commission, in New York, from 17 March to 18 April
2008 and from 11 August to 12 September 2008, respectively, on the understanding
that the following periods will be used for the technical examination of submissions
at the Geographic Information System laboratories and other technical facilities of the
Division: 17 to 28 March 2008; 14 to 18 April 2008; 11 to 15 August 2008; and 2 to
12 September 2008;
50. Expresses its firm conviction about the importance of the work of the
Commission, carried out in accordance with the Convention, including with respect
to the participation of the coastal State in relevant proceedings concerning its
submission, and recognizes the continued need for active interaction between
submitting States and the Commission;
51. Encourages States to continue exchanging views in order to increase
understanding of issues, including expenditures involved, arising from the
application of article 76 of the Convention, thus facilitating preparation of
submissions by States, in particular developing States, to the Commission;
52. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Member States,
to continue supporting and organizing workshops or symposiums on scientific and
technical aspects of the establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf
beyond 200 nautical miles, taking into account the need to strengthen capacitybuilding for developing countries in preparing their submissions;
VIII
Maritime safety and security and flag State implementation
53. Encourages States to ratify or accede to international agreements
addressing the safety and security of navigation, as well as maritime labour, and to
adopt the necessary measures consistent with the Convention, aimed at
implementing and enforcing the rules contained in those agreements;
54. Welcomes the adoption of the Work in Fishing Convention (No. 188) and
the related Recommendation (No. 199), 2007 by the International Labour
Conference on 14 June 2007, and encourages States to become parties to that
Convention;
55. Also welcomes the continuing review by the International Maritime
Organization and the International Labour Organization of Guidelines on Fair
Treatment of Seafarers in the Event of a Maritime Accident, 26 and notes the decision
25F

_______________
26
Adopted by the International Maritime Organization Legal Committee on 27 April 2006 as resolution
LEG.3(91), and by the International Labour Organization Governing Body on 12 June 2006, at its
296th session.

11

A/RES/62/215

of the International Maritime
implementation of the Guidelines;

Organization

to

continue

to

monitor

the

56. Calls upon States to consider becoming members of the International
Hydrographic Organization, and urges all States to work with that Organization to
increase the coverage of hydrographic information on a global basis to enhance
capacity-building and technical assistance and to promote safe navigation,
especially in areas used for international navigation, ports and where there are
vulnerable or protected marine areas;
57. Encourages States to draw up plans and to establish procedures to
implement the Guidelines on Places of Refuge for Ships in Need of Assistance; 27
26F

58. Notes the progress in the implementation of the Action Plan for the
Safety of Transport of Radioactive Material, approved by the Board of Governors of
the International Atomic Energy Agency in March 2004, 28 and encourages States
concerned to continue their efforts in the implementation of all areas of the Action
Plan;
27F

59. Also notes that cessation of the transport of radioactive materials through
the regions of small island developing States is an ultimate desired goal of small
island developing States and some other countries, and recognizes the right of
freedom of navigation in accordance with international law; that States should
maintain dialogue and consultation, in particular under the aegis of the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the International Maritime Organization, with the aim
of improved mutual understanding, confidence-building and enhanced
communication in relation to the safe maritime transport of radioactive materials;
that States involved in the transport of such materials are urged to continue to
engage in dialogue with small island developing States and other States to address
their concerns; and that these concerns include the further development and
strengthening, within the appropriate forums, of international regulatory regimes to
enhance safety, disclosure, liability, security and compensation in relation to such
transport; 29
28F

60. Further notes the decision taken at the eighth meeting of the Conference
of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movement
of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, aimed at reinforcing cooperation with the
International Maritime Organization on regulations on the prevention of pollution
from ships; 30
29F

61. Encourages States to cooperate to address threats to maritime safety and
security, including piracy, armed robbery at sea, smuggling and terrorist acts against
shipping, offshore installations and other maritime interests, through bilateral and
multilateral instruments and mechanisms aimed at monitoring, preventing and
responding to such threats;
62. Urges all States, in cooperation with the International Maritime
Organization, to actively combat piracy and armed robbery at sea by adopting
measures, including those relating to assistance with capacity-building through
training of seafarers, port staff and enforcement personnel in the prevention,
_______________
27

International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.949(23).
Available from www-ns.iaea.org.
29
Resolution 60/1, para. 56 (o).
30
UNEP/CHW.8/16, annex I, decision VIII/9.
28

12

A/RES/62/215

reporting and investigation of incidents, bringing the alleged perpetrators to justice,
in accordance with international law, and by adopting national legislation, as well as
providing enforcement vessels and equipment and guarding against fraudulent ship
registration;
63. Welcomes the significant decrease in the number of attacks by pirates and
armed robbers in the Asian region through increased national action and regional
cooperation;
64. Expresses deep concern about the continuous violent attacks on ships off
the coast of Somalia, and welcomes the initiatives supported by the International
Maritime Organization and the World Food Programme to strengthen cooperation
among States to protect ships, in particular those transporting humanitarian aid,
from acts of piracy and armed robbery in that region;
65. Notes the adoption of resolution A.1002(25) on 29 November 2007 by
the Assembly of the International Maritime Organization on acts of piracy and
armed robbery against ships in waters off the coast of Somalia, and encourages
States to ensure its full implementation;
66. Also notes the initiatives taken by the Secretary-General of the
International Maritime Organization, following up on resolution A.979(24) adopted
by the Assembly of the International Maritime Organization on 23 November 2005,
to engage the international community in efforts to combat acts of piracy and armed
robbery against ships sailing the waters off the coast of Somalia;
67. Calls upon States to become parties to the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and the
Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms
Located on the Continental Shelf, 31 invites States to consider becoming parties to
the 2005 Protocols amending those instruments, 32 and also urges States parties to
take appropriate measures to ensure the effective implementation of those
instruments, through the adoption of legislation, where appropriate;
30F

31F

68. Also calls upon States to effectively implement the International Ship and
Port Facility Security Code and the amendments to the International Convention for
the Safety of Life at Sea, 33 and to work with the International Maritime
Organization to promote safe and secure shipping while ensuring freedom of
navigation;
32F

69. Welcomes the adoption on 18 May 2007 of the Nairobi International
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007, under the auspices of the International
Maritime Organization, and invites States to note its opening for signature from
19 November 2007 to 18 November 2008;
70. Requests States to take appropriate measures with regard to ships flying
their flag or of their registry to address hazards that may be caused by wrecks and
drifting or sunken cargo to navigation or the marine environment;
71. Urges all States, in cooperation with the International Maritime
Organization, to improve the protection of offshore installations by adopting
_______________
31

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1678, No. 29004.
International Maritime Organization, documents LEG/CONF.15/21 and 22.
33
International Maritime Organization, documents SOLAS/CONF.5/32 and 34, as well as resolution
MSC.202(81) introducing the long-range identification and tracking of ships system.
32

13

A/RES/62/215

measures related to the prevention, reporting and investigation of acts of violence
against installations, in accordance with international law, and by implementing
such measures through national legislation to ensure proper and adequate
enforcement;
72. Calls upon States to ensure freedom of navigation, the safety of
navigation and the rights of transit passage, archipelagic sea lanes passage and
innocent passage in accordance with international law, in particular the Convention;
73. Welcomes the work of the International Maritime Organization relating to
the protection of shipping lanes of strategic importance and significance, and in
particular in enhancing safety, security and environmental protection in straits used
for international navigation, and calls upon the International Maritime Organization,
States bordering straits and user States to continue their cooperation efforts to keep
such straits safe, secure and environmentally protected and open to international
navigation at all times, consistent with international law, in particular the
Convention;
74. Calls upon user States and States bordering straits used for international
navigation to cooperate by agreement on matters relating to navigational safety,
including safety aids for navigation, and the prevention, reduction and control of
pollution from ships, and welcomes developments in this regard;
75. Welcomes the progress in regional cooperation, including the Jakarta,
Kuala Lumpur and Singapore Statements on Enhancement of Safety, Security and
Environmental Protection in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, adopted on
8 September 2005, 34 20 September 2006 35 and 6 September 2007, 36 respectively,
especially the formal establishment of the Cooperative Mechanism on safety of
navigation and environmental protection to promote dialogue and facilitate close
cooperation between the littoral States, user States, shipping industry and other
stakeholders in line with article 43 of the Convention, and in implementing the
Marine Electronic Highway Demonstration Project for the Straits of Malacca and
Singapore, notes with appreciation that the Information Sharing Centre of the
Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against
Ships in Asia is already operational in Singapore, and calls upon States to give
immediate attention to adopting, concluding and implementing cooperation
agreements at the regional level;
3F

34F

35F

76. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to become parties to the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 37 and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, 38 and to take appropriate measures to ensure their effective
implementation;
36F

37F

_______________
34

A/60/529, annex II.
A/61/584, annex.
36
A/62/518, annex.
37
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2241, No. 39574.
38
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
35

14

A/RES/62/215

77. Calls upon States to ensure that masters on ships flying their flag take the
steps required by relevant instruments 39 to provide assistance to persons in distress
at sea, and urges States to cooperate and to take all necessary measures to ensure the
effective implementation of the amendments to the International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue 40 and to the International Convention for the Safety of
Life at Sea 41 relating to the delivery of persons rescued at sea to a place of safety, as
well as of the associated Guidelines on the Treatment of Persons Rescued at Sea; 42
38F

39F

40F

41F

78. Urges flag States without an effective maritime administration and
appropriate legal frameworks to establish or enhance the necessary infrastructure,
legislative and enforcement capabilities to ensure effective compliance with, and
implementation and enforcement of, their responsibilities under international law
and, until such action is taken, to consider declining the granting of the right to fly
their flag to new vessels, suspending their registry or not opening a registry, and
calls upon flag and port States to take all measures consistent with international law
necessary to prevent the operation of substandard vessels;
79. Welcomes the audits that have been completed pursuant to the Voluntary
International Maritime Organization Member State Audit Scheme 43 and the Code for
the implementation of mandatory International Maritime Organization
instruments, 44 and encourages all flag States to volunteer to be audited;
42F

43F

IX
Marine environment and marine resources
80. Emphasizes once again the importance of the implementation of Part XII
of the Convention in order to protect and preserve the marine environment and its
living marine resources against pollution and physical degradation, and calls upon
all States to cooperate and take measures consistent with the Convention, directly or
through competent international organizations, for the protection and preservation of
the marine environment;
81. Notes the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
including the finding that, while the effects of observed ocean acidification on the
marine biosphere are as yet undocumented, the progressive acidification of oceans is
expected to have negative impacts on marine shell-forming organisms and their
dependent species, and in this regard encourages States to urgently pursue further
research on ocean acidification, especially programmes of observation and
measurement;
82. Encourages States, individually or in collaboration with relevant
international organizations and bodies, to enhance their scientific activity to better
understand the effects of climate change on the marine environment and marine
biodiversity and develop ways and means of adaptation;

_______________
39

The International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, the International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979, as amended, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
1982, and the International Convention on Salvage, 1989.
40
International Maritime Organization, document MSC/78/26/Add.1, annex 5, resolution MSC.155(78).
41
Ibid., annex 3, resolution MSC.153(78).
42
International Maritime Organization, document MSC/78/26/Add.2, annex 34, resolution MSC.167(78).
43
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.974(24).
44
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.973(24).

15

A/RES/62/215

83. Calls upon States to enhance their efforts to reduce the emission of
greenhouse gases, in accordance with the principles contained in the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, 45 in order to reduce and tackle
projected adverse effects of climate change on the marine environment and marine
biodiversity;
4F

84. Encourages States to ratify or accede to international agreements
addressing the protection and preservation of the marine environment and its living
marine resources against the introduction of harmful aquatic organisms and
pathogens and marine pollution from all sources, and other forms of physical
degradation, as well as agreements that provide for compensation for damage
resulting from marine pollution, and to adopt the necessary measures consistent with
the Convention aimed at implementing and enforcing the rules contained in those
agreements;
85. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to the
1996 Protocol to the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping
of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (“the London Protocol”) 46 and the Protocol on
Preparedness, Response and Cooperation to Pollution Incidents by Hazardous and
Noxious Substances, 2000; 47
45F

46F

86. Welcomes the commencement of activities by the International Maritime
Organization to investigate the development of international measures for
minimizing the translocation of invasive aquatic species through biofouling of ships,
and encourages States and relevant organizations and bodies to assist in that
process;
87. Notes with appreciation the adoption of the Baltic Sea Action Plan, in
Krakow, Poland, on 15 November 2007, by the Member States of the Helsinki
Commission, the aim of which is to drastically reduce pollution in the Baltic Sea
and restore it to a good ecological status by 2021;
88. Encourages States, in accordance with the Convention and other relevant
instruments, either bilaterally or regionally, to jointly develop and promote
contingency plans for responding to pollution incidents, as well as other incidents
that are likely to have significant adverse effects on the marine environment and
biodiversity;
89. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Environment Programme
relating to marine debris carried out in cooperation with relevant United Nations
bodies and organizations, and encourages States to further develop partnerships with
industry and civil society to raise awareness of the extent of the impact of marine
debris on the health and productivity of the marine environment and consequent
economic loss;
90. Urges States to integrate the issue of marine debris into national
strategies dealing with waste management in the coastal zone, ports and maritime
industries, including recycling, reuse, reduction and disposal, and to encourage the
development of appropriate economic incentives to address this issue, including the
development of cost recovery systems that provide an incentive to use port reception
facilities and discourage ships from discharging marine debris at sea, and
_______________
45

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
International Maritime Organization, document IMO/LC.2/Circ.380.
47
HNS-OPRC/CONF/11/Rev.1, attachment 1.
46

16

A/RES/62/215

encourages States to cooperate regionally and subregionally to develop and
implement joint prevention and recovery programmes for marine debris;
91. Encourages States that have not done so to become parties to the
Protocol of 1997 (Annex VI-Regulations for the Prevention of Air Pollution from
Ships) to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships,
1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, and furthermore to ratify
or accede to the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’
Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004, 48 thereby facilitating its early entry into force;
47F

92. Welcomes the forthcoming entry into force on 17 September 2008 of the
International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling Systems on Ships,
2001; 49
48F

93. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization in
accordance with its resolution on International Maritime Organization policies and
practices related to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from ships 50 and the
workplan to identify and develop the mechanism or mechanisms needed to achieve
the limitation or reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from international shipping,
and welcomes ongoing efforts of the Organization in that regard;
49F

94. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the International Maritime
Organization in developing and approving an action plan to address the inadequacy
of port waste reception facilities, and urges States to cooperate in correcting the
shortfall in such facilities in accordance with the action plan;
95. Calls upon States to implement the Global Programme of Action for the
Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities 51 and to take all
appropriate measures to fulfil the commitments of the international community
embodied in the Beijing Declaration on Furthering the Implementation of the Global
Programme of Action;
50F

96. Welcomes the continued work of States, the United Nations Environment
Programme and regional organizations in the implementation of the Global
Programme of Action, and encourages increased emphasis on the link between
freshwater, the coastal zone and marine resources in the implementation of
international development goals, including those contained in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration,8 and of the time-bound targets in the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation”), 52 in particular the target on sanitation, and the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development; 53
51F

52F

97. Also welcomes the decision of the twenty-ninth Consultative Meeting of
Contracting Parties to the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by
Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (“the London Convention”) and the
second Meeting of Contracting Parties to the London Protocol, held from 5 to
_______________
48

International Maritime Organization, document BWM/CONF/36, annex.
International Maritime Organization, document AFS/CONF/26, annex.
50
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.963(23).
51
A/51/116, annex II.
52
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
53
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
49

17

A/RES/62/215

9 November 2007, which endorsed the June 2007 “Statement of concern” of their
Scientific Groups; 54 recognized that it was within the purview of each State to
consider proposals on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the London
Convention and Protocol; urged States to use the utmost caution when considering
proposals for large-scale ocean fertilization operations; and took the view that,
given the present state of knowledge regarding ocean fertilization, such large-scale
operations were currently not justified; 55
53F

54F

98. Encourages States to support
understanding of ocean iron fertilization;

the

further

study

and

enhance

99. Reaffirms paragraph 119 of resolution 61/222 regarding ecosystem
approaches and oceans, including the proposed elements of an ecosystem approach,
means to achieve implementation of an ecosystem approach and requirements for
improved application of an ecosystem approach, and in this regard:
(a) Notes that continued environmental degradation in many parts of the
world and increasing competing demands require an urgent response and the setting
of priorities for management interventions aimed at conserving ecosystem integrity;
(b) Notes that ecosystem approaches to ocean management should be
focused on managing human activities in order to maintain and, where needed,
restore ecosystem health to sustain goods and environmental services, provide social
and economic benefits for food security, sustain livelihoods in support of
international development goals, including those contained in the Millennium
Declaration, and conserve marine biodiversity;
(c) Recalls that States should be guided in the application of ecosystem
approaches by a number of existing instruments, in particular the Convention, which
sets out the legal framework for all activities in the oceans and seas, and its
implementing Agreements, as well as other commitments, such as those contained in
the Convention on Biological Diversity and the World Summit on Sustainable
Development call for the application of an ecosystem approach by 2010;
(d) Encourages States to cooperate and coordinate their efforts and take,
individually or jointly, as appropriate, all measures, in conformity with international
law, including the Convention and other applicable instruments, to address impacts
on marine ecosystems within and beyond areas of national jurisdiction, taking into
account the integrity of the ecosystems concerned;
100. Invites States, in particular those States with advanced technology and
marine capabilities, to explore prospects for improving cooperation with, and
assistance to, developing States, in particular least developed countries and small
island developing States, as well as coastal African States, with a view to better
integrating into national policies and programmes sustainable and effective
development in the marine sector;
101. Encourages the competent international organizations, the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and other funding agencies to
consider expanding their programmes within their respective fields of competence
for assistance to developing countries and to coordinate their efforts, including in
the allocation and application of Global Environment Facility funding;

_______________
54
55

18

See International Maritime Organization, document LC-LP.1/Circ.14.
See International Maritime Organization, document LC 29/17.

A/RES/62/215

102. Notes the information provided by the Secretary-General relating to the
study on the assistance available to and measures that may be taken by developing
States, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing
States, as well as coastal African States, to realize the benefits of sustainable and
effective development of marine resources and uses of the oceans within the limits
of national jurisdiction, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session pursuant to paragraph 88 of resolution 61/222, urges States and competent
international organizations and global and regional funding agencies to provide
further information, and requests that the study be prepared in continuing
cooperation with such States and organizations and based on information so
provided or disseminated and otherwise available in the public domain;
X
Marine biodiversity
103. Reaffirms its role relating to the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, notes the work of
States and relevant complementary intergovernmental organizations and bodies on
those issues, including the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and invites them to contribute to its
consideration of these issues within the areas of their respective competence;
104. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General relating to the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of
national jurisdiction, prepared and released in response to the request in
paragraph 92 of resolution 61/222; 56
5F

105. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to convene a meeting of
the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group in accordance with paragraph 91
of resolution 61/222 and paragraphs 79 and 80 of resolution 60/30, to take place in
New York from 28 April to 2 May 2008, and to provide the services required;
106. Encourages States to include relevant experts in their delegations
attending the meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group;
107. Recognizes the importance of making the outcomes of the Ad Hoc Openended Informal Working Group widely available;
108. Notes the work under the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal
Biological Diversity 57 and the Convention on Biological Diversity elaborated
programme of work on marine and coastal biological diversity, 58 as well as the
relevant decisions adopted at the eighth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on Biological Diversity, held in Curitiba, Brazil, from 20 to
31 March 2006; 59
56 F

57F

58F

109. Reaffirms the need for States and competent international organizations
to urgently consider ways to integrate and improve, based on the best available
scientific information and in accordance with the Convention and related
agreements and instruments, the management of risks to the marine biodiversity of

_______________
56

A/62/66/Add.2.
See A/51/312, annex II, decision II/10.
58
UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex, decision VII/5, annex I.
59
UNEP/CBD/COP/8/31, annex I.
57

19

A/RES/62/215

seamounts, cold water corals, hydrothermal vents and certain other underwater
features;
110. Calls upon States and international organizations to urgently take further
action to address, in accordance with international law, destructive practices that
have adverse impacts on marine biodiversity and ecosystems, including seamounts,
hydrothermal vents and cold water corals;
111. Reaffirms the need for States to continue their efforts to develop and
facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools for conserving and managing
vulnerable marine ecosystems, including the possible establishment of marine
protected areas, consistent with international law and based on the best scientific
information available, and the development of representative networks of any such
marine protected areas by 2012;
112. Notes the work of States, relevant intergovernmental organizations and
bodies, including the Convention on Biological Diversity, in the assessment of
scientific information on, and compilation of ecological criteria for the
identification of, marine areas that require protection, in light of the objective of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development to develop and facilitate the use of
diverse approaches and tools such as the establishment of marine protected areas
consistent with international law and based on scientific information, including
representative networks by 2012;9
113. Acknowledges, in this regard, the Micronesia Challenge, the Eastern
Tropical Pacific Seascape project and the Caribbean Challenge, which in particular
seek to create and link domestic marine protected areas to better facilitate ecosystem
approaches, and reaffirms the need for further international cooperation in support
of such initiatives;
114. Notes the work of the scientific experts’ workshops on ecological criteria
and biogeographic classification systems for marine areas in need of protection,
held in Azores, Portugal, from 2 to 4 October 2007, 60 on biogeographic
classification systems in open ocean and deep seabed areas beyond national
jurisdiction, held in Mexico City from 22 to 24 January 2007, and on criteria for
identifying ecologically or biologically significant areas beyond national
jurisdiction, held in Ottawa from 6 to 8 December 2005; 61
59F

60F

115. Also notes the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment synthesis reports and
the urgent need to protect the marine biodiversity expressed therein;
116. Reiterates its support for the International Coral Reef Initiative, takes
note of the International Coral Reef Initiative General Meeting, held in Tokyo from
22 to 24 April 2007, and the upcoming eleventh International Coral Reef
Symposium, to be held in Fort Lauderdale, United States of America, in July 2008,
supports the work under the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal Biological
Diversity and the elaborated programme of work on marine and coastal biological
diversity related to coral reefs, and notes that the International Coral Reef Initiative
is sponsoring the International Year of the Reef 2008;
117. Expresses its concern that coral bleaching has become more frequent and
severe throughout tropical seas over the last two decades, and highlights the need

_______________
60
61

20

See UNEP/CBD/EWS.MPA/1/2.
See A/AC.259/16, annex.

A/RES/62/215

for improved monitoring to predict and identify bleaching events to support and
strengthen action during such events and improve strategies to support the natural
resilience of reefs;
118. Encourages States to cooperate, directly or through competent
international bodies, in exchanging information in the event of accidents involving
vessels on coral reefs and in promoting the development of economic assessment
techniques for both restoration and non-use values of coral reef systems;
119. Emphasizes the need to mainstream sustainable coral reef management
and integrated watershed management into national development strategies, as well
as into the activities of relevant United Nations agencies and programmes,
international financial institutions and the donor community;
120. Notes the peer-reviewed scientific studies received by the Division from
Member States, pursuant to paragraph 107 of resolution 61/222, encourages further
studies and consideration of the impacts of ocean noise on marine living resources,
and requests the Division to continue to compile the peer-reviewed scientific studies
it receives from Member States and, as appropriate, to make them, or references and
links to them, available on its website;
XI
Marine science
121. Calls upon States, individually or in collaboration with each other or
with relevant international organizations and bodies, to improve understanding and
knowledge of the oceans and the deep sea, including, in particular, the extent and
vulnerability of deep sea biodiversity and ecosystems, by increasing their marine
scientific research activities in accordance with the Convention;
122. Notes the contribution of the Census of Marine Life to marine
biodiversity research, and encourages participation in the initiative;
123. Takes note with appreciation of the work of the Advisory Body of
Experts on the Law of the Sea of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
on the development of procedures for the implementation of Parts XIII and XIV of
the Convention and on the development of a consensual text on the legal framework
for the collection of oceanographic data within the context of the Convention;
124. Stresses the importance of increasing the scientific understanding of the
oceans/atmosphere interface, including through participation in ocean observing
programmes and geographic information systems, such as the Global Ocean
Observing System, a programme of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission, particularly considering their role in monitoring and forecasting
climate change and variability and in the establishment and operation of tsunami
warning systems;
125. Recognizes the significant progress made by the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission and Member States towards the establishment of
regional tsunami warning and mitigation systems and the new effort to identify
common requirements for regional centres, welcomes the continued collaboration of
the World Meteorological Organization and other United Nations and
intergovernmental organizations in this effort, and encourages Member States to
establish and sustain their national warning and mitigation systems, within a global,
ocean-related multi-hazard approach, as necessary, to reduce loss of life and damage

21

A/RES/62/215

to national economies and strengthen the resilience of coastal communities to
natural disasters;
XII
Regular process for global reporting and assessment of the state of the marine
environment, including socio-economic aspects
126. Recalls that the Ad Hoc Steering Group was established by resolution
60/30;
127. Takes note of the report of the second meeting of the Ad Hoc Steering
Group for the “assessment of assessments” launched as a preparatory stage towards
the establishment of the regular process for global reporting and assessment of the
state of the marine environment, including socio-economic aspects, held in
New York on 22 June 2007, 62 and urges Member States from the African regional
group to propose the remaining representative to the Chairman of the regional group
so that the appointment to the Ad Hoc Steering Group of that representative can be
made by the President of the General Assembly without further delay;
61F

128. Also takes note of the overall working approach, the outline for the
“assessment of assessments” report and the timeline and workplan for the
“assessment of assessments”, proposed by the Group of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 60/30, at the first meeting, held in Paris from 28 to 30 March
2007, 63 and endorsed by the Ad Hoc Steering Group at its second meeting, subject
to the availability of funding;
62F

129. Welcomes with appreciation the support of the United Nations
Environment Programme and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission for
the “assessment of assessments” in providing secretariat services to the Ad Hoc
Steering Group and the Group of Experts;
130. Invites Member States, the Global Environment Facility and other
interested parties to contribute financially to the “assessment of assessments”,
taking into account the workplan and budget approved by the Ad Hoc Steering
Group, in order to complete the “assessment of assessments” within the specified
period;
XIII
Regional cooperation
131. Notes that there have been a number of initiatives at the regional level, in
various regions, to further the implementation of the Convention, takes note in that
context of the Caribbean-focused Assistance Fund, which is intended to facilitate,
mainly through technical assistance, the voluntary undertaking of maritime
delimitation negotiations between Caribbean States, takes note once again of the
Fund for Peace: Peaceful Settlement of Territorial Disputes, established by the
General Assembly of the Organization of American States in 2000 as a primary
mechanism, given its broader regional scope, for the prevention and resolution of
pending territorial, land border and maritime boundary disputes, and calls upon
States and others in a position to do so to contribute to these funds;

_______________
62
63

22

United Nations Environment Programme, document UNGA 60/30-A of A-AHSG/2.
GRAME/GOE/1/7.

A/RES/62/215

XIV
Open-ended informal consultative process on oceans and the law of the sea
132. Takes note of the report and annex on the work of the Consultative
Process at its eighth meeting,5 focused on the topic of marine genetic resources, and
acknowledges the need to discuss the issue of marine genetic resources in the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group in accordance with paragraph 91 of
resolution 61/222, taking into consideration the possible elements suggested by the
co-chairpersons of the Consultative Process;
133. Notes the discussion on the relevant legal regime on marine genetic
resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction in accordance with the Convention,
and calls upon States to further consider this issue in the context of the mandate of
the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group, with a view to making further
progress on this issue;
134. Recognizes the abundance and diversity of marine genetic resources and
their value in terms of benefits, goods and services they can provide;
135. Also recognizes the importance of research on marine genetic resources
for the purpose of enhancing the scientific understanding, potential use and
application, and enhanced management of marine ecosystems;
136. Encourages States and international organizations, including through
bilateral, regional and global cooperation programmes and partnerships, to continue
in a sustainable and comprehensive way to support, promote and strengthen
capacity-building activities in particular in developing countries, in the field of
marine scientific research, in particular, taking into account the need to create
greater taxonomic capabilities;
137. Requests the Secretary-General to convene, in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 54/33, the ninth meeting of the Consultative
Process, in New York from 23 to 27 June 2008, to provide it with the necessary
facilities for the performance of its work and to arrange for support to be provided
by the Division, in cooperation with other relevant parts of the Secretariat, as
appropriate;
138. Recalls the need to strengthen and improve the efficiency of the
Consultative Process, and encourages States, intergovernmental organizations and
programmes to provide guidance to the co-chairpersons to this effect, particularly
before and during the preparatory meeting for the Consultative Process, and in this
regard notes its decision to further review the effectiveness and utility of the
Consultative Process at its sixty-third session; 64
63F

139. Expresses its serious concern regarding the insufficient resources
available in the voluntary trust fund established by resolution 55/7 for the purpose
of assisting developing countries, in particular least developed countries, small
island developing States and landlocked developing States, in attending the
meetings of the Consultative Process, and urges States to make additional
contributions to the trust fund;
140. Decides that those representatives from developing countries who are
invited by the co-chairpersons to make presentations during the meetings of the
_______________
64

Resolution 60/30, para. 99.

23

A/RES/62/215

Consultative Process shall receive priority consideration in the disbursement of
funds from the voluntary trust fund established by resolution 55/7 in order to cover
the costs of their travel, and shall also be eligible to receive daily subsistence
allowance subject to the availability of funds after the travel costs of all other
eligible representatives from those countries mentioned in paragraph 139 above
have been covered;
141. Recalls its decision to focus its discussions on the topic “Maritime
security and safety” at the ninth meeting of the Consultative Process;
XV
Coordination and cooperation
142. Encourages States to work closely with and through international
organizations, funds and programmes, as well as the specialized agencies of the
United Nations system and relevant international conventions, to identify emerging
areas of focus for improved coordination and cooperation and how best to address
these issues;
143. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of heads of intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations engaged in activities relating to ocean
affairs and the law of the sea, as well as funding institutions, and underlines the
importance of their constructive and timely input for the report of the SecretaryGeneral on oceans and the law of the sea and of their participation in relevant
meetings and processes;
144. Welcomes the work done by the secretariats of relevant United Nations
specialized agencies, programmes, funds and bodies and the secretariats of related
organizations and conventions to enhance inter-agency coordination and cooperation
on ocean issues, including through UN-Oceans, the inter-agency coordination
mechanism on ocean and coastal issues within the United Nations system;
145. Encourages continued updates to Member States by UN-Oceans
regarding its priorities and initiatives, in particular with respect to the proposed
participation in UN-Oceans;
XVI
Activities of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
146. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the annual
comprehensive report on oceans and the law of the sea, prepared by the Division, as
well as for the other activities of the Division, which reflect the high standard of
assistance provided to Member States by the Division;
147. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to carry out the
responsibilities and functions entrusted to him in the Convention and by the related
resolutions of the General Assembly, including resolutions 49/28 and 52/26, and to
ensure the allocation of appropriate resources to the Division for the performance of
its activities under the approved budget for the Organization;

24

A/RES/62/215

XVII
Sixty-third session of the General Assembly
148. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive report, in its
current comprehensive format and in accordance with established practice, for the
consideration of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session, on developments
and issues relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea, including the
implementation of the present resolution, in accordance with resolutions 49/28,
52/26 and 54/33, and to make the report available at least six weeks in advance of
the meeting of the Consultative Process;
149. Emphasizes the critical role of the annual comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General, which integrates information on developments relating to the
implementation of the Convention and the work of the Organization, its specialized
agencies and other institutions in the field of ocean affairs and the law of the sea at
the global and regional levels, and as a result constitutes the basis for the annual
consideration and review of developments relating to ocean affairs and the law of
the sea by the General Assembly as the global institution having the competence to
undertake such a review;
150. Notes that the report referred to in paragraph 148 above will also be
submitted to States parties pursuant to article 319 of the Convention regarding
issues of a general nature that have arisen with respect to the Convention;
151. Also notes the desire to further improve the efficiency of, and effective
participation of delegations in, the informal consultations concerning the annual
General Assembly resolution on oceans and the law of the sea and the resolution on
sustainable fisheries, and decides to limit the period of the informal consultations on
both resolutions to a maximum of four weeks in total and to ensure that the
consultations are scheduled in such a way as to avoid overlap with the period during
which the Sixth Committee is meeting and that the Division has sufficient time to
produce the report referred to in paragraph 148 above, and invites States to submit
text proposals for inclusion in the resolutions to the coordinators of the informal
consultations at the earliest possible date;
152. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the
item entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea”.
79th plenary meeting
22 December 2007

25
