S/PV.7804

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7804

th meeting
Wednesday, 9 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Twelfth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2016/885)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2299 (2016) (S/2016/897)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-37180 (E)
*1637180*

S/PV.7804

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

We are witnessing the birth of a new Iraq. Let
us not forget that the people of Iraq also fight on our
behalf in defence of human values shared by the whole
world against the terrorism and intolerance represented
by Da’esh and its underpinning ideology. Today, we
also stand here in solidarity with the abducted, abused
and violated women and girls, their families and
communities. Women and children are the first victims
of Da’esh crimes, and we insist on full accountability
for the human rights abuses and atrocities perpetrated
by Da’esh against civilians. We call for justice for all
the victims of these heinous crimes, which may amount
to crimes against humanity, war crimes or genocide.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Twelfth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2016/885)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 2299 (2016) (S/2016/897)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/885, which contains the twelfth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), as well
as to document S/2016/897, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2299
(2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Let me start by congratulating the Iraqi
security forces, the Peshmerga, the Popular Mobilization
Forces and allied tribal and local volunteers, supported
by the international community, on the steady progress
in their historic battle to liberate Mosul. We honour the
martyrs who have paid the highest sacrifice for a free
Iraq. This liberation operation marks the beginning
of the end of the so-called Da’esh caliphate in Iraq.
Increased support of the civilian population for this and
previous liberation operations speaks best about the
fact that the liberation of Iraq is a fight of all Iraqis
in their unity for the future of their country as the
common house of all Iraqi people living together in
justice, equality, peace and tolerance.
2/7

09/11/2016

Based on lessons learned from the past, the
Government of Iraq and the leadership of the Iraqi
security forces and the Popular Mobilization Forces
have prioritized the protection of civilians in an
unprecedented way in the planning and conduct of the
military operations. Also, the Shia religious leadership,
the Marja’iya, has issued strong statements in that
regard.
The campaign for Mosul’s liberation is in its
twenty-fifth day and is progressing well. The progress
is planned and controlled in order to avoid excessive
risks, notably to the civilian population. The battle
has already moved to the city of Mosul. Nevertheless,
it is expected that the urban warfare may take some
time, well into the harsh winter period. As expected,
a desperate Da’esh has increased its terrorist activities
throughout the country, mostly against civilians. It has
also carried out several complex attacks in Kirkuk and
Rutba, and is planning more.
There has been unprecedented cooperation over
the planning and conduct of the Mosul liberation
operation between the Governments of Baghdad and
Erbil. As confirmed during the visit of President
Barzani to Baghdad, his first since 2013, and the visit
of Prime Minister Al Abadi to Erbil in recent days,
this cooperation and dialogue have expanded to also
cover a range of political, economic and administrative
issues and arrangements on which future BaghdadErbil relations will be built. As the Prime Minister of
the Kurdistan region of Iraq, Nechirvan Barzani, has
said, “We need to find a new formula for coexistence
in Iraq”.
Leaders of all components, communities and
groups, including civil society and women, will have to
address numerous grievances of the past and find a way
16-37180

09/11/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

to live together, after Da’esh, in justice and equality
for all. Reconciliation at both the community and the
national levels is the way to make military victories
against Da’esh sustainable and to make Iraq truly
peaceful and united.
Encouragingly, the head of the Iraqi National
Alliance, Ammar Al-Hakim, recently confirmed that
the National Alliance, as the largest parliamentary
bloc, is planning to submit
“an important document for national compromise
that considers an important political project to be
implemented in conjunction with the liberation of
Mosul to unify all Iraqis”.
Al-Hakim has called for the building of a country of
coexistence where all Iraqis feel compelled to defend
the unity of their lands, peoples and democracy. He also
stressed that the division of Iraq should be rejected in
all circumstances, and emphasized the importance of
constitutional obligations.
Credible reports suggest that Da’esh has been
forcing tens of thousands of women, children and
men from their homes in sub-districts around Mosul
and forcibly relocating civilians inside the city itself,
effectively using them as human shields. Forced
out at gunpoint or killed if they resist or try to flee,
these people are reportedly being moved to strategic
Da’esh locations, including Tall Afar. Thus far, there
have been only a few sporadic reports of violations
committed by pro-Government forces, mostly of
individuals committing ad hoc acts of revenge against
captured Da’esh fighters or persons accused of
supporting Da’esh. I am nevertheless concerned about
possible vengeful violence, particularly by tribes and
minorities who suffered atrocities committed by Da’esh
supporters, and also against their own tribal members
who joined Da’esh.
Since last December, the presence of Turkish
troops in Camp Bashiqa, which is considered by Iraq to
be a violation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity,
remains unresolved. Although both countries have
endeavoured to contain the situation through diplomatic
channels and bilateral mechanisms, there has been no
visible progress so far. Public exchanges from Baghdad
and Ankara continue to escalate. This is even more
disturbing now as the Mosul liberation operation is in
full swing, with all its risks and complexities. I urge
the Governments of Turkey and Iraq to tone down
their rhetoric and accelerate their bilateral efforts to

S/PV.7804

find a mutually acceptable resolution of this problem
and related issues in a way that will fully respect the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq, and
to ensure that all activities that take place in Iraq are
conducted in coordination and with the full agreement
of the Government of Iraq, while taking into account
the security concerns of both countries.
As of 9 November, up to 42,000 people have been
internally displaced as a result of the Mosul operation.
At present, more than 20,000 people are being supported
at existing camps. The remaining 30 per cent have
found shelter in host communities and public facilities.
A total of seven emergency sites are ready to receive
40,000 more people. At least 450,000 more spaces are
under construction. In July, the humanitarian country
team issued a flash appeal requesting $280 million to
prepare for Mosul. Close to 80 per cent of the required
amount has been received, although most funding came
on line only recently, delaying preparations until nearly
the start of the operation.
Stabilizing the city of Mosul following its liberation
will be a daunting task. Experiences from other
liberated cities, notably Ramadi, point to the possibility
of widespread destruction. Extensive contamination
from improvised explosive devices (IEDs) is already
reported. The United Nations Development Programme
Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization is
coordinating with the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) to conduct rapid threat-impact
assessments in key neighbourhoods and expedite
clearance of IEDs in the liberated areas. Also, UNMAS
is entirely reliant on bilateral contributions to the
United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in
Mine Action. The mine action community will require
$112 million in 2017, depending on the rate of at which
areas are retaken. This is almost entirely unfunded at
the moment.
Allow me to turn now to the twelfth report of the
Secretary-General on the issue of missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives (S/2016/885).
I would like to commend the Government of Iraq, and
particularly its Ministry of Defence, for bolstering
activities geared towards finding missing persons,
injecting much-needed energy and momentum into the
file.

16-371803/7

S/PV.7804

The situation concerning Iraq

A call for witnesses that was broadcast on local and
satellite television channels by the Iraqi Ministries of
Defence and Foreign Affairs on 18 September, inviting
all those with information pertaining to missing Kuwaiti
persons and property to come forward, has resulted in
hundreds of phone calls from citizens claiming to know
the whereabouts of both. That information is currently
being verified.
I would like to highly acknowledge the Government
of Kuwait, which has consistently shown support and
understanding with regard to the challenges faced by
the Government of Iraq over the years.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing. Uruguay acknowledges
his challenging work and that of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which, working in close
coordination with the Iraqi Government, is carrying
out the important task of addressing the various crises
currently affecting the country.
The plight of the Iraqi people is deteriorating.
As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/897), armed conflicts, acts of violence and
terrorism have continued to claim many victims. Iraq
continues to face multiple and great humanitarian,
political, economic and security challenges, the
principal among which is the fight against terrorism.
Once again, Uruguay reiterates the urgent need to face
the terrorist scourge in an effective manner, within the
framework of international law and together with the
United Nations. Uruguay supports the efforts of the
Iraqi Government, with the help of the international
coalition, to combat the grave threat posed by the
Islamic State to Iraq’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and its civilian population.
Those responsible for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and, possibly, genocide committed against
the civilian population must sooner or later be held
accountable and brought to justice for such atrocities.
Like in Syria, we are concerned about new information
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham may have used
chemical weapons in its attacks. Uruguay vigorously
condemns any use of chemical weapons against civil
4/7

09/11/2016

populations and calls for an in-depth investigation into
such claims.
As we have warned for many months, the retaking
of Mosul has the potential to become one of the greatest
humanitarian crises in recent times. In the great
struggle to reclaim Mosul, the Iraqi Government must
include the protection of civilians and an immediate
response to the humanitarian emergency as part of
its military offensives. The reconstruction of civilian
infrastructure, the normal provision of services and the
gradual return of internally displaced persons to their
homes must be priorities for the Government.
We urge the parties to the conflict to respect and
protect civilians, including women, children, persons
with disabilities and the elderly, respect human rights
and allow access of emergency humanitarian aid,
according to international humanitarian law. Lastly,
we commend the intense efforts being undertaken by
humanitarian agencies to protect civilians in Mosul. In
that regard, we encourage them to continue their efforts.
Nonetheless, it remains clear that military operations
alone will not eliminate the terrorist threat in Iraq. Iraqi
political leaders must overcome their differences and
mutual distrust and reach consensus on a single vision
for national reconciliation, without which, it will be
very difficult in the future to heal the wounds, caused
by so many years of conflict, from which its people
continue to bleed.
The President (spoke in French): I give to the floor
to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate Senegal on presiding over the
Security Council this month, its tremendous efforts and
the transparent manner in which it conducts the work of
the Council. I commend the Russian Federation for its
work during the presidency of the Council last month.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, Mr. Jan Kubiš, for his briefing, the
efforts, dedication and excellent work of his team in
Baghdad and New York.
On behalf of the people and Government of Iraq,
I would like to congratulate the American people on
Mr. Trump’s election as President-elect of the United
States of America. We pledge to work with him and his
team. We also thank His Excellency President Barack
Obama, Vice-President Biden and President Obama’s
representative and entire team for their support to Iraq
16-37180

09/11/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

and assistance in the war on terrorism. We also thank
them for their leadership of the international coalition
that has supported the Iraqi armed forces so that we could
liberate our territories from the clutches of the terrorist
gangs of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
We also commend the logistical and financial support,
the training of our armed forces and the humanitarian
assistance provided by the United States, in addition to
fundraising activities that raised more than $2 billion
so that we could rebuild the infrastructure in those
cities. The United States will remain a strong ally and
friend of the Iraqi people and Government. We will
work hard with the new Administration to enhance
that relationship.
The Iraqi Government provides all of the necessary
means to ensure that the efforts of its security forces
meet with success as they combat terrorism and work
to retake all of the territories under the control of
ISIL terrorist gangs. The Prime Minister of Iraq and
Commander-in-Chief, Mr. Al Abadi, has directly
supervised those operations from day one. He oversees
all joint field operations and security sectors with a
view to defeating the ISIL terrorist gangs. In the past
few weeks, Iraqi forces, with the assistance of the
international coalition, have liberated the towns of Al
Qayyarah and Sharqat, in addition to other villages in
the Ninawa and Salah al-Din governorates, which were
under the control of ISIL terrorists.
My Government commends the achievements made
in Mosul by the Iraqi army, the Peshmerga, the People’s
Mobilization Forces and the tribal forces, through the
joint operation command and with the assistance of the
international coalition. They have been victorious in
liberating most villages and towns on the periphery of
Mosul and have made incursions into the Left Bank.
They have liberated a number of neighbourhoods in
the centre of the city, and work assiduously to demine
areas in preparation for the return of internally
displaced persons.
More than 900,000 Iraqis were able to return to
their homes in areas that were liberated from ISIL.
That was made possible with financial support from
the international coalition. The areas were secured
before the return of internally displace persons. That
is in addition to providing jobs and services so that
normalcy could be restored. In Tikrit, 95 per cent of the
population has returned. More than 200,000 citizens
have returned to their homes in Ramadi. More than
90,000 citizens have returned to Fallujah.

S/PV.7804

The Iraqi House of Representatives voted against
the incursion of Kurdish forces into Iraq’s territory
and rejects the presence of any forces on Iraqi territory
without the approval of the central Government. It
considers the Turkish forces in Camp Bashiqa to
be aggressive forces of occupation and has given
instructions to have them thrown out of Iraqi territory
if they do not heed Iraq’s calls. We also rejected the
Turkish Parliament’s extension of the presence of
those forces. Furthermore, we condemn the racist
statements of the Turkish Prime Minister, which gave
rise to sedition among the Iraqi people. He maliciously
attempted to undermine Iraq, which is winning in its
fight against the ISIL terrorist gangs, who receive
support in the form of logistics, human resources,
funding and health care from Ankara, which is trading
in our artefacts and oil with with ISIL terrorist groups.
We have called on the Council to take immediate
steps to throw the Turkish forces out of our territory.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Jaafari, in his
letter dated 14 October 2016, informed the President of
the Security Council that we reserve the right to act in
self-defence and to apply the rules of engagement with
the aggressive Turkish forces in locations that are close
to our points of engagement with ISIL.
Iraq rejects the provocative statements made
by Turkish leaders against Iraq and their flagrant
intervention and occupation of Iraqi territory. Iraq
reaffirms the historic links between the peoples
of Turkey and Iraq, but we reject these statements,
which have become more explicit and clearly indicate
the intentions of Ankara officials who claim that the
Iraqi cities of Kirkuk and Mosul were once Turkish
cities. The Security Council must firmly counter these
expansionist expressions of greed against a State that is
a founding Member of the United Nations and a country
with full sovereignty.
We urge the countries of the world to implement
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and
2253 (2015), in particular with regard to stopping the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters from more than 120
States Members of the United Nations. Efforts must be
made to staunch the funding and recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters and the logistical support provided
to them, including weapons, food and non-food stuff,
medical equipment, communication, transportation
and weapons, in particular the material used in the
manufacturing of improvised explosive devices and
landmines from neighbouring countries. The Security

16-371805/7

S/PV.7804

The situation concerning Iraq

Council sanctions committee should undertake its role
to limit the capacities of ISIL terrorist gangs, dry up
their sources of funding and monitor the countries that
provide funding, support and arms to the ISIL terrorist
gangs, which engage in cross-border trade, in particular
in Iraqi oil and artefacts.
Iraq is working with its friends and partners to
identify possible options for collecting and archiving
evidence on ISIL crimes and is strengthening its
national capacity in this regard. We value the efforts
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, which
have identified the main areas of capacity-building in
Iraq in the field of combatting terrorism through their
visi, in September 2015 and successive meetings, in
particular the meeting held in Baghdad on 25 October,
with a view to helping the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the relevant Iraqi authorities
and to assisting and coordinating the efforts of all
stakeholders in the area of technical support to Iraq in
countering terrorism.
The people and the Government of Iraq thank all
countries of the international coalition, in particular
the United States of America, the countries of the
European Union and others that are not part of the
international coalition. They have combatted terrorism
and provided military and logistical support to the
Iraqi security forces in the framework of respect for
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Iraq and
in full cooperation with its security forces. We value
their contribution to restoring stability and rebuilding
areas that have been liberated from ISIL so that we
could alleviate the humanitarian suffering of internally
displaced persons through demining activities and the
removal of ordinances, in addition to the provision of
basic support services.

09/11/2016

Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence broadcast
on local and satellite television and use other means
of media to atttract more witnesses. Field visits are
carried out in order to obtain more reliable information
and achieve tangible results in locating the burial sites
of the missing persons and Kuwaiti prisoners. We have
held many joint technical meetings, excavations have
been undertaken and witnesses interviewed. From 14 to
18 July, we excavated 120 locations in Karbala, but found
no human remains. The plan of the Ministry of Defence
of Iraq is to carry out excavations in Khamisiyah,
Radwaniyah, Ayn al-Tamr and Sulaymaniyah, as well
as in another location in Salman Pak.
With a view to promoting brotherly relations
with Kuwait, we have held, in New York from 24 to
28 October, a joint technical workshop on the new maps
of the internationally acknowledged boundaries
between Iraq and Kuwait. The workshop was held
under the supervision of the United Nations. The two
delegations have reached an agreement to start an
18-month project for the creation of new maps.
Iraq appreciates the genuine efforts of the United
States of America and the Russian Federation to reach
a comprehensive solution in Syria for the Syrian
people who have suffered for six years from terrorism,
destruction, killings and displacement. There must
be communication to reach an intra-Syrian solution
that is satisfactory to all parties. There must be an
end to the terrorist gangs — and the international and
regional support they receive — and the recruitment
of terrorists. We call on Syria’s neighbours to respect
their boundaries. They must close the borders to the
terrorists and should not provide them with logistical
support as such actions would be in violation of Security
Council resolutions.

We call on Member States to fund their programmes
in Iraq. We continue to promote our relations with
neighbouring and Arab States, in particular the State of
Kuwait, Jordan, Iran and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
in addition to our continued communication with the
Syrian Government.

Iraq notes with satisfaction the relocation of the
inhabitants of Camp Liberty to other States. In that
regard, we value the efforts of Ms. Jane Holl Lute of the
United States of America and the Republic of Albania
for facilitating that process and carrying it through to
its completion.

The Government of Iraq is committed to strive
tirelessly for progress on the issue of the missing
citizens and archives of Kuwait. The national and joint
committees are meeting with witnesses in order to gain
a greater understanding of the plight of the missing
citizens of Kuwait and other States. The Ministry for

In conclusion, we thank the Special Representative
Mr. Ján Kubiš and his team for their efforts and for
the advice they provide to the Iraqi Government. We
are also grateful for the activities of United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for an Iraq that is stable,
unified and free from terrorism.

6/7

16-37180

09/11/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue

S/PV.7804

our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-371807/7
