TWENTY-THlRII

YEAR
th
MEETING: 19 MARCH 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1399) . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption

Page
1

of the agenda . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . b. . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30
August 1963 addressed to the President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two Member States (S/.5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo (B,razzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic
of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/8454)
. . . . . ..I........................*.......*....

1

S/PV. 1399

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed oj’capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-NINTH

Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. Ousmane So& DIOP (Senegal).
esent: The representatives of the following States:
:ria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
rgary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
iet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
ain and Northern Ireland and United States of America,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l399)

Adoption of the agenda.
Question
concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed to the President of the Security Council on
behalf of the representatives of th.irty.two Member
States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger,
Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/8454).
Adoption

of the agenda

‘le ugerzda was adopted.
stion concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
tters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed to the
esident of the Security Council on behalf of the
presentatives of thirty-two
Member States (S/5382 and
‘6409):
rtter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria,
Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, Un’ited Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454)

The PRESIDENT (trmslated from French): The repreatives of Jamaica and Zambia have asked to be invited
barticipate without vote in the Security Council’s debate

MEETING

19, March 1968, at 4 p.m.
on the item before it; these requests for participation can
be found in documents S/8455 of 12 March and S/8469 of
I8 March 1968. In accordance with the Council’s usual
Practice, I propose, if there is no objection, to invite the
RpresentatiVeS
of Jamaica and Zambia to take places at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. L. M, Bartlett
(Jamaica) and Mr. J. B. Mwemba (Zambia) took places at
the Council table,

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call upon
the first speaker on my list, the representative of Algeria,
3. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): As this is the first time that 1 have spoken since

our Council has been honoured by the participation of the
distinguished representative of the Soviet Union, my
delegation has the pleasant duty and the great satisfaction
of extending our warmest welcome to Ambassador MaIik.
4. With, due respect to those who have already welcomed
Ambassador Malik, 1 should like to say that while the cold
war has brought neither glory nor honour, neither does
coexistence, as it is understood by those who have
expressed their agreement with him, bring glory or honour.
5. In order to erase any doubts on this subject, one need
only give some thought to the hot and cold wars being
waged against the liberation movements of the third world
by those who have been unable or have not known how to
rid themselves of the reflexes they acquired during the cold
war in conducting rearguard actions which, although they
looked like offensives, were nevertheless retreats.
6. In this theatre of ours-and it is certainly no longer the
puppet theatre it once was-there seems to be a simultaneous cult of the characters in Shakespeare and of the heroes
of Greek tragedy. But, I suspect, heroes of the Shakespearean dramas are not necessarily those of the Greek
tragedies. To continue a theatrical analogy which seems to
have scored something of a success, one might hope that
the spotlight would be turned upon action and not upon
immobility.
7. A long struggle, lasting almost half a century, has
enabled the. socialists of Europe to bring about the state of
coexistence for, which we are all striving. Why, then, should
we be surprised that the third world is fervently engaged in
choosing, building and strengthening structures of all kinds
which it considers appropriate? For there are some in the
West who think that they can justify their refusal to change
by seeking comfort in established situations.

’ 8. These remarks are designed to give our new colleague a
less one-sided picture of this Council. The reality of the
situation is, moreover, sufficiently varied and complex to
give everyone an opportunity of doing useful work; and;
when the work is done jointly, it is bound to overcome
frustrations and failures.

15. It goes without saying that I am referring primarily to
non-African regimes, neighbours of Rhodesia, which naturally have a particularly flourishing bilateral trade with that
country. This is in fact one of the main direct consequences
of the bogus policy of economic boycott, which is very
fragmentary and which allows the countries concerned not
only considerably to develop their own trade relations, but
also to take part in triangular and clandestine trade, a
phenomenon of which history provides us with many
examples.

9. The Security Council is holding this urgent meeting
today at the request of the African countries in order to
examine the serious problem which the continued deterioration of the Rhodesian situation constitutes for peace and
security.

16. It seems, therefore, somewhat pointless today to recall
that one of the absolutely essential conditions for a
sanctions policy is the economic isolation of Rhodesia from
its immediate neighbours, a policy which the United
Kingdom would be perfectly capable of carrying into
effect; I need not add that the Cauncil would not hesitate
to follow the same course,

10. The legitimate emotion that swept world opinion as a
whole, and the anger aroused in all the .4frican peoples by
the murder committed by the racist regime of Salisbury,
have given the world a sharp reminder of the tragic fate of
the people of Zimbabwe. By that premeditated act, carried
out in spite of numerous interventions; Ian Smith wished to
give a spectacular demonstration, two and a half years after
the unilateral declaration of independence, of his regime’s
intention of breaking all ties with the United Kingdom,
although those ties were in fact only symbolic.

17. We know, however, that the United Kingdom displays
a certain diffidence regarding any policy which might
involve a confrontation with the colonialist minority. This,
no doubt, explains why in 1965 the United Kingdom laid
the Rhodesian question before the Security Council and
asked for the application of selective sanctions. That
initiative in itself gave the administering Power a chance to
water down its own responsibilities.

11. Salisbury’s challenge, first to the administering Power,
and then to the international community wasno doubt the
first sign of self-confidence in a regime which, faced with
the constant hesitation of the administering Power and the
ineffectiveness of the sanctions adcpted against that regime
by the United Nations, believes it can install itself and
consolidate its position to the detriment of the Zimbabwe
people.

18. The British attitude has thereafter consisted in a
self-interested slowing down and obstinate delaying of the
search for a solution capable of re-establishing the democratic process in Rhodesia and allowing the Zimbabwe
people freely to choose their own future in accordancewith
their own wishes and legitimate aspirations. This contradiction between the original attitude of the United
Kingdom and its present attitude has led the Council into a
state of paralysis preventing it from taking the necessary
effective measures to re-establish the prior conditions for
the application of the principle of self-determination,

12. This failure of the sanctions policy advocated by the
United Kingdom results, in particular, from an international
situation in which it is still hoped that the problems of
southern Africa can be isolated from one another and that
no attention need be paid to the close links between the
common political problems facing the various parts of that
region.

19. In envisaging the possibility of resorting to selective
sanctions, which the majority of African States denounced
at the time as unworkable, the United Kingdom had wished
to create the impression that it was implementing a phased
policy which would inevitably lead to the extreme measures
provided for in the Charter, namely, the use of armed force
as a last resort. But in that specific field the failure of the
sanctions envisaged by the Council became too obvious to
make any demonstration necessary. The attitude of the
United Kingdom gives indirect but unmistakable assurances
to the Ian Smith regime which, in undisturbed calm, is
strengthening its position by ways and means of which the
distant echo reaches us daily.

13. This idea has already been put forward on several
occasions, but has obviously not been taken sufficiently
into account by the Members of the Organization. It is to
be feared that sooner or later the seriousness of situations
which we can already foresee will oblige us to confront that
hard reality. We can already see a foreshadowing of this in
the fact that during the last few weeks the Council has
devoted the major part of its work to the problem of South
West Africa and that today it faces the problem of
Rhodesia; there can be no doubt but that sooner or later we
shall have to deal also with the question of South Africa
itself.

20. We are deeply convinced that’ the Council will draw
the lessons of past experience and express its will and
determination to see the administering Power and the
international community as a whole take energetic action
to spare Rhodesia the upheavals of decolonization experienced in Palestine and, in so doing, safeguard southern
Africa from the endless convulsions suffered by the Middle
East. Here, as there, the policy of pandering to short-term
interests by allowing foreign communities to assume the
attributes of sovereignty at the expense of the indigenous

14. With regard to the problem of sanctions, we should
like to thank the Secretary-General for all the work he has
done in order to be in a position to furnish the Orgardzation with a detailed report on Rhodesia’s trade, Iu this
connexion we must express our regret today that, although
many countries have demonstrated their obvious determination to implement the Security Council’s resolutions, some
countries continue to maintain profitable relations with
that Territory.
3

population, will lead sooner or later to violence, responsiour Ocganization put into effect measures to prevent the
bility far which can be laid only upon those who have
threatened conflagration,
allowed, introduced and consolidated the power of those
social groups which, because they are foreign, are usurpers.- “26. It has now become necessaryand urgent to reconsider
the problem of sanctioris, as provided for in resolution
21. Recent developments in Southern Rhodesia have
232 (1966). For economic sanctions to be completely
merely confirmed once again that the entire responsibility
effective, it seems necessary that the borders of Southern
for the present sjtuation is first and foremost the United
Rhodesia should henceforth be tightly sealed. To that end,
Kingdom’s, Under the Charter it is for that country, as a , both South Africa and Portugal must be made to comply
colonial Power, to establish the conditions permitting the
with the implementation of the sanctions adopted. Any
people of Rhodesia to acquire their independence. Despite
other attitude will have to be considered a violation of the
our justified reservations, and without any real prospects
provisions of the United Nations Charter, particularly of
that might support its contention, the United Kingdom has
Article 25.
repeatedly tried to convince us that preliminaiy measures
would be capable of bringing Salisbury to heel.
27. Nevertheless, the only real problem confronting us
here is to know whether the United Kingdom, enjoying
22. Far from taking the vigorous action required by a international support and a position strengthened by a
recognized legal responsibility, will for long go on refusing
situation which was only too plain, the United Kingdom
to consider the elimination, by whatever means, of the
has preferred to indulge in bogus talks with a European
minority
which it did not hesitate at the same time to
minority racist rtgime in Salisbury. If that is so, then the
qualify as rebellious. It seems that these bogus talks have
disquiet and scepticism shown up to the present by the
now been broken off and we are waiting with interest to
African States regarding the true intentions of the administering Power would be fully justified.
iearn whether or not the logical conclbsion will be drawn
from recent events, namely, that the only genuine and
fruitful talks, in keeping both with the provisions of the
28. We still dare to believe, even today, that -thg interCharter and with the true interests of the parties concerned,
national community and the awakened consciousness of the
would be talks between the national leaders, who are the
African peoples will not allow certain recent tragedies to
true representatives of the Zimbabwe people, and the
recur and that the Zimbabwe people will receive active
support :both from the African countries and from the
colonial Power, There can be no doubt that if such a policy
international community in the unequal struggle imposed
were followed, it would receive full support from the
members of the Security Council and the unreserved
on them by the common front of Smith and his allies,
Portugal and South Africa.
adherence of the international community as a whole.
23. In fact, every one is aware that Ian Smith’s constantly
provocative attitude is based essentially upon nothing more
than the generally shared conviction that in no circumstances will force really be used for the re-establishment of
law. The United Kingdom has done everything possible to
Inculcate this idea in the minds of the present rulers of
Rhodesia, and if the British attitude can be called a candid
one, it is nonetheless a serious political blunder-on the
assumption that it was adopted in good faith.

29. Let us repeat once again that the community of
nations must give its support to the Zimbabwe people in
their difficult and courageous struggle to recover their
national independence and must join with the United
Kingdom in exercising all the influence at its command in
order truly to translate the principles of the Charter into
concrete action.
30. Before concluding, my delegation wishes to put
forward a number of suggestions:

24. It would be extremely naive to think that the Ian
Smith rdgime would be content with the reality of political
power, without ultimately demanding its exterior attributes. This has been demonstrated by the hideous crime
comtnitted
a few days ago. As we see it, that action has a
twofold significance. On the domestic level, it was intended
to stri!te a blow at the national liberation movement; on the
international
level, it was meant to sever one of the last ties
stilf linking the rBgime to the United Kingdom, in an
endeavour to carry the unilateral declaration of independence to its conclusion.

(1) In view of the fact that Security Council resolution
232. (1966) of 16 December 1966 has recognized the
legitimacy of the Rhodesian people’s struggle and has also
recognized the illegality of the institutions set, up in
Salisbury, the Security Council ought to enjoin the United
Kingdom and the community of nations to regard those
responsible for the Salisbury murders as international
criminals.
(2) Since the United Kingdom has repeatedly stated that
the failure of sanctions wasdue to a lack of co-operation on
the part of certain States, this would be a suitable moment
for the administering Power to put at the disposal of the
Council all the facts which would enable it to take the most
appropriate measures; in so doing, the United Kingdom will
enjoy a greater degree of co-operation and will find that the
obstacles which, we are told, have prevented its policy from
bearing fruit will thereby be removed. From the same
viewpoint, the United Kingdotn could consider the possibility of sending a number of observer missions, so that the

25. In the first case, the reply was not long in coming. The
fighting, the arrests and the mass killings all bear witness to
the limited effect the Salisbury assassinations have had on
the national liberation movement. In the second case, it is
for the Security Council to decide upon the measures to be
taken and the actions to be carried out, first by the United
Kingdom
and subsequently by the international community. For if the United Kingdom is chiefly responsible
for the present situation, that situation also requires that
3

35. The British Prime Minister indicated on I4 March that
“in the present circumstances there can be no question of
resuming contact with the Smith regime”. Does this mean
that although it does not at present enViSage negotiatim
with Smith, London does not thereby rule out the
possibility of pursuing such negotiations when the time
seems right? How can such intentions be reconciled with
the.ilIegal nature of a regime and the patent responsibility
for murder incurred by that regime?

precise scope and effectiveness of the sanctions applied
could be determined. This would doubtless have the
advantage, in the eyes of London, of avoiding a resort to
force.
(3) These sanctions must be total.
(4) A last stern warning must be addressed to South
Africa and Portugal.
(5) The United Kingdom should take immediate steps to
put an end to the advertising for Southern Rhodesia and
tlie movement of immigration into that country. In our
view this is absolutely imperative, since-and this can never
be too often repeated-we are trying to spare Rhodesia and
southern Africa the fate of Palestine and the Middle East.

36. Prime Minister Wilson said on I1 November 1965:
“ . . . I think that the solution of this problem is not. one
to be dealt with by military intervention, unless of
course”-I stress the words “of course”-“our troops arc
asked for to preserve law and order and to avert a tragic
action, subversion, murder and so on.“’

(6) All States Members of the Organization and its
specialized agencies must be requested to break off all
consular relations and not to recognize in any way any
travel document issued by the Salisbury authorities.

37. We are forced to note that law has not been preserved,
that order has not been preserved, that tragic action has not
been averted, that subversion has become institutionalized,
and that murder, violating the law and threatening order, is
legitimizing the subversion which by definition constitutes
tragic action. Neither before, nor during, nor after the
giving of those’ assurances, have British troops been called
upon to preserve law and order or to avert tragic action,
subversion and murder. How can the United Kingdom
reconcile the responsibility which it claims-and which no
one denies to it-and the commitments it has entered into
with its persistent refusal to employ force? In words of one
syllable, does the United Kingdom wish to preserve law ancl
order, does it wish to avert subversion and murder, or does
it prefer to forgo military intervention?

(7) Those same States must be asked to put into effect
all the measures provided under Article 41 of the Charter,
including the interruption of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio and other means of communication. This
should cover all information media, such as the press, films,
television programmes, etc.
(8) To prevent any pressure on or attack against
Zambia-an attack which might be carried out under the
pretext that Zambia is being used as a sanctuary for the
Rhodesian movement-in short, to avoid any return to a
situation of the kind which the Council has had under
consideration for many months, the Council should, in
conjunction with Zambia and with complete respect for the
sovereignty of that country, envisage the most appropriate
defence measures.

38. In fact, the state of confusion which seems to
surround London’s political actions obliges us not to
underestimate the hypothesis that the United Kingdom
would probably not hesitate to intervene in Rhodesia, if the
strong development of a liberation movement were to
create a situation which would inevitably be interpreted as
a threat to law and order and would therefore be described
as the tragic action, suppression and murder obviously
calling for military intervention. Not legality, but at least
order-colonial order-would have been restored.

31. In conclusion, Mr. President, I should like through you
to address a number of questions to the representative of
the administering Power. These questions do not arise out
of a desire to set up an inquisition, but, if the replies, are
forthcoming, they may allow the Council to consider the
question in full possession of the facts, instead of in
ambiguity and confusion.

39. This should not be regarded in any way as an attack
on the integrity or good faith of those who are here
representing the administering Power, which has agreed to
be responsible, if not to the Organization, at least to the
Security Council. We felt it our duty to beg the United
Kingdom, with all due deference, to enlighten the Council
on certain questions which we believe to be crucial.

32. On 30 August 1967, a man named Lardner-Burke
who called himself Smith’s Minister of Justice and who ii
officiating today at Salisbury’s sacrificial altar, had already
announced the murders that were to take place on 6 March
1968.

40. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I propose today
to make only a first statement. I shall not attempt at once
to answer a number of important questions and indeed
charges
put forward so eloquently by the representative of
Algeria. I am anxious to deal with them and on another
occasion, if I am permitted to do so, I shall give a
considered reply to the questions and charges which he has
raised. It would perhaps be a mistake to single out any
Particular accusations, but he made a number of statements
which even now, without attempting a full reply, I should
answer.

33. What were the effective measures-not the delaying
tactics-carried out by the administering Power to rescue
those fighters from death?
34. Does the United Kingdom wish effective and adequate
action to be taken to render the Salisbury criminals
harmless? If this is the United Kingdom’s determined
desire, how can such an objective be reconciled with the
attitude it has shown in its refusal of all confrontation with
Salisbury and Pretoria?

1 Quoted in English by the speaker.
4

41. :
select1
bilitile
to de
accepl
have 1
., canno

‘?
j
!
”

i.: 42. I
be ha!
the pt
that ia
the g,r
grourb
basis I
the ail
then a
too 81
submi
contrc
from
clear i
tion 0
this nu
agree (

43. ‘M
man il
of jus
United
carried
withm
shall n
44.

Ih

in Rhc
condel
been t
satisk

full a;g
PZCOCd

munil:!
4s.

1:

shall II
strong
sentati

has be
hard
respm
action:
diffm

not 6x1

rigtlt t
there i
may h
have f
anger.,
recog11
futt1re
46. :t
world.
injustiil

3

41, The representative of Algeria said that by adopting
selective sanctions We SOU&t
t0 minimize
our responsibilities. That I cannot accept. He said that we have sought
to delay the search for a solution. TI;at again I cannot
accept. He said-at least I understood him to say-that we
llave given assurances to the illegal regime. That I certainly
cannot accept.

Years in condemned cells and then denied the right of final
appeal to the highest court. As the Commonwealth SetretarY said in the House of Commons, tile deprivation of
the right to resort to the ultimate court of appeal on a
capital charge is about the grossestbreach of the rule of law
that we can imagine.
47. The world-wide protest also owes its intensity to a
sense of foreboding for the future. That comes from the
concern which many of us so deeply feel for what may be
regarded as the greatest task of our generation-the task of
enabling people of different races in Africa and elsewhere
to live in mutual respect and in qthe security of true
equality.

ii ,+” 42. I would say no more now on the presentation which
he has made to US except that when he emphasizes that all
Ihe people of Rhodesia have a right to be consulted and
that all the people of Rhodesia have a right to participate in
rhe government of their country, then we are on common
ground. That has been our position and that has been the
basis of our policy throughout. When he sets as his purpose
the aim of bringing the illegal rCgime in Salisbury to an end,
then again we are on common ground. That is our purpose
too and has been from the beginning. But I should like to
submit to the Council that if we concentrate to&y on
controversy between ourselves, we shall distract attention
from our first and overriding duty. That duty is to make
clear in unmistakable and unanimous terms our condemnation of the illegal executions carried out in Rhodesia earlier
this month when five men were hanged. We all, I am sure,
agree on that.

48. If we agree that our first duty is to express the force
of international condemnation and to call for a stop to
these illegal and inhuman actions, the Council may decide
to prepare and adopt a resolution to that effect at once. If
that is the wish of the Council, we shall be ready to
co-operate in such a first step. We see advantage in
proceeding with such initial action, and in proceeding at
once and jn full agreement.
49. Last week we unanimously adopted resolution
246 (1968) on the Pretoria trial. That followed on resolution 245 (I 968) which we adopted unanimously on 25
January 1968. I need not remind the Council that we all
co-operated together to go forward in these expressions of
international opinion in full agreement. I myself have no
doubt that in spite of the reports which we have received
on the response from the South African Government, those
demonstrations of international concern and international
condemnation and international demand were timely and
valuable.

43. We should go further. I trust that a clear and
unanimous caI1 will go out from this Council, in the name
of justice and mercy and carrying the authority of the
United Nations, demanding that no more illegal hangings be
carried out. This should be done without reservation and
without delay. This is our first obligation: I trust that we
sbaI1not fail to meet it.
44. More than a hundred men have been awaiting hanging
in Rhodesia. Many of them have endured the agony of the
condemned cell for many years. Some, we hear, have now
been told that they are not to be killed. But no one can be
satisfied with that. Surely it is necessary for this Council, in
full agreement amongst all of us and without any delay, to
record our demand on behalf of the international community that the rule of law should not again be so flouted.

50. It would be well, I suggest,if we were to proceed with
the same purpose and with the same urgency and the same
unanimity to express international concern and condemnation and demand on the question now before us.
51. It may be said that the force of international opinion
about the hangings in Rhodesia has already been made
clear, That may be so; but I commend to you the
proposition that it is for this Council to confirm and to
reinforce what has already been so strongly felt and openly
said here in the United Nations and indeed throughout the
world.

45. On the moral questions involved in these hangings, 1
shall not attempt to add to what has been said. I respect the
strong, indeed passionate, feelings expressed by the representative of Algeria. I share them. He will understand that it
has been a bitter experience in recent weeks to live with the
hard fact that, while my country has constitutional
responsibility for Rhodesia, we have not been able to stop
actions so clearly illegal and so brutally inhuman. It is
difficult for many of us to express our feelings; words are
not enough, and in such questions Africans have a better
right to speak than I have. But I ask them to believe that
there are countless people in the world who, though they
may have no special knowledge of Rhodesia or of Africa,
have followed what has taken place with-disgust and with
anger. More .than that, there are very many people who
rccognize that these actions are evil and ominous for the
future.

52. Our first duty is to the prisoners in Rhodesia still
under sentence of death-and new death sentences, SOwe
hear, have recently been passed. Let us not hesitate or
delay. Our first duty is clear.
53. I certainly do not suggest that we should stop or even
pause when that first duty has been done. My proposal is

that we should at once proceed to consider together the
whelk question of what further action can be taken to
restore the situation in Rhodesia, to end the rebellion and
to prepare for the advance to free, democratic government
which we all, I am sure, wish to see.
54. I have no intention today to go over past events in
Rhodesia, though 1 am ready to do so if that is the Wish of
the Council in the course of our debate.

46. The storm of protest has already been heard round the
world, It owes its strength to the knowledge that grave
injustice has been done and that men have been kept for
5

55. One of the first acts of my Government was to give a
warning of the consequences of an illegal declaration of
independence, and we have throughout declared and
maintained the principles on which we believe a just
settlement should be based. Those principles may bc open
to criticism or susceptible of improvement. Some may say
that in some respects they go too far, some may argue that
they do not go far enough. But I very much doubt that
there’ will be many here who will maintain that they are
wrong. I believe that in international opinion they are
recognized as a genuine and fair attempt to find the right
way to go forward. They are principles which have guided
us in the processes of decolonization elsewhere in the past.
They continue to provide what we believe should be the
framework for a settlement in Rhodesia. We have promised
that there will be no going back,
56. We set ourselves to achieve our aims by peaceful
means. We appealed at once to the Council to join with us
and support us in that effort. We ours&es made proposals
to the Council. We have faithfully taken action in accordance with the decisions of the Council. We have done so at
economic sacrifice, in spite of the economic and financial
difficulties my country has recently faced. No country has
done more than mine to put the decisions of the Council
into practical effect. We have in fact gone well beyond the
requirements of the Council’s resolutions. It would have
been possible, some would say it would have been easy, to
abandon our declared principles and save ourselves from
further economic loss. We have refused to do so.
57. There have been delays and mistakes and miscalculations. WC welcome and commend the actions of all
those who have joined us in our efforts, but there have been
those who were not prepared to answer the call of the
Council.
As the Algerian representative has reminded us,
there have been evasionsand failures. Wehave had these
factors under constant review, both ourselvesand in the
Commonwealth Sanctions Committee. The time has come
to examine together here what has been done and what
more can now be done.
58. My earnest recommendation to the Councilis that we
should at once undertake a full and careful review of past
action and future possibilities, and I accordingly place
myself at the disposal of the Council for urgent consultation. I sincerely trust that that offer will be acceptedin the
spirit of full co-operation in which it is made,

must be, in favour of mere invective and dispute among
ourselves.
61. I do not need to remind the Council of our main
obligation. It is to all the people of Rhodesia,and especially
to those more than 4 million Africans who are beingdenied
freedom of expressionand the prospect of full participation
in the governmentof their own country.
62. There are some who say that there is no way but by
force, that the endeavour to use peaceful meanswas
misguidedfrom the start, or that, even if that wasnot so,
the methods we have employed under the authority of this
Council have now no further part to play, that there is no
additional measure, no new pressure, no stopping of
loopholesand no prevention of evasionswhich is worthy of
consideration. I am myself convinced that that is not so. I
am
I. sure that there are effective measuresstill to be taken.
63. I go further. I would say that in spite of the
difficultiei and limitations of which I am all too well aware
we have a duty not to decide and declare that sanction;
have failed, not to pronounce that one of the main weapons
of international enforcement has proved useless.Wehavea
duty to explore and to examine every effective and
practicable method to supplementand sustainthe measures
we have already taken. This is not the time to give up; it is
the time to go on. That is the decision which shouldgo
from this Council to Salisbury. We need to convince
everyone, including particularly the illegal rt?gimein
Rhodesia, that we mean to go on. We need to convince
them that in the end there will be no escapefrom the
situation created by their illegal actions except by a return
to the road of legality and democratic advance andfree
government which was so wantonly abandtined on 1I
November 1965.

6

0

ir

64. We all have difficult judgements and awkward decisions to make together. On some vital aspectsof the
problem before us we shall no doubt disagree.It wouldbe
surprisingif it were not so. But I for one am convincedthat
this is a time when we must accept the limitations 011our
options, however galling those limitations may be, and go
forward with deliberate and determined steps along the
road which we have chosen.

Sl

t1
w
R
01
Ci

te
/
1
’
/
;

/
66. lt is with this in mind that I repeat my recommendation that we should at once embark on a detailedand i
thorough consultation amongst ourselveson the measures i
which can and should be taken.
’
.

60. I trust that we shall not allow ourselvesto be defeatist
in the sensethat we abandon further practical andeffective
action, limited and unspectacular though perhapsmost of it

7
0

6.5. It is a time not for gesturesand generalizationsand
accusations,but for steady persistence.We have to makeit
quite clear that while we cannot hope to win at once,we
are resolved not to give up and not to abandon our
responsibility to the people who rely on us.

59. 1 do not for a moment forget or deny the practical
difficulties we must honestly face and the real limitations
on what cm in fact be done. We have not failed to state
them. But 1 greatly hope that, however strong the feelings
of membersof the Council, and before they make up their
minds, there will be a readinessto consult on the basisof
the hard facts and the practical possibilities.I trust that we
shall not run away from our responsibilitiesby resort
merely to sweeping declarations and demandsthat cannot
be met. I trust Ihat the Council will not lightly abandonthe
coursewhich by our previous votes we have set.

I

7:,
d-1
bc,
in
tu
bt
7-1
ra
in
CO

on

67. After listening to the representative of Algeria this i
afternoon I hope that I can take it-l believe that I i
can-that such consultations will be undertaken and carried
through in a spirit of genuine co-operation to achieve ;
commonaims.

in
QM

68. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): I should
like first of all to join those who have spokenbeforemein

Prc

d",'
PQ

73
i

segregation and apartheid is being rapidly institutionalized
expressing a warm welcome to our new colleague, the
on a massive scale.
representative of the Soviet Union, Ambassador Malik.
Ambassador Malik has been a very well known figure in
74. This colonial alignment looks to the future with an air
international politics for more than two decades, and his
present appointment to the United Nations brings to the
of false confidence, in the knowledge that it will always get
some substantial support from abroad, from the Western
Organization vast knowledge of and experience in interworld, whose civilizing mission it claims to be carrying out
national affairs, coupled with recognized diplomatic skill
and competence, from all of which the Cotmcil and the
and whose interest it avows to protect and defend. At any
Organization can derive a great deal of benefit. We of the
rate it believes-and it has every reason to go on believingAfrican delegations are particularly gratified that the Soviet
that this support will be forthcoming so long as it is able to
Government has chosen as its representative to the United
control the enormous wealth and resources of that rich and
Nations at this particular time SO important for African
vast subcontinent.
problems a distinguished statesman who has been closely
associated with Africa and its problems during the past
75. In South Africa it has established a garrison State
years; and we are confident that this timely and significant
equipped to the teeth with the most up-to-date weaponry
appointment will help further to enhance the understanding
of aggression. The most brutal system of oppression has
and co-operation that exist between the African delegatiohs
been established on the most avowed racist ideology,
and the delegation of the Soviet Union.
.
.
equalled
in recent times only bv that of nazi Germanv. It
,
has usurped in broad daylight a ward of the United Nations,
69, In welcoming Ambassador Malik to membership of the
the international Territory of South West Africa.
Council, my delegation wishes to assure him of its
whole-hearted co-operation in the true spirit of the long
76. In the Portuguese Territories colonialism has unstanding relations that have so happily existed between the
leashed its fury against those who have dared to question its
Soviet and Ethiopian Governments and people:.
legitimacy. A colonial war whose intensity and ferocity are
growing
day by day is raging, while the rest of the world,
70. I do not intend to speak at length at this stage of our
condemllcrl by and large to a conspiracy of silence, remains
debate on this very grave problem that we face in Southern
unaware.
Rhodesia. My colleague the Permanent Representative of
Algeria has presented to the Council a clear, eloquent and
‘77. In Southern Rhodesia the situation which the Council
comprehensive case for prompt and comprehensive action
in its resolution 232 (1966) of 16 December 1966 deterby the Council in order to bring this shameful rebellion to
mined to be a threat to international peace and security is
an end and thus restore to the people of Zimbabwe their
fast becoming an imminent threat,
rights to self-determination and independence.
78. If the past year has shown anything conclusively, it is
71. I find it necessary, none the less, to seize the
that
the challenge of colonialism, shorn of its paraphernalia,
opportunity
of this opening debate both to underline some
has been revealed in its true colours. It is an alliance of
of the points raised by my Algerian colleague and to
colonialism and racism, which has pulled together all its
indicate the main lines of action in which the Council
resources,
mustered all its support, to defeat all that the
should, in our view, direct its efforts. It also seems to me
United
Nations
stands for.
that as the Security Council embarks once again on what
we all hope will be an historic and decisive debate on
79. It has become all too obvious that the colonial
Rhodesia it is only fitting and timely that we should remind
problems
in southern Africa cannot be treated separately if
ourselves of the background from which this tragedy
we are earnest in our search for an effective solution. The
cannot be separated, the tribulations of our times, the
solution we should seek should be co-ordinated in one
terrible convulsions we are passing through.
concerted move against all these problems. Anything short
of this, in the face of all evidence of the new posture and
72. The past year alone has witnessed more than its due
tactics of colonialism in southern Africa, is bound to be
share of hostilities, and the prospects do not seem any
unrealistic and inadequate.
better for the year that has now begun. One such sore place
in the world-a
place where a large fire with the potential of
80. The Security Council is once again considering the
turning into an inferno is building, where the smell of
situation in Southern Rhodesia because it has been estabburntig is ‘already in the air-is of course southern Africa.
lished that that situation constitutes a continuing threat to
There an obdurate colonialism, in league with racism, has
international peace and security-a threat that has been
raised a barricade against the advance of freedom and
further aggravated by the recent political assassinations and
independence.
Nor can the stand of this alliance of
colonialism
and racism in southern Africa be described as persecutions of that country’s freedom fighters. Indeed, the
history of Rhodesia in the past ten years has been
only one of resistance to what has often been called the
wind of change. Colonialism in that part of Africa is
characterized by a steady and constant deterioration and by
desperately oti the offensive, It tries to push as far back as an ever-growing threat to international peace and security.
possible the frontiers of independence in Africa. For it sees This has happened not by accident but because of the
refusal of one of the permanent members of the Security
iri the independence of the peoples of Africa a threat to its
own precarious and ill-founded security and future.
Council, a country which shares primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, to
73. At home it has unleashed a policy of vicious supdischarge fully its responsibility under the United Nations
pression of the indigenous peoples. A policy of racial
Charter to the people of Rhodesia. Indeed, the Government
7

86. Inevitably, as the repression 11X increased, SO h;lS fhc
resistance of the African population. Deprived of any
legitimate means of redress, the African population bus
risen to the c]la]]enge
and 110~ decided to Irlcet the violcnse
of the oppressorby effective resistance. This resistance has
apparently been so widespread and SO IIJUCII
beytd
tile
capacity of the SmitJl regime to deal with that South
African counter-insurge~~cy forces have been brought in to
cope with the problem.

of the United Kingdom cannot escape.responsibility to
history for the situation that now prevails in Rhodesia and
for all the consequences that have flowed therefrom.
81. When the United Nations General Assembly and the
Special Committee on decolonization2 first set out to
consider the question of colonialism in Rhodesia, some six
years ago, we continually addressed pleas to the Government of the United Kingdom to assume its direct responsibility to advance the people of Rhodesia to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV).
82. However, the United Kingdom refused throughout to
co-operate with the United Nations, on the fictitious
ground that the question of constitutional reforms in
Rhodesia was in the hands of the minority Rhodesian
Government which had been established following a socalled election in 1923, in which only an exclusively white
electorate-about 10,000 in number-took part. The United
Kingdom Government pleaded then, as it does now, that it
had no competence to do anything to remedy the situation,
83. This policy of vacillation and refusal by the United
Kingdom Government to discharge its full responsibility
finally convinced Smith and his accomplices that the
Government would not act if they revolted. When the
threat of the unilateral declaration of independence became
real, we again tried to impress upon the United Kingdom.
Government that it should not discount the use of force as
a means of preventing the threat from being carried out. As
is well known, no such declaration ever came, and Smith
revolted, flouting the British Crown with impunity.

with

ever-increasing repression breeds

91. As the resistance grows, as it is bound to grow, the
alliance of colonialism, instead of looking into its own
policies, will inevitably see in the nei~lbouring’irldcpcndenl
African States a threat to its security, There is thus it
distinct possibility that colonialism in southern Africa will
sooner or later unleash aggression against the neighbouring
independent African States. In this connexion, I siv.~~ldtikc
to support the suggestion made by my ccrllca~uc the
representative of Algeria, for the Council to take this inlo
fu]] account, and to prepare itself for such an eventuality,
92. Thus, in our assessment, the situation in Southern
Rhodesia which the Security Council determined as a threat
to international peace alld security in December 1066, is
fast becoming an imminent
threat. It is against the
backgroun? of this ominous development that the Council
should address itself to 811 evatuation of the effects of the
selective mandatory sanctions it had decided upon in
December 1966 as well as in the light of SUCKan evaluation
to examining new and additional measures sufficiently
adequate to remove the threat to international peace and
security which now obtains there.

regard to the

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto Colonial Countries and Peoples.

8

r

support of progressive forces and public opinion. The
struggle of the oppressed cannot simply be ex]JIilined ll\vay
as a common-law crime. This is particularly SO when the
power of the oppressor is based on force and repressive
violence, and when the oppressed have no legitimate means
of redress.

90. While the nature and the extent of the atlirlnce or’
colonialism in Southern Rhodesia was unveiled in the
Zambezi Valley and the Wankie area as a result of the
activities of the nationalist forces, it should be pointed out
that these developments are only portents of a grcatcr and
more imminent threat to peace in that part of Africa.

8.5. The situation in Southern Rhodesia has thus deteriorated to such an extent that the problem now is no longer
one of ensuring the immediate participation on a democratic basis of the African people in the affairs of their
Government. The nature of the problem has decisively
changed. Smith has now embarked on a policy of racial
segregation and nparth~id which excludes altogether the
participation of the indigen&s people in the political life of
their country. Already a bill to ensure the maintenance of
separate communities in separate places has been passed.
Another bill, the so-called Draft Property Owners (Residential Protection) Bill, provides for the eviction of people
of one race from an area predominantly occupied by
another race. The Municipal (Amendment) Act is designed
to provide separate municipal facilities and services on
racial lines. Segregation in sports participation and in the
provision of hospital serviceshas been instituted as a policy.
on the Situation

88. History shows that

further resistance,especially Wh211 thf.! Oppl’CSSCtf
hVC by (IlC
hope of freedom and can count or1 the Syml-)itthy und

89. In this regard the General Assembly was right in
proclaiming the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe to be
legitimate and it was also right for the Special Committee
on Decolonization to condemn the hanging of political
prisoners and character& it as political assassination,

84. Since the unilateral declaration of independence, the
policy of vacillation has continued. Step by step Smith has
escalated his defiance, to the point of severing altogether
his last link with the United Kingdom-namely,
the
authority of the British Crown-by refusing to accept the
reprieve granted by Her Britannic Majesty the Queen to
political prisoners condemned to death by his kangaroo
court.

2 Special Committee

87. It is against that ominous background that the recent
hanging of political prisoners has dran~ntieally demorb
strated how nervous and ruthless the authorities have
become. They hope, perhaps against hope, that by meting
out death sentences to freedom fighters they can silence
them. In this, as in every other assumptit>n they Iiuvc
chosen to entertain, the racists 0f Rhodesia are of course
utterly wrong.

F
j

i
I
!(
;
7
!

1
,
!
i

1
?

i
1

I
1

and to some extent a picture of a more particular pattern,
emerges from the reports of the Secretary-General, as well
as from news reports in the international press.

93. After everything is said about these selective mandatory sanotions, one thing stands out very clear: that is,
despite the fact that these measures have been in operation
for over a year, the Smith regime, instead of collapsing as
was expected, is fast consolidating itself on the lines of the
apartheid system pioneered by its spiritual mentors in
South Africa. Nothing could be a more eloquent and telling
proof of the failure of the so-called selective mandatory
sanctions than the grim fact that the Smith regime is still on
its feet today. So defiant has Ian Smith been that he was
recently quoted as having said that Southern Rhodesia
would be-and I quote his words-“stark, staring mad” to
consider any alternative.

98. The main indications are that any decrease in the
export from Southern Rhodesia of agricultural products
that may have been achieved by the selective mandatory
sanctions, has been offset by increased export earnings
from minerals. The evidence also shows that foreign
investment in mineral extraction activities is actually
increasing.
99. The fact that the Smith regime has been able to
compensate farmers for all the lossesthey have sustained as
a result of the sanction measures also suggests that outside
resources from certain quarters must have been made
available to it,

94. It is tlierefore pertinent to ask why these sanction
measures failed, or whether they ever had any chance to
work in the first place. My Government, and many other
Governments of Member States, never had any illusion that
they could or would work. For one thing, we had correctly
analysed the nature of colonialism in that part of the
African continent. We had predicted that South Africa and
Portugal would sabotage any meaningful United Nations
action. Secondly, we had felt that even if they were to be
fully implemented,
selective mandatory sanctions would
only give Smith time to make the necessary adjustments to
organize his economy with that of South Africa and the
Portuguese in Mozambique, in order to minimize the
impact of the decision of the Council.

100. Selective mandatory sanctions’have also provided the
Smith regime with time to make the necessaryadjustments
and reorientation of production in its economy. The policy
in this regard has been to shift to production of commodities for which there is a high demand in the world
market. The production of groundnuts has been given high
priority. The re-export of beef from Southern Rhodesia,
according to press reports, has considerably increased since
the unilateral ‘declaration of independence. Also according
to press reports, mineral exports, comprising asbestos,
copper and chrome, have continued to reach world markets
in ever-increasing quantities,

95, The fact of the matter, however, is that the selective
measures were not fully complied with by all States as they
should have been, and yet these represent a decision of the
Security Council which all Member States of the United
Nations are in duty, bound to carry out faithfully. The
attitude of the Governments of Portugal and South Africa
have been made absolutely clear: their attitude has been
one of complete disregard of this decision of the Council. I
shall take up this matter a little later in my statement.

101. The inescapable conclusion from a review of the
statistics supplied by the Secretary-General is that although
the official figures submitted by Member Governments
indicate in some instances a substantial decrease of trade
between Southern Rhodesia and its traditional trading
partners, it seems that at the same time there is a large
volume of clandestine trade that has not figured in these
official submissions. Since much trade in these countries is
carried on by private concerns, it may well be that the
Member Governments concerned did not exercise sufficient
vigilance against those rechannelling their trade through
middlemen in South Africa and Portugal.

96. Apart from these countries the evidence submitted to
us iri the Secretary-General’s reports,3 prepared in pursuance of Council resolution 232 (1966), suggests that a
number of countries have not also fully lived up to their
obligation.

102, Although the evidence of violation of the selective
mandatory sanctions with respect to other countries may
not be so all conclusive as to enable us to pin-point
responsibility with respect to Portugal and South Africa,
the evidence regarding their complicity and duplicity in
sabotaging the sanction measures decided upon by the
Security Council is a matter of official acknowledgement.
Both Governments have not hidden the fact that they are
not prepared to carry out the decision of the Council.
Indeed, the Portuguese Government has gone so far as’to
challenge the legality of the decision of the Council. In its
letters both to the President of the Security Council and to
the Secretary-General in connexion with this problem,
Portugal has raised legal points on which it knew beforehand the Secretary-General could not give an answer. All
this, however, has been done in a vain attempt to justify
Portugal’s unwillingness to carry out the decisions of the
Security Council and its defiance of them. I

97, It is, of course,.diff!cult to determine the extent of the
violation of these sanction measures in each case. The
Secretary-General in his various reports has explained to us
how difficult it has become to get information on tradeflow to and from Rhodesia. The Smith regime is playing a
cloak-and-dagger game with trade information. Quite a few
statistical publications
have been suspended, and the
revelation of trade information
has been decreed as
prejudicial to the national interest. To a great extent trade
to and from Southern Rhodesia has been “denationalized”,
and most of the transactions are now being carried out
through South African and Portuguese intermediaries.
Nevertheless, a general pattern of violation of the sanctions,
3 See Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second
Year. Supplemetit
for
January,
February and March 1967, document S/7-78:1 and Add.1 and 2; ibid., Supplement for July, August
and Seprember 1967, document S/?l81/Add.3;
and ibid., Suppletnent for October, November and December 1967, document
S/7181/ Add.4

103. Moreover, on 23 November 1967, the Foreign
Minister of Portugal, Mr. Franc0 Nogueira, stated at a Press
9

I

ment measures. It is only through such action that
sanctions can have a decisive impact on the internal
situation in Southern Rhodesia, and it is only in this way
that we can hope to remove the ominous threat to
international peace and security that presently exists in
southern Africa, and in Southern Rhodesia in particular.

conference that Portugal made no secret of the fact that oil
products were passing through Lourenco Marques to
Southern Rhodesia and that the Sonarep refinery at
Lourenco Marques was refining oil for Mozambique’s own
requirements and for “the same old clients as before”.
Needless to say, one of the notorious “same old clients”
mentioned in this statement is none other than Southern
Rhodesia itself.

109. Moreover, experience has shown that the mere
promulgation of sanctions can never be enough on its own
to ensure effective application and compliance, This is an
indisputable lesson that we derive from the history of
sanctions both from the time of the League of Nations and
from that of the post-war period. It is not enough for the
Council to request the Secretary-General to report on the
progress of the implementation of the decisions to be taken
here. The information brought to us by the SecretaryGeneral is, of course, always very useful and.the SecretaryGeneral has no doubt done his very best, under the
circumstances, to provide the Council with all information
given to him by Member States. But such information,
however useful it may be, does not enable the Council to
ensure that its decisions are in fact implemented without all
kinds of obstruction on the part of those whose desire it is
to undermine the Council’s effort.

104. South Africa has also not hidden its attitude of
defiance towards the selective mandatory sanctions-so
. much so that the Government of South Africa has even
obliged foreign business subsidiaries to obey its edict of
defiance of the Council’s decision. Thus, in June 1966, the
Minister of Economic Affairs of South Africa declared that
the South African Government would not tolerate foreign
Governments issuing instructions to South African subsidiaries which clashed with South African policies. He said
in fact that if South Africa: does not “participate in a
boycott action, then no South African company has a right
to participate in a boycott”.
105. It is also to be recalled that in a note verbale dated
22 June 1966 /S/7392/
from the Permanent Representative of the Republic of South Africa to the United
Nations that representative expressed, on behalf of his
Government, reservations regarding the validity of resolution 221 (1966) of9 April 1966.

110. In a situation like that of Southern Rhodesia where
South Africa and Portugal are openly defying decisions of
the Council, sanctions without some means of following up
their implementation can have no effect, If the Council
really *means business, it must decide on specific and
appropriate measures which can enable it to follow up the
implementation of its decisions.

106. In the face of incontrovertible evidence, it is high
time that both Portugal and South Africa should stand
accountable for their conduct in terms of their obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations. Under Article 25
of the Charter they are both under the obligation to carry
out faithfully decisions of the Council. Such decisions of
the Council are, of course, decisions of the Organization
taken by the Council on behalf of the entire membership.
Nobody can question the validity of such decisions nor
disregard them without contravening thereby one’s Charter
obligation. Moreover, whatever controversy there may be or
may have been iu the past with regard to the interpretation
of Article 25, there is none in this particular case, for the
decision of the Council in resolution 232 (1966) wastsken
under Chapter VII of the Charter.

111, If Britain wishes sincerely to bring this rebellion to
an end, it must demonstrate its good faith and its
determination by assuming the direct responsibility that is
Britain’s and by playing the major role in the proposed
process of implementation. Anything short of this will be a
grave evasion of responsibility which history will never
forget and Africa will never forgive.
112. These are, in the view of my delegation, the main
lines of action that the Council should seriously consider
and on the basis of which it must take urgent action. I
reserve the right to intervene at a later stage.

107. Now that the complicity
and duplicity of the
Portuguese authorities and of South Africa in defeating
those limited sanction measures have become a matter of
record, my delegation believes that no sanction measures,
even if they were to be comprehensive, could work today
unless they were to include the Portuguese Territories and
South Africa as well. We have to recognize colonialism in
southern Africa for what it is and devise resolute action in a
way that can meet its changed posture and tactics.

113. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have 1
no further speakers on my list. Before adjourning the
meeting, I wish to inform the Council that, as a result of
consultations which I have held, a number of Council
members have expressed the desire that the next meeting
should take place tomorrow at 3 p.m., in order to allow
time for consultations. With the Council’s consent, I shall
now adjourn the meeting, on the understanding that the
next meeting will take place tomorrow at 3 p.m. when we
shall resume our consideration of the question of Southern
Rhodesia.

108. The time has therefore come for the strict and
effective application of general and mandatory comprehensive sanctions, without leaving any loop-holes which
impede the prompt and efficient application of enforce-

The meeting rose at 6 p, m.

10
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

(or equivalent in otller currencies)

35420-May

1971---2,100
