THE SITUATION IN CYPRUS 291

single citizenship, with its independence and territorial integrity
safeguarded, and comprising two politically equal communities
as defined in paragraph 11 of the Secretary-General's report in
a hi-communal and hi-zonal federation, and that such a
settlement must exclude union in whole or in part with any
other country or any fonn of partition or secession;

Decisions

In a letter dated 23 March 1992,292 addressed to the
President of the Security Council for the information of the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General stated that
Major-General Clive Milner, of Canada, who had been the
Commander of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus since 3 April 1989, would relinquish his post on 9 April
1992. Following the usual consultations, it was the SecretaryGeneral's intention to appoint as bis replacement BrigadierGeneral Michael Minehane, of Ireland. The Government of
Ireland had informed him that Brigadier-General Minehane
would be promoted to Major-General upon bis appointment to
this post.

3. Calfs again upon the parties to adhere fully to these
principles and to negotiate without introducing concepts that
are at variance with them;
4. Endorses the set of ideas described in paragraphs 17
to 25 and 27 of the Secretary-General's report as an appropriate basis for reaching an overall framework agreement, subject
to the work that needs to be done on the outstanding issues, in
particular on territorial adjustments and displaced persons,
being brought to a conclusion as an integrated package
mutually agreed upon by both communities;

In a letter dated 25 March 1992,293 the President of the

Security Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"I have the honour to infonn you that your letter of
23 March 1992 concerning the appointment of the next
Commander of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus292 bas been brought to the attention oi9the members of the Council. They agree with the proposai contained in your letter.

5. Requests ail concerned to cooperate fully with the
Secretary-General and his representatives in clarifying without
delay these outstanding issues;

6. Reaffirms that the Secretary-General 's mission of good
offices is with the two communities, whose participation in the
process is on an equal footing to assure the well-being and
security of both communities;

At its 3067th meeting, on 10 April 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The situation in Cyprus: report of
the Secretary-General on bis mission of good offices in Cyprus
(S/23780)". 43

7. Decides to remain seized of the Cyprus question on an
ongoing and direct basis in support of the effort to complete
the set of ideas referred to in paragraph 4 above and to
conclude an overall framework agreement;

Resolution 750 (1992)

or 10 Aprll 1992
The Security Council,

8. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue his intensive
efforts to complete the set of ideas referred to in paragraph 4
above during May and June 1992, to keep the Council closely
informed ofhis efforts and to seek the Council's direct support
whenever necessary;

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
3 April 1992 on bis mission of good offices in Cyprus, 294
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on Cyprus,

9. Continues to believe that, following the satisfactory
conclusion of the Secretary-General's intensive efforts to
complete the set of ideas referred to in paragraph 4 above, the
convening of a high-level international meeting chaired by the
Seeretary-General in which the two communities and Greece
and Turkey would participate represents an effective mechanism for concluding an overall framework agreement;

Noting with concem that there bas been no progress in
completing the set of ideas for an overall framework agreement
since the Secretary-General's report of 8 October 1991 295 and
that in some areas there bas even been regression,
Welcoming the assurances given to the Secretary-General
over the past two months by the leaders of the two communities and the Prime Ministers of Greece and Turkey of their
desire to cooperate with him and his representatives,

10. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a full
report to the Council on the outcome ofhis efforts by July 1992
at the latest and to make specific recommendations for
overcoming any outstanding difficulty;

1. Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts, and
expresses its appreciation for his report of 3 April 1992 on his
mission of good offices in Cyprus; 294

11. Reaffirms the important mandate entrusted to the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus and looks
forward to receiving the report on the Force that the SecretaryGeneral proposes to submit in May 1992.

2. Reaffirms the position, set out in resolutions 649
(1990) of 12 March 1990 and 716 (1991) of 11 October 1991,
that a Cyprus settlement must be based on a State of Cyprus
with a single sovereignty and international personality and a

Adopted unanimously al the JOf,7th
meeting

92
