Re10Jutiou1 adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

( b) The need for additional humanitarian international conventions or for other appropriate legal instruments to ensure the better protection of civilians, prisoners and combatants in all armed conflicts and the
prohibition and limitation of the use of certain methods
and means of warfare ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take all other
necessary steps to give effect to the provisions of the
present resolution and to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on the steps he has
taken;
4. Further requests ::\Iember States to extend all
possible assistance to the Secretary-General in the preparation of the study requested in paragraph 2 above;
5. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so
to become parties to the Hague Conventions of 1899
and 1907,30 the Geneva Protocal of 1925 37 and the
Geneva Conventions of 1949. 38
1748th plenary 111ecting,
19 December 1968.

2445 (XXIII). Teaching in schools of the
purposes and principles of tile Charter of
the United Nations and the structure and
activities of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies, with particular reference to human rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Year for Human
Rights should be.the occasion for new efforts to improve
the standard of knowledge about the United Nations
and, in particular, about its efforts in the field of human
rights,
Recalling its resolutions 137 (II) of 17 November
1947 and 1511 (XV) of 12 December 1960 concerning
the teaching in schools of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the structure
and activities of the Organization and the specialized
agencies,
Considering that such teaching is not yet sufficiently
widespread, in particular in primary and secondary
schools, despite the efforts of 1Iember States and of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Convinced that in order to achieve the desired results
such teaching must start at an early stage of education,
Conscious of the fact that young people cannot receive training which meets the requirements of a world
increasingly characterized by the interdependence of
peoples if educators do not themselves receive special
instruction in international organization,
1. Requests States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to take steps,
as appropriate and according to the scholastic system
of each State, to introduce or encourage:
(a) The regular study of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies and of the principles proclaimed
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in
other declarations on human rights, in the training of
teaching staff for primary and secondary schools;

SI

~ b) Progressive instruction on the subject in question in the curricula of primary and secondary schools,
inviting teachers to seize the opportunities, provided by
teaching, of drawing the attention of their pupils to the
increasing role of the United Nations system in peaceful co-operation among nations and in joint efforts
to promote social justice and economic and social progress in the world ;
2. Fti, ther requests States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and of
the International Atomic Energy Agency to draw the
attention of the competent authorities in private scholastic institutions to the present resolution and to invite
them to make the necessary efforts for the achievement
of the aims envisaged in paragraph 1 above ;
3. Requests the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue and to encourage the study of appropriate ways and means
of promoting the achievement of the .aims envisaged
in the present resolution ;
4. Further requests the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the other
specialized agencies concerned and th,: United Nations
Development Programme to provide assistance to Member States, particularly those which are developing
countries, with a view to enabling them to achieve the
objectives envisaged in paragraph 1 above.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

Co1wffltions 011d Declaratioiis 1899-1907 (New York, Oxford

2446 (XXIII). Meaaures to achieve the rapid and
total elimination of all forms of racial
discrimination in general and of the policy
of apartheid in particular
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that during the International Year
for Human Rights large-scale violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms continue to take place,
Gra1:'ely ~once:ned about the continuing eviction and
detent10n, 1mpnsonment and murder of nationalists
and freedom fighters in southern Africa and in colonial
Territories,
Noting resolutions III, IV and VIII of 11 May 1968
of th~ International Conference on Human Rights811
pledgmi ~up~ort for mea~u~es to achieve the rapid and
total ehmmat1on of coloma!tsm and all forms of racial
discrimination in general and of apartheid in particular
and for the treatment as prisoners of war of captured
freedom fighters opposed to the policies of apartheid
and colonialism,
1. Condemns the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal for their persistent defiant stand towards the
United Nations and world opinion in respect of their
policies of apartheid and colonialism, respectively;
2. Further condemns the. policy of racial discrimination of the illegal minority regime in Southern Rhodesia
and deplores the refusal of the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Nor.them
Ireland, as the administering Power, to take effective
measures to suppress this illegal regime and to ensure
human rights and fundamental freedoms to the people
of Zimbabwe ;
3. Censures the Governments of South Africa and
P<?rtu~al f?r. assi_sting and collaborat_ing with the illegal
minority regime m Southern Rhodesia;

8T League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),
No. 2138.
as United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.

89 See Final Act of lht Intematiot1al Co11ferenct on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2~,
pp. 6, 7 and 9.

-

88 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,

The Hague

University Press, 1918).
