2. Invites any special committee which the
General Assembly may appoint on information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter to
examine the factors which should be taken into
account in deciding whether any territory is or is
not a territory whose people have not yet attained
a full measure of self-government.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

335 (IV). Publication of information
relating to Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Having noted the summaries and analyses prepared by the Secretary-General e,f the information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Considering that the information contained
therein on conditions existing in Non-Self-Governing Territories has considerable value and that
very abundant supplemental information has been
placed at the disposal of the Secretary-General by
the Members concerned,
Considering that resolution 218 (III), rn
adopted by the General Assembly on 3 November
1948, invites the Secretary-General to prepare
full summaries and analyses at three-year intervals and annual supplements in the intervening
years,
1. Notes that, in future, the complete summaries and analyses, as well as the annual supplements, are required to be published in the three
working languages ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to complement
the summaries and analyses, as well as the annual
supplements, by the periodical publication of data
on special aspects of the progress achieved in
Non-Self-Governing Territories as contained in
the information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter and in the supplemental information.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

336 (IV). Information on technical
assistance accorded to Non-SelfGoverning Territories
The General Assembly,
Noting the special interest which the members
of the Special Committee on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter have in
measures adopted by the Governments responsible
for Non-Self-Governing Territories concerning the
economic and social welfare of the inhabitants of
such Territories,
Noting the decision of the General Assembly to
establish an expanded programme of technical
assistance for economic development through the
United Nations and certain specialized agencies,
and
Noting the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to authorize the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the specialized agencies con-

cerned, to enter into negotiations with appropriate
officers of inter-governmental regional organizations engaged in the development of technical
assistance programmes, with a view to ensuring
the desirable co-ordination for the carrying out of
technical assistance activities,
l? equests the Secretary-General to keep the
Special Committee informed of the nature of the
technical assistance which is accorded from time
to time to N on-Self-(;oyerning Territories by specialized international bodies.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 Decemblr 1949.

33 7

(IV). Question of South West
Africa: reiteration of prel--ious
resolutions and submission of reports

Whereas the General Assembly noted, in resolution 141 (II) 17 of 1 November 1947, that the
Covernment of the Union of South Africa had
undertaken to submit reports on its administration of the Territory of South West Africa for
the information of the United Nations,
Whereas, in resolution 227 (III) 18 of 26 November 1948, the l;eneral Assembly recommended
that the Government of the Union of South
Africa continue to supply annually information on
the administration of the Territory of South West
Africa,
W'hereas the Government of the Union of
South Africa in a letter 19 to the Secretary-General of 11 July 1949, which was transmitted to the
:Viember States, stated that no further reports
would be forwarded,
~Vhereas the Trusteeship Council, in resolution 111 ( V) 20 of 21 July 1949, has called to the
attention of the Ceneral Assembly the decision
of the Government 0f the Union of South Africa
not to transmit further reports and has informed
1he General Assembly that this decision precludes the Trusteeship Council from exercising
further the functions envisaged for it in resolution 227 (III) of 26 November 1948,
The General Assembly
L Expresses regret that the Government of the
Union of South Africa has withdrawn its previous undertaking, referred to in resolution 141
(ll) of 1 November 1947, to submit reports on
its administration of the Territory of South West
Africa for the iniormation of the United Nations;
2. Reiterates in their entirety General Assembly
resolutions 65 ( I )~ 1 of 14 December 1946, 141
(l[) of 1 November 1947 and 227 (III) of 26
November 1948;
3. Invites the Government of the Union of
~outh Africa to resume the submission of such
reports to the (;eneral Assembly and to comply
with the decisions of the General Assembly contained in the resolutions enumerated in the preceding paragraph.
269th plenary meeting,
6 Decenr/Jer 1949.
rn See Official Rcrords of the fourth session of the
General Asscm/>ly, Annex to the Fourth Committee,
document A/929.
"" See Official Rcrords of the fifth session of the Trust,·eship Council, Rrsc1i•:lio11s. page 19.
21 See ResolHlions adopted /,y the General Assembly
during the secm1<1 part of its first session, page 123.

Official Raords of the third session of the General Assembly, Part l, Resolutions, page 80.
17 See Official Recurds of the .scrnnd session of the
General Assembly, Resolutions, page 47.
18 See Official Records of the third session of the Gen
era! Assembly, Part I, Resolutions. page 89.
16 See

44
