S/PV.7984

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7984th meeting

Tuesday, 27 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Klein
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Letter dated 4 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/282)
Thirty-third progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2017/510)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-18367 (E)
*1718367*

S/PV.7984

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

and legislative elections in October, and the subsequent
transition of Government in January. It will be crucial
for Liberia’s law-enforcement agencies to be adequately
prepared to respond to potential low-level civil unrest
and mob violence during this delicate period. Current
limitations in manpower, equipment and mobility
may restrict the ability of these agencies to respond to
multiple simultaneous security incidents.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Letter dated 4 April 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/282)
Thirty-third progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2017/510)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Liberia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2017/282, which
contains the text of a letter dated 4 April 2017 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, as well as to document S/2017/510,
which contains the thirty-third progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Zarif and by Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, in his capacity as
Chair of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: It is a pleasure to be here today to present
the Secretary-General’s latest report on Liberia, dated
16 June (S/2017/510).
As the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
enters the final phase of its mandate, Liberia has
remained stable. No major threats are envisaged
beyond possible isolated and sporadic incidents of a
public-order nature in the context of the presidential
2/10

27/06/2017

UNMIL is supporting the Liberia National Police in
elaborating an integrated election-security plan to ensure
the most effective utilization of available resources to
protect civilians. The Liberia National Police has also
conducted community-policing activities across the
country aimed at building trust and communication
with the population ahead of the elections. UNMIL,
in collaboration with the Government and local actors,
including Liberian traditional communicators, has
undertaken public-awareness campaigns countrywide to mitigate the risk of mob justice and encourage
adherence to the rule of law.
UNMIL stands ready to respond to any situation
amounting to a risk of strategic reversal of peace
and stability. Yet the extent of this response will be
restricted by the reduced Mission capacity, the low
number of uniformed personnel and the potentially
competing mandated task of protecting United Nations
personnel. At present, UNMIL has 260 personnel in
its two formed police units and 230 personnel of the
Nigerian infantry company.
We presently maintain only two field offices, in the
north-east and the north-west. Formed police units and
force personnel are deployed only in Monrovia, which
significantly limits our capacity to intervene. This
is a significant change from the last two presidential
elections, when UNMIL had a country-wide presence.
Other factors could also have an impact on our ability
to perform our mandate. Any substantial reduction,
therefore, in the modest and lean budget we submitted
to the General Assembly would significantly affect the
ability of UNMIL to deliver on the mandate given by
the Council.
While UNMIL is preparing for the transition of
residual mandated activities to the Government of
Liberia, the United Nations country team and other
partners, it remains fully engaged in all aspects of its
mandate, with a particular emphasis on good offices
and political facilitation. As the elections draw closer,
the Mission has further intensified its engagement with
17-18367

27/06/2017

The situation in Liberia

the National Elections Commission, political party
leaders, presidential candidates, the Government and
civil society to prevent and defuse tensions, help resolve
disputes and advocate for inclusive, transparent, credible
and peaceful elections. The country’s future as a stable
democracy will hinge on the successful conduct of the
October elections and broad agreement that they were
free and fair, followed by a smooth transfer of power
from the current Government to a new Administration.
There are many presidential candidates, including
the incumbent Vice-President and several formidable
opposition-party candidates, who will almost certainly
have to form coalitions to enhance their chances in a
possible run-off.
At the initiative of the Government, the
Interreligious Council of Liberia organized, on 31 May
and 1 June 2017, a national forum of all political party
leaders, culminating in the parties’ commitment to a
violence-free electoral process and transfer of power.
The commitment, referred to as the Farmington River
Declaration, built on a combination of agreements
previously reached among the parties. The Declaration
also endorsed the establishment of a peace and mediation
committee to help guide relations among and between
the political parties and State institutions for a peaceful
transition. The Declaration was formalized on 4 June
2017 during the summit conference of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Heads
of State. UNMIL, the African Union and ECOWAS
collectively engaged with the parties to ensure their
support for this significant initiative.
The Government also submitted a draft bill on
arrangements for the smooth transition of authority to
a new Government. The Government has established
a transition team that will attend to asset transfers,
handover notes and other matters, so as to ensure that
the incoming Government assumes its functions as
seamlessly as possible.
On 8 June, the Senate proposed to amend part XII
of the Code of Conduct law, with which the House of
Representatives concurred on 13 June. The amendment,
inter alia, seeks to provide a governing framework for
the operations of the Office of the Ombudsman. The
amendment also requires that electoral matters be
adjudicated by the National Elections Commission in
the first instance, with appeals to the Supreme Court,
which has caused additional uncertainty about the
eligibility of candidates for nomination, which process
started on 19 June.

S/PV.7984

Meanwhile, the exhibition of the provisional
registration roll, which took place from 12 to 17 June,
encountered technical issues, including, reportedly,
missing names and photographs of several individuals,
although the Commission has claimed that all registered
individuals will be allowed to vote in October. It
will be important that the Commission address these
challenges so as to prevent uncertainty in connection
with the process and its results, which could lead to
distrust and amplify existing problems.
Despite the important gains made over the
years of post-conflict recovery, Liberia continues to
face considerable challenges, which weigh heavily
on efforts to sustain peace and advance national
reconciliation. Critical legislative reforms, widely
accepted as minimum requirements to address the
underlying causes of conflict, most notably the land
rights bill and the local governance bill, are yet to be
enacted. The decisive steps needed to help bring more
security to the lives of women have yet to be taken,
including the passage of the domestic violence bill. I
continue to engage vigorously with the Government,
particularly the Legislature, to help advance these
transformational reforms.
I am encouraged by the gradual strengthening
of Liberia’s human rights capacity, illustrated, for
example, by the recent international accreditation
of the Independent National Commission on Human
Rights following several years of UNMIL’s technical
support in capacity-building. The Commission must
intensify its efforts to address the serious human
rights challenges, including sexual and gender-based
violence, harmful traditional practices and challenges
with respect to freedom of speech, which continue to
plague Liberia. For instance, over the past two weeks,
from late May to early June, UNMIL counted seven
reported cases of rape, both by individuals and gang
rape, of minors, including children of both sexes. The
Government should implement as a matter of urgency
the salient recommendations of the 2016 UNMILOffice of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Human Rights report on addressing impunity for rape
in Liberia. In this regard, UNMIL has stepped up
media activities and interactive programming on the
themes of sexual and gender-based violence, sexual
exploitation and abuse, national reconciliation and the
promotion of human rights.
On 4 April, the Secretary-General transmitted to
the Security Council the Liberia peacebuilding plan,

17-183673/10

S/PV.7984

The situation in Liberia

which was developed in consultation with national
and international stakeholders by the United Nations
system and the Government of Liberia. The plan
identifies key actions set to take place before 30 March
2018, when UNMIL’s substantive mandate ends, and
outlines the level of necessary political engagement.
The peacebuilding plan provides the basis for the
United Nations system’s integrated transition plan,
which is currently being finalized in consultation with
the Government and civil-society actors.
Sustaining peace in Liberia must look to horizons
beyond the immediate needs of the transition process,
requiring long-term investment in national institutions
that are inclusive, accountable and responsive, providing
opportunities and services to all Liberians. To that end,
the Government has started developing specific actions
for the implementation of each of its commitments
under the plan, and the Mission is assisting with this
process to, hopefully, ensure that it is done in a timely
and successful manner. In that context, I would like to
express my appreciation for the helpful assistance from
the Peacebuilding Commission’s configuration for
Liberia, chaired by Ambassador Skoog, who has just
completed a very useful visit to the country.
The United Nations country team recently completed
a capacity mapping exercise to assess its readiness to
provide strategic and programmatic support to Liberia
after UNMIL’s departure. The findings showed that it
will need significant assistance to increase its capacity,
resources and expertise. Efforts are currently under
way to mobilize support so that the transition from
UNMIL to the country team is conducted seamlessly
and responsibly and can effectively support Liberia’s
efforts to achieve sustainable peace.
One programmatic aspect is the establishment of
an independent presence for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
is essential for monitoring and capacity-building. With
regard to financing, a Liberia transition multipartner
trust fund, aimed at making the country team’s funding
and operations more predictable, is being discussed.
Given that most of the priorities outlined in the Liberia
peacebuilding plan require the country team’s mediumto-long-term engagement, it will be essential to
ensure that Liberia has the international community’s
sustained political and financial support. In that regard,
we are also discussing an international conference that
will enable the new Liberian Government to share its
national priorities. It could be organized for April 2018,
4/10

27/06/2017

when there will be a review of the statement of mutual
commitments, which, together with the peacebuilding
plan, could form the basis for a framework of mutual
accountability between the new Government and
the international community, as represented by the
United Nations.
It is therefore a concern that the most recent draft
of the national budget for 2017-2018 has little room
for investment in social and economic intervention,
which is essential if the key drivers of conflict are to
be addressed. Currently, 94 per cent of the estimated
$526.5 million budget is committed to recurring costs,
including payrolls, leaving just $27.3 million — I repeat,
just $27.3 million — for public-sector investment plans.
At the same time, the budget is 12.3 per cent lower than
the 2016-2017 budget of $600.2 million. The continuing
shortfalls in national resources for supporting Liberia’s
transition and consolidating peace will be felt even
more acutely as international donor assistance declines.
Liberia has made remarkable progress since the
signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in
Accra in 2003. However, challenges that pose a risk
of reversal still remain. The Government of Liberia,
the United Nations system and the wider international
community must continue to address them with all
the energy and innovation available to them if we
are to preserve and reinforce the gains made in the
intervening years. I appeal to all concerned to increase
and consolidate their investment in Liberia and support
the country at this crucial time, through its transition to
a new Government and beyond.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Zarif
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to brief the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. It
gives me great pleasure to share with the Council some
of the main takeaways from my recent trip to Liberia.
The objective of my visit of 14 and 15 June was to
follow up on progress made in the implementation of
the peacebuilding plan; discuss preparations for the
upcoming elections; consult with stakeholders on key
reforms related to land rights and decentralization; and
identify ways in which the Peacebuilding Commission
can best offer support during the upcoming transitions.
17-18367

27/06/2017

The situation in Liberia

I was fortunate enough to be able to meet with
a wide range of stakeholders, including President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Deputy Ministers from the
departments of internal affairs, foreign affairs and
finance, as well as the Ministry of Justice. I also met with
representatives of civil society, youth representatives,
political parties, the National Elections Commission,
the Chief Justice and Supreme Court justices, and
representatives of the international community. At this
point I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Liberia and his delegation for being consistently
supportive of my visits, and to say that working with
Liberia, as part of the Peacebuilding Commission, has
been an exceptionally good experience. It is a pleasure
to work with a country that is itself so committed to
working with the Commission.
In my meetings, I welcomed the dedicated, inclusive
and swift efforts of the Government and of the United
Nations to develop a peacebuilding plan in response
to the Council’s resolution 2333 (2016). I also stressed
the importance of undertaking key structural reforms,
as set out in phase I of the peacebuilding plan, which
will help to address some of the root causes of conflict
in Liberia. That includes the enacting of important
bills on issues such as land rights, local Government
and domestic violence. I also urged all stakeholders to
contribute to free and fair elections, prioritize women’s
strong participation in them and involve young people
throughout the process. In addition to the rich briefing
we have just heard by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, I would like to share the impressions
with which I left Monrovia.
As we have noted in the past couple of months,
Liberia is at a critical juncture. Several historic
transitions are under way. The situation therefore
requires, and deserves, the dedicated attention of
international partners in the months ahead. While
no one I met suggested to me that there is a clear or
imminent risk of a relapse into conflict, there are real
hurdles ahead as the peacekeeping Mission closes down
and the new Government takes the reins. We know
that the main root causes of conflict in Liberia must
continue to be addressed. Reconciliation, land use,
decentralization, access to justice, and violence against
women are among the more critical issues that are still
to be resolved and that will determine whether Liberia
moves towards a true and lasting consolidation of peace.
As we just heard, the limited fiscal capacity to take
reforms forward under the current Administration may

S/PV.7984

itself lead to increased grievances. Diversification and
revitalization of the economy are desperately needed.
On the security side, the overall situation remains
stable. While the Government successfully resumed
responsibility for its security as of July 2016, there is still
work to be done to further build the capacity of security
actors, including the armed forces and the Liberia
National Police. Efforts aimed at strengthening access
to justice and the rule of law are equally important and
remain vital to fostering a sense of inclusion and social
cohesion and to building trust in national institutions.
In four months’ time, Liberians will be heading to
the polls, and the preparations for elections are well
under way. They have been described as a defining
moment for Liberia, one in which the country will
see the first democratic transfer of power in its
modern history. Successful elections and a peaceful
transition will undoubtedly help to consolidate
democracy and good governance. During our visit,
the National Elections Commission was working on
a voter registration exhibition designed to address
irregularities in the registration process. As we just
heard, in a welcome move earlier this month, political
parties signed the Farmington River declaration on the
margins of the Summit of the Economic Community
of West African States in Monrovia, in which they
committed to peaceful elections.
The other challenges outstanding pertain to a funding
gap for the activities of the Elections Commission and
to controversies related to the application of the code
of conduct, and should be addressed and resolved as
soon as possible. In addition, we should stress the
continuing need for civic education, awareness-raising
and outreach to a largely disenfranchised population
ahead of the election, and for increased efforts to
ensure strong participation by women. The fact that
the election is taking place during the rainy season is a
complicating factor.
As of now, 22 political parties are fielding candidates.
Some stakeholders have expressed worries about the
fact that candidates may be running on personalized
platforms and may mobilize voters around identity
politics instead of running policy-based campaigns. I
encouraged representatives of political parties to focus
their campaigning on the key issues confronting the
country rather than mobilizing around tribal politics.
I commend the active and important role played by
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)

17-183675/10

S/PV.7984

The situation in Liberia

generally, and the Office of the Special Representative
in particular, in facilitating dialogue in the run-up to
the election. In my discussions with both the National
Elections Commission and the Chief Justice, I once
again stressed the need for solid mechanisms for swift
dispute resolution and for managing run-offs, which
they confirmed are in place.
During my meetings with a range of stakeholders,
I noted a broad sense of ownership of the Liberia
peacebuilding plan. Its commitments set out a clear
road map for addressing the country’s remaining
peacebuilding
challenges.
Financing
for
the
implementation of the commitments made remains an
outstanding issue.
In meetings with the United Nations system in
Monrovia, I discussed the kind of support that the United
Nations can provide in taking those commitments
forward in the light of the UNMIL drawdown and the
coming transition in the United Nations presence. In
that regard, I commend the United Nations country
team for having carried out robust mapping of its
capacities. I believe that it may be the first of its kind.
This has clearly been a highly useful exercise.
It has provided a clear point of departure and has
enabled the whole United Nations system in Liberia to
think strategically about the transition and about how
to increase capacity in the country team as UNMIL
leaves, so that it can take over support for residual tasks.
However, it also means that we have a very clear picture
of what will be needed in the future. It is worrying to
note that, as UNMIL draws down, the United Nations
will clearly face a cliff in terms of resources, capacities
and expertise for the support of peacebuilding.
Given those capacity constraints and based on the
Peacebuilding Commission’s experience with the United
Nations transition in Sierra Leone, several members of
the Peacebuilding Commission have flagged concerns
about UNMIL’s transition to the country team. The
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
could help the United Nations system to identify how
to responsibly manage the transition and how to ensure
predictable financing for peacebuilding in Liberia
during the critical transition phase.
We commend the efforts of UNMIL over the past
13 years. As the peacekeeping mission withdraws, it
will serve as a test case for the United Nations system
and Liberia in the fulfilment of peacebuilding and
sustaining-peace goals and tasks. Liberia has come a
6/10

27/06/2017

long way since the conflict ended, and much progress
has been achieved. However, the current situation
means that the indicators of fragility continue to exist,
in particular insufficient progress on reconciliation
and on needed legislation for addressing the root
causes of the conflict, the weak economy and the
upcoming election, where the stakes are high. Liberia’s
international partners have a collective responsibility
to make sure that the investments made over the past
13 years, through peacekeeping, are safeguarded, and
to build on those investments in order to consolidate
the peace in Liberia. That includes ensuring that the
remaining United Nations presence is configured
and provided with sufficient resources to respond
to the ongoing needs of the Liberian people through
peacebuilding support.
In his recent trip to New York, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General ElHillo stated
that
“Liberia represents a success story in peacekeeping.
We now must ensure that it is also a success in
peacebuilding.”
That will require innovative thinking on how to secure
reliable resources once UNMIL has departed, and the
Security Council has a key role to play in the process.
For our part, the Peacebuilding Commission stands
ready to continue its political accompaniment, ensuring
continued international attention after the peacekeepers
have left and insisting on drawing attention to gaps. We
will undertake continued advocacy on the importance
of pursuing reforms that are central for sustaining
peace in Liberia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Skoog for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, and the Permanent Representative of
Sweden and Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Olof Skoog,
for their comprehensive briefings.
Uruguay congratulates the Government and the
people of Liberia for the progress achieved in bringing
stability to the country. It is also important to recognize
that the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
has played a leading role in this process for more than
17-18367

27/06/2017

The situation in Liberia

13 years. Liberia is currently going through a crucial
moment on the eve of the presidential and legislative
elections, and less than a year before the definitive
termination of UNMIL, which was established under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
The holding of presidential and legislative
elections, which are scheduled for October, and the
peaceful transfer of power in January 2018 will be
important milestones in consolidating peace in Liberia.
Uruguay is convinced that democratic processes that
are conducted in a free, inclusive and transparent
manner and with the highest possible participation
of voters are precisely those that make it possible to
forge a lasting peace. We note with satisfaction the
efforts of the Government to implement State authority
throughout Liberian territory. Only in that way will all
of the country’s inhabitants be able to benefit from the
dividends of peace.
However, many challenges remain for Liberia. The
country will need to step up its efforts in the area of
security. It will also be necessary to address the root
causes that fuelled the conflict in the past. With that
in mind, it is essential to enact pertinent legislation
on land-ownership rights and local administration.
Furthermore, it will be important to strengthen State
institutions that promote and ensure compliance with
rules. Corruption is another scourge affecting Liberia
that needs to be eliminated from all levels of Government
so that it has solid, transparent and reliable institutions.
Uruguay notes with particular concern the human
rights situation in Liberia, which is a fundamental
aspect in which the desired progress has not yet been
achieved. In order for the efforts focused on the stability
and security of the country to be maintained in the
long run, the protection and promotion of human rights
will need to be one of the top priorities, together with
accountability and such issues as restorative justice,
truth and reconciliation. It is also a source of serious
concern that there are many cases of sexual violence
and gender violence, certain persistent harmful
traditional practices, such as female genital mutilation
and accusations of witchcraft, and restrictions on
the freedom of expression. Sexual and gender-based
violence, which has particularly affected girls, is a
problem that must be urgently addressed.
The awareness-raising campaign about such cases,
organized by UNMIL and the Liberian Ministry for
Gender, Childhood and Social Protection, is a step in

S/PV.7984

the right direction. However, efforts should be stepped
up by the Government to prevent and respond to such
crimes and put an end to the persistent impunity of
those who perpetrate them. Bearing in mind the still
precarious situation of human rights in Liberia, Uruguay
would endorse the observations of the SecretaryGeneral on the need to establish a satellite office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
especially in the light of the imminent withdrawal of
UNMIL from the country.
Today’s meeting offers us an excellent opportunity
to congratulate UNMIL for its work in supporting the
Government of Liberia and in providing protection to
civilians, as well as for its contribution to achieving
national peace and reconciliation in the country.
Uruguay hopes to see the closure of UNMIL, a process
that has been under way for some time, take place in
a timely and successful manner. Our delegation also
acknowledges the work of the Liberia configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission for its work with the
Government and international and local partners and
for its drafting of a peacebuilding plan for Liberia. In
that regard, we would like to thank and particularly
congratulate the Swedish delegation for its leadership.
The United Nations — in particular the
Security Council, UNMIL and the Peacebuilding
Commission — has provided support for the peace
process in Liberia through various actions that will, we
hope, together with the efforts of the people and the
Government of Liberia, contribute to making Liberia a
success story.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French):
The Senegalese delegation congratulates you,
Mr. President, on organizing today’s meeting on the
situation in Liberia, a fraternal and friendly country
for Senegal, with which we share membership in
all international organizations, and above all, our
subregional organization, the Economic Community
of West African States. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing. And I also thank our colleague and neighbour,
Olof Skoog, Chair of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his visit and for the
briefing he has just given us about his visit. We look
forward to the statement by our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Liberia.

17-183677/10

S/PV.7984

The situation in Liberia

The Senegalese delegation would simply like to
take the floor to recall the long way that Liberia has
come to reach this day.
Since before the intervention of the United
Nations, the subregional engagement of the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
has contributed to stabilizing the country, ultimately
leading to the stability and security of the situation in
the country only a few months before the upcoming
presidential and legislative elections in October, for
which 22 political parties and coalitions will present
their candidates and 2.1 million voters have registered,
of whom — it is important to underscore — 48 per cent
are women. Those elections are all the more important,
as they will enshrine a historic and peaceful transition
of power, while, at the same time, consolidating the
transformation of Liberia and sustainably establishing
peace and democracy within the context of the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). The Liberian forces will then resume their
sovereign right concerning security matters, with the
support, when needed, of the Senegalese rapid-reaction
force, which has been redeployed from the United
Nations operation in the Congo to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and could be deployed from Mopti.
In that regard, the Senegalese delegation welcomes
the various stakeholders’ commitments to ensuring
that the upcoming elections are held in a free and
transparent manner and that all disputes are settled
peacefully through established mechanisms and in
accordance with the rule of law. Accordingly, we
commend the important work carried out thus far by the
National Elections Commission and call on the various
stakeholders to lend it all the necessary support, in
particular by providing the $1.8 million necessary to
fill the gap for financing the electoral process.
On 23 January, the President of Liberia, Ms. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf, presented her final annual state of
the nation address, in which she identified national
reconciliation the fight against corruption as the
Government’s priorities for the rest of her tenure.
On 31 May and 1 June, the Government of Liberia,
supported by UNMIL, the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, hosted
a national forum facilitated by the Interreligious
Council of Liberia, which culminated on 4 June in
the signing of the Farmington River Declaration by
standard-bearers and political leaders of 20 out of the
8/10

27/06/2017

22 registered political parties. The signatories to the
Declaration declared their commitment to a peaceful
electoral process and the transition of power to a new
Government in January.
I stress the issue of elections because the Council
has noted that, in the western part of Africa, electoral
processes continue to be a source of tension. But I would
also like to underscore the concern — which we should
all share — with regard to the macroeconomic situation,
which continues to be affected negatively by the general
decline in commodity prices and the residual impact of
the Ebola epidemic. The International Monetary Fund
estimates that Liberia faces a significant shortfall in
revenue despite receiving approximately $75 million in
direct budget support from donors for the fiscal year
2016-2017.
The Council should therefore consider the
importance of finding the optimal way of responding
to the various challenges that continue to confront
the country, especially by fully supporting the
implementation of the peacebuilding plan developed by
the Government of Liberia at the request of the Security
Council, involving financial resources, institutional
capacity-building and expertise. It is at such a price
that, after having achieved making Liberia into a
success story with regard to peacekeeping, the Council
will continue to transform Liberia, thereby making it
into a success story in terms of peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liberia.
Mr. Brown (Liberia): I am honoured to address
this meeting of the Security Council on behalf of the
Government and the people of Liberia, and thank the
Secretary-General for his thirty-third progress report
(S/2017/510) on the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zarif and Ambassador Skoog
for their comments and statements, and thank the
Ambassador of the brotherly State of Senegal.
Allow me, Sir, to draw your kind attention to
three points.
The first is that the United Nations Mission in Liberia
is a successful peacekeeping operation. Today, as the
report confirms, Liberia is relatively secure and stable.
From previous levels of up to 15,000 men and women,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia will complete its
mission and undergo a final drawdown in April 2018.
17-18367

27/06/2017

The situation in Liberia

S/PV.7984

After nearly 14 years since the first peacekeeping boots
landed on the bloody soil of my country, there is today
no doubt that the peacekeeping mission can be credited
with enabling and catalysing Liberia’s ongoing political
and economic transformation.

that, rather than the quantity of political parties, the
ongoing competition would be flavoured by the quality
of the political discourse. Imperfect as it currently
is, we seem to be getting better with each attempt at
institutionalizing the process of democratic change.

Notwithstanding the present challenges, where
there formerly was pervasive hopelessness when the
troops arrived, ours has come to be a more hopeful
society. Where death and destruction once stalked
our streets, a renewed commitment to democratic
governance and the popular desire to rebuild the broken
nation now drive the discourse and motivate a break
with our tragic past. Having concluded the inclusive
development of a peacebuilding plan consistent with
resolution 2333 (2016), Liberia is seeking continued
partnerships and support to sustain its peace and
continue the needed reforms as the peacekeeping
mission comes to a successful end.

It must also be noted that the mere exercise of the
choice to freely and fairly elect the leaders of our country,
with a sense of growing regularity and confidence in
both the electoral processes and associated outcomes,
meaningfully contributes to deepening a new culture
of peace, lends itself to democratic governance and
expressions, empowers ordinary citizens and keeps the
elected leaders duly accountable. We intend to continue
along that path in order to resolve the attending
irregularities, improve upon the imperfections and
deepen public confidence, not only in the usefulness of
democratic elections, but also in the sustainable values
of democratic transitions and governance.

That brings me to the second point. It was 73
years ago when a living President last democratically
transferred power to another in Liberia. The inauguration
in January 2018 of a new Liberian Administration will
mark only the second time that that will have happened
since 1847 — the year Liberia became independent.
That historic significance is not lost on Liberians and
further motivates our will to succeed. Lest we forget,
beyond that historic significance, there are other
important consequences linked to a successful holding
of peaceful, democratic elections in Liberia.

That is why the National Elections Commission
and other relevant stakeholders are working to resolve
irregularities that may have arisen from the recent
registration of qualified voters. Liberians know that
we win — all of us will be winners — if, once again,
this ground-breaking election proves to inspire public
confidence in the electoral process and if the outcomes
are based on the free, fair, credible and transparent
exercise of the public’s rights and duties as responsible
citizens. Let me therefore assure the Council that for
the Liberian Government and people, to achieve that
important undertaking there is no lack of political will.
However, as we are beginning to see, political will may
not necessarily be enough.

We are proud to acknowledge that our West African
subregion is expanding the space for democratic
governance and the peaceful transition of power.
Given the shared history and sociology of our region,
in the same way in which it has been relatively easy
to experience the spread of conflict and misery across
our borders, peace and a renewed commitment to
democratic governance — notwithstanding the obvious
challenges — are now overtaking the subregional
space of the Economic Community of West African
States. Consequently, a successful holding of peaceful,
democratic elections in Liberia will continue to pave
the way for other important successes in expanding the
democratic space across the West African subregion,
as well as significantly impacting the consolidation of
regional peace and security.
At home, many still wish that the election was
about a choice of the best ideas in continuing to build
a future of continued peace and development, and

The report of the Secretary-General is
comprehensive, including in its description of the
depressing state of the Liberian economy. That is why,
despite the various austerity measures currently being
implemented, the Liberian Government is growing
concerned about a $17.5 million funding gap for
the implementation of the activities of the National
Elections Commission. So far, out of the $45 million
requested by the National Elections Commission, the
Liberian Government has committed to the payment
of $20 million and the international community has
committed about $8 million. The difference is yet to
be committed.
That brings me to the final point. Despite the many
challenges that lie ahead, Liberians are still growing
in confidence about the future of our country. Indeed,

17-183679/10

S/PV.7984

The situation in Liberia

arriving at where we are has been a long, costly and
arduous journey. We pay special homage to all those
who made the ultimate sacrifice — voluntarily and
involuntarily — to get us here and we are grateful to
the United Nations, its various specialized agencies, as
well as our multilateral, regional and bilateral partners
for their continued support and accompaniment. We
also reserve special thanks for the people of Liberia for
their continued resilience and steadfast belief both in
the ongoing transformation of Liberia and in a future
of togetherness, security and peace. Especially in that
light, the report broadly confirms that we have not, as
yet, begun to run as we know we can. But the truth is
also that Liberians are no longer standing still, weighed
down by a dehumanizing sense of hopelessness or the
enormity of the challenges that lie ahead in sustaining
our peace.
We know that a more just, equitable and inclusive
society is the pillar required to strengthen the peace
and security architecture whose foundations we were
enabled to establish. We know that change is hard, but
change we must to realize the benefits of the enormous
potential in human and other natural resources with
which we have been blessed. We know that we must
continue to be transparent in the management of our
resources and accountable to each other, including
in confronting the darkness of our tragic past and
therefrom forever inscribe its valuable lessons on the
national consciousness. We know we must continue
to reform not only the things that are easy, but also
the ones that are difficult and necessary, including
laws concerning rights to land, local Government and
domestic violence, because they pronounce upon our
overall ability to sustain our peace.
Those are all various forms of development and
fruition. Of course, we wish the pace were faster, but
we must also heed one of the stand-out lessons from
our tragic past, which is that it is best to lead where
others follow. That is even more profound for countries
such as ours, emerging from protracted conflicts that
were driven by the chilling effects of exclusions. The

10/10

27/06/2017

slow pace is therefore not a consequence of the lack
of political will; it is the recognition of the need to
meaningfully strive to always bring the majority of
the people along in the change process and to link
reforms with institutional capacities, most of which
are non-existent, in order to enforce the change.
Consequently, we have seen that as the fiscal space
has unfortunately constricted around us, so too has the
pace of the reforms decelerated.
Notwithstanding, Liberians are growing in
confidence that we are on a more assured path to
consolidating our peace. The election, re-election
and subsequent leadership of President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, the first woman to be elected President, have
inspired Liberian women and girls, more than half
of the Liberian population, broken their silence and
steered them away from exclusion in the national
decision-making processes of the country. We know that
we must continue to inspire and engage them, including
our youthful population. Quite simply, Liberia will
never be the same. We continue to change for the better.
We still have a long way to go to be the society
that we know we can be, but we are pleased with the
growing recognition, including in the report that Liberia
has come a long way. We urge continued partnership
with the international community, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the various agencies of the United
Nations towards sustaining our peace. Liberia and
Liberians are ready for this. We are ready to draw on the
gains already made to build a society that is tolerant of
our differences and respectful of the rights of all of its
citizens. Once again, we are ready to present the United
Nations with an important story of success — this time,
with peacebuilding, just as we have with peacekeeping.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

17-18367
