A /77/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

96th plenary meeting

Friday, 25 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)
Agenda item 7 (continued)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items

Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/77/L.91)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.91.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations listed in document A/77/L.91,
the following countries have become co-sponsors of
A/77/L.91: Georgia and Portugal.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.91, entitled
“Extension of the preparatory period preceding the
graduation of Solomon Islands from the least developed
country category”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.91?
Draft resolution
(resolution 77/323).

A/77/L.91

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 9.

The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly concluded its consideration of
agenda item 11 at the forty-third plenary meeting, on
1 December 2022. In order for the Assembly to take
action on the draft resolution, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of agenda item 11.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 11 (continued)
Sport for development and peace
Draft resolution (A/77/L.95)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Philippines to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.95.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): Today marks a
momentous occasion, as we adopt the General Assembly
draft resolution on World Basketball Day (A/77/L.95).
As a globally recognized sport, basketball transcends
borders, cultures and languages. It serves as a unifying
force whereby people from different backgrounds can
come together, bond and communicate with each other,
creating connections and breaking down barriers, and
thereby contributing to peace.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-25125 (E)

*2325125*

A/77/PV.96

I thank our main co-sponsors, Indonesia, Nicaragua
and Peru, for their strong collaboration on this draft
resolution. I also thank all those who co-sponsored
the draft resolution and those who engaged in the
negotiations of the text. I would like to also thank
Canada for its contribution to the conceptualization
of this draft resolution. We recognize Professor David
Hollander of New York University, whose work on
how basketball can save the world has served as an
inspiration in the process.
The adoption of the draft resolution is very timely,
as the 2023 International Basketball Federation (FIBA)
World Cup of Basketball just started today, 25 August, in
three major cities in Asia — Manila, Jakarta and Tokyo.
It is an honour for my own country, the Philippines,
to host that global competition, because basketball is
in our national DNA. We have more basketball courts
per capita than anywhere in the world. In 2019, the
Philippines had the highest basketball popularity index
score globally. In 1975, the Philippines established
Asia’s first and oldest professional basketball league,
the Philippine Basketball Association, which remains
active and competitive to this day. In a statement before
FIBA officials, President Ferdinand R. Marcos, Jr.,
stressed that the FIBA World Cup is going to have a
very enthusiastic, knowledgeable, loud, passionate
crowd every single day.
One of the aims of this draft resolution is to
declare 21 December every year as World Basketball
Day. Basketball was played for the first time on
21 December 1891 at the International Young Men’s
Christian Association Training School in Springfield,
Massachusetts, United States of America, after Dr.
James Naismith, a Canadian physical education
instructor, developed the game to keep his students
active during the winter months. Today basketball has
grown to become one of the most popular and widely
played sports in the world. FIBA, basketball’s governing
body, estimates that at least 450 million people
worldwide are playing basketball today. Basketball
has also been a part of the Olympic programme since
its introduction at the 1936 Olympics, held in Berlin.
Basketball enjoys a strong presence in North America,
especially the United States, Europe, Asia and other
regions. In 2019, the ground-breaking Basketball Africa
League was established and is now a professional
league, featuring 12 club teams from across Africa.
Women started playing basketball as early as 1892, or
less than a year after the game was invented. Women’s
2/22

25/08/2023

basketball made its debut as a regular team sport for
women in the Olympics at the 1976 Olympic Games,
held in Montreal, Canada. Twenty years later, women’s
basketball announced the “We Got Next!” campaign,
and soon the Women’s National Basketball Association
was established, in 1997.
The game has produced some of the most iconic
and most recognizable individuals in history — Jordan,
Magic, Kareem, Bird, Kobe, Lebron and Curry. These
individuals inspired millions of children around the
world not only to pursue basketball at the highest levels
but also to develop essential life skills, a strong work
ethic and a sense of social responsibility. However, the
United States is no longer the main source of basketball
greats. Now we have Luka, Jokiç and Giannis, easily
some of the finest and most recognizable basketball
players on the planet today. They are from Slovenia,
Serbia and Greece, respectively. Before them, we had
Dirk Nowitzki of Germany, Dražen Petrović of Croatia,
Manu Ginóbili of Argentina, Yao Ming of China and
Hakeem Olajuwon of Nigeria, among others from
different regions of the world.
Overall, beyond these iconic names, basketball
is a global grassroots sport and is played and enjoyed
by people of all ages and skill levels, from organized
leagues to casual pickup games. Even here in the
United Nations, we have a group of diplomats, led by
Deputy Permanent Representatives, who get together
and play basketball regularly. Basketball plays a role in
promoting health, mental well-being, and community
engagement, as it contributes to global health goals.
It is a powerful tool for promoting the values of
discipline, respect for rules, team spirit, inclusivity and
women’s empowerment.
The Philippines enjoins all Member States to
support and co-sponsor the World Basketball Day draft
resolution. Our action today is to honour a sport that
people love, to serve as a gift to everyone who views
basketball as a pathway to greater heights and sporting
excellence, and to further enhance its contribution to
global peace and development.
The President: Maybe at a later stage outside the
framework of this meeting I can tell members about
the interlinkage between the birth of basketball and the
spreading of the telephone network.
We shall now
resolution A/77/L.95.

proceed

to

consider

draft

23-25125

25/08/2023

I give the
the Secretariat.

A/77/PV.96

floor

to

the

representative

of

together the international community and affirming the
ideals and values of sport.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations listed in document A/77/L.95,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Austria, Azerbaijan, the Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, China, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
the Marshall Islands, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Türkiye, Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates, the
United States of America, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Viet Nam and Zambia.

In that regard, we regret the fact that the sponsors of
the draft resolution (A/77/L.95) yielded to a small group
of Western countries and refused to include in the text
provisions about equal opportunities for all sportsmen
and women, without any discrimination, to participate
in international competitions and tournaments. That
is particularly odd in the context of the fact that the
basketball world championships are starting today. In
our opinion, it is not possible to declare an international
day to bring people together around sport and at the
same time deny the fact that it is unacceptable to
discriminate against athletes. We are in favour of sport
in the world developing according to its own rules,
irrespective of the political situation and, above all, not
subject to intrigue or blackmail. Sport must be unifying
in nature, and it should not divide people and nations.

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position before the adoption, may I
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Vorobiev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Sport is a significant achievement in human
civilization and a universal language for communication
between people. It plays a very important role in the life
of every person. It helps not only physical development
but also provides an opportunity for self-fulfilment.
It breaks prejudices and stereotypes fosters tolerance
and makes an invaluable contribution to combating
discrimination. The Russian Federation pays great
importance to developing international cooperation
in the area of sport, as it helps to overcome national
and religious enmity, foster understanding between
peoples and strengthen intercivilizational dialogue and
harmony. We are convinced that supporting sport, inter
alia at the State level, is an important factor in bringing

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before the adoption.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.95, entitled “World Basketball Day”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.95?
Draft resolution A/77/L.95
(resolution 77/324).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after the adoption, may I
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Ukraine.
Mrs. Mudrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes the
adoption of the resolution entitled “World Basketball
Day” (resolution 77/324) and thanks the Philippines
for this initiative, which has materialized in a balanced
document. We joined the consensus, as this resolution
highlights the important role of sport in promoting
peace, cooperation and solidarity.
The issue of non-discrimination in sport is important
and, at the same time, complex. As we observe Russia’s
lament regarding alleged discrimination, we should
remember that it is an example of manipulation aimed
at legitimizing the crime of aggression, war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in Ukraine on a

23-251253/22

A/77/PV.96

daily basis. We do not consider the treatment of their
athletes as discrimination. They are not welcomed in
sport arenas because they represent the aggressor State
who has been recognized as such by numerous General
Assembly resolutions. They perform under the same
colours as the Russian army, which kills Ukrainians and
destroys our infrastructure on a daily basis. Moreover,
most of these sportsmen are affiliated with the Russian
army as well. During the Olympics held in Tokyo in
2020, 63 per cent of medals Russia won were received
by athletes representing sport clubs and organizations
associated with the Russian army. It is impossible to
take a machine gun one day in the army that waged an
aggressive war and change it to a bow on another day.
At the same time, there were examples of real
discrimination stemming from the Russian aggression
against my country. Several hundred Ukrainian
athletes have been killed by Russia since the beginning
of the invasion and will never compete at sports arenas.
Thousands of Ukrainian athletes were deprived of the
possibility of practicing sport and preparing for their
competitions because their training facilities were
destroyed or occupied, or because unabated missile
shelling caused regular air raid sirens throughout the
entire country, thus disrupting both the training process
and competitions. To secure the moral purity and
integrity of sport and the credibility of the international
Olympic movement, world sport should show solidarity
with the victim, not the aggressor. That is what brings
the famous line by Pierre de Coubertin, “O sport, you
are peace!” into reality.
The President: We have the heard the last speaker
in explanation of position after adoption.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolutions (A/77/L.99 and A/77/L.100)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Gabon to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.99.
4/22

25/08/2023

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): My country
and Germany, together with the Group of Friends on
Poaching and Illicit Wildlife Trafficking, wish to
reaffirm before the General Assembly our shared
commitment to combatting poaching and the illicit
trafficking of wildlife in order to put an end to them. I
would like to thank all those delegations and countries
that supported this process, which has resulted in the
draft resolution under consideration today (A/77/L.99).
It is crucial to strengthen the fight against the
international scourge of illicit wildlife trafficking,
which threatens species and ecosystems and undermines
our collective efforts to protect biodiversity. This type
of trafficking is illegal. It is the fourth most lucrative
type of trafficking in the world and poses a threat to the
pursuit of sustainable development. It is heavily reliant
on the global demand for wildlife species. The illegal,
and even legal, trade for wildlife species has given rise
to a market that has proven to be particularly lucrative.
The issue of the fight against illicit wildlife
trafficking requires our attention in more than one
respect. The illicit trade in wildlife, whether for
subsistence or for lucrative purposes, impoverishes
flora and fauna species owing to overexploitation
through the establishment of clandestine national,
transnational and international networks to sell wildlife
species across the world.
The draft resolution that we are presenting today
recognizes that the phenomenon of wildlife trafficking
is associated with transnational organized crime and is
therefore an immediate threat, not only for ecosystems
but also for security, the rule of law and good
governance. There is no longer any need to prove that
there is a decrease in the number of species, an erosion
of their populations and a degradation of ecosystems.
Several million animal and plant species are threatened
with extinction. The health of ecosystems, on which
we depend, and on which all other species depend, is
deteriorating at an unprecedented rate. Judging from
the scale of the phenomenon, the relevant conventions
and legislation seem somewhat outdated, even though
a framework of reference has been defined by the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). Beyond
weakening the means of subsistence, and beyond
weaking food security, health and the quality of life
across the world, this alarming situation — illustrated
by the resurgence in illicit wildlife trafficking — causes
economic and financial risks. That is why, alongside
23-25125

25/08/2023

Germany, Gabon has updated this draft resolution on
tackling illicit wildlife trafficking, in order to take into
account recent developments and international policies
in the area of the environment.
Updating this draft resolution is part of the new
post-2020 global biodiversity framework, the KunmingMontreal Global Biodiversity Framework, adopted
in 2022, which establishes ambitious objectives to
protect and restore nature by 2030, and the CITES
Strategic Vision 2021–2030, the objective of which is
to ensure sustainable trade in wildlife while remaining
aligned with relevant international priorities. It
takes into consideration recent developments in the
fight against illicit wildlife trafficking, namely the
provisions of the recent resolution of the Commission
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, as well as
new elements, such as the link with climate change or
the One Health approach, which recognizes the links
between human, animal and environmental health.
The draft resolution that Gabon and Germany have
submitted for adoption by the Assembly today, and
which is already supported by 58 co-sponsors, affords us
an opportunity to identify the challenges to protecting
all of wildlife by considering the implementation of
a comprehensive mechanism that would take into
account all the dimensions of the phenomenon as the
starting point for a solution. The text that Germany
and Gabon are presenting today reaffirms the need to
adopt legislation that is even more deterrent, in order to
prevent the criminal exploitation of wildlife.
It is important to maintain the impetus of the
work of Governments, civil society, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), academia and even international
financial institutions to prevent in a sustainable way all
human activities that threaten species of flora and fauna.
For that, we must strengthen international cooperation.
Criminal networks that operate beyond borders exploit
the loopholes in our national legislation. We must
therefore encourage States to improve border controls.
I will conclude by emphasizing capacity-building
while underscoring the importance of stepped-up
regional cooperation and coordination, reflecting on
the ways and means that would allow us to protect
biodiversity, focusing on partnerships with other
countries, NGOs and with international bodies from
other regions, with a view to dismantling illicit
trafficking networks.

A/77/PV.96

Finally, buoyed by all the foregoing, I can but
recommend the adoption of the draft resolution that
we are submitting to the General Assembly today.
I am persuaded that draft resolution A/77/L.99, in
its form and content, summarizes the various points
of view of Member States on the subject. I reiterate
my satisfaction with the fact that the draft resolution
takes into consideration the relevance of the issue
highlighted therein.
In conclusion, allow me once again to thank all
those delegations that participated in the negotiations
and their outcome. They lent the crucial support that
has brought us to this point. I would also like to reiterate
my thanks to all United Nations agencies and NGOs
that actively participated in this process. I would like to
pay a vibrant tribute to all States and all colleagues who
have co-sponsored this draft resolution. It is our wish
that this draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
The President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Serbia to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.100.
Mr. Stevanovic (Serbia): I am honoured to present
the draft resolution on the International Decade of
Sciences for Sustainable Development, 2024–2033
(A/77/L.100) on behalf of the core group of countries,
which includes Argentina, Cuba, Honduras, Hungary,
South Africa, Spain, Viet Nam and my country, Serbia.
The topic we are addressing is of immense
importance as we strive to underscore the vital role of
science in our joint pursuit of sustainable development. It
therefore seems fitting to start off with a quotation from
Nikola Tesla, the great Serbian-American inventor: “The
progressive development of man is vitally dependent on
invention”. This quotation reminds us that our progress
relies on science. Nevertheless, today’s focus is not on
any kind of progress; it is centred around sustainable
progress. We are facing complex challenges, some of
which are existential for humankind. Time is not a
luxury we can afford anymore. We cannot repeat the
historical pattern of waiting until circumstances force
us into necessary actions. In our efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals, we have learned two
major lessons.
First, we have the power to make a difference. It
has been shown that progress is not only theoretically
within reach, but achievable. We have surpassed certain
crucial Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
such as reducing hunger and expanding education.

23-251255/22

A/77/PV.96

This success was not a coincidence; it was a result of
deliberate decisions, well-timed actions and collective
dedication in alignment with the MDGs.
Secondly, progress remains fragile. The same
challenges that we have been trying to address persist,
often due to our old patterns of behaviour. The
coronavirus disease pandemic set us back, and conflicts
have shaken our confidence. Hunger and educational
setbacks are returning, and the tools for human dignity
and gender equality are strained. Misguided solutions
based on fear and ignorance are gaining traction. This
year, halfway to the deadline set forth in the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), it is projected that none of
the SDGs and only 12 per cent of the targets will be
met. We need to regroup. How do we move forward?
Our only option is to rely on collective brainpower
and knowledge — the science that explains, enables
and guides us. If we want to achieve what is not just
desirable but necessary, science is our best, if not our
only, tool. Knowledge created by science plays a pivotal
role in accelerating the implementation of the SDGs.
But for this purpose, global science must evolve as well.
Knowledge should be more accessible, and
its production should be more open to sustainable
innovation. Equally important, our focus needs to be on
integrating knowledge into the decision-making process.
Serbia firmly believes that global challenges require
global cooperation. Building on the momentum of the
International Year of Basic Sciences for Sustainable
Development, we have proposed the International
Decade of Sciences for Sustainable Development,
receiving strong support from like-minded countries in
the core group. Clearly, the initiative aims to elevate
the role of science in addressing global challenges and
advancing sustainable development. This is especially
relevant given the statement in the draft 2023 Global
Sustainable Development Report that current platforms
are insufficient. By advocating this initiative, we aim
to establish a broad, long-term platform for collective
action, knowledge exchange and international
collaboration. The initiative envisions diverse scientific
disciplines collaborating to make meaningful progress
in sustainable development. We urge UNESCO to
fulfil its role as the lead agency in implementing the
initiative. We also invite all members to engage in
upcoming events and stay informed and vigilant on our
journey towards the fulfilment of the SDGs.
Let us take this opportunity together to make
a transformative impact that transcends borders,
6/22

25/08/2023

accelerates SDG progress and shapes a brighter future
for generations to come. Through collaboration,
coordination and collective action, we can ensure a
robust and successful Decade that leaves no one behind.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/77/L.99 and A/77/L.100.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I will address the
co-sponsorship on the two draft resolutions submitted
under this agenda item.
First, with regard to A/77/L.99, I should like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/77/L.99, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft: Albania, Belarus,
Botswana, Canada, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Kingdom of
the Netherlands, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malta, Morocco, Namibia, North Macedonia,
Norway, Panama, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, United Kingdom, United States
of America and Zimbabwe.
Turning to draft resolution A/77/L.100, I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/77/L.100, the following countries
have also become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Andorra, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cambodia, China,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Greece, Indonesia, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia, the Maldives,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian
Federation, Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Türkiye, the United Kingdom, the United Republic
of Tanzania, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Zimbabwe.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/77/L.99 and A/77/L.100.
23-25125

25/08/2023

A/77/PV.96

The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/77/L.99, entitled “Tackling illicit
trafficking in wildlife”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.99?
Draft resolution A/77/L.99
(resolution 77/325).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.100, entitled
“International Decade of Sciences for Sustainable
Development, 2024–2033”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.100?
Draft resolution A/77/L.100
(resolution 77/326).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by representatives from
their seats. I would also like to remind everyone that
delegations that are sponsors of one or both resolutions
may not make statements in explanation of position.
Ms. Orduz Duran (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia believes firmly that science, technology
and innovation are critical to achieve sustainable
development in its three dimensions for the welfare
of humankind and to transition to economic models
that are in harmony with nature. In that regard, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 77/326 and the
proclamation of the International Decade of Sciences
for Sustainable Development.
We also welcome the inclusion of a gender
perspective in the resolution. As the text clearly states,
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls will make a crucial contribution to progress across
the Sustainable Development Goals. However, as we
have reiterated in various multilateral forums, States
have been urging the United Nations system for years
to mainstream a gender perspective that recognizes the
role of women and girls in technology and advocates for
strengthening their participation in it. In that regard,
Colombia, in line with its feminist foreign policy, has
consistently urged in negotiations for explicit references
to the conclusions of the Commission on the Status
of Women, particularly those from the sixty-seventh

session, which focused on innovation, technological
change and education in the digital age.
The relevance of something that States have agreed
on year after year within an intergovernmental forum
specializing in gender affairs, after a long and inclusive
deliberation process, should not be questioned. We
need a holistic view of the situation that recognizes
the contributions of half of the world’s population,
with a view to ensuring that the potential of science,
innovation and technology can be fully harnessed to
improve their lives. We regret that not all delegations
agreed to some of this language, but we hope that the
International Decade that we are inaugurating with
today’s resolution will foster substantive discussions
addressing the causes and consequences of the
enormous gaps faced by women and girls in science.
For that, it will be critical to ensure continued progress
in the area of gender equality in multilateral forums,
building on what has been agreed in such instruments
as the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of
Women. Colombia will remain committed to ensuring
that gender equality becomes a reality.
Mr. Andres Pinto (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Germany and Gabon for their work
in facilitating resolution 77/325, on tackling illicit
trafficking in wildlife. This resolution has historically
represented an opportunity for Member States, United
Nations bodies and other international organizations to
strengthen their alliances and cooperation to promote
a comprehensive approach to combating this form
of trafficking.
This year’s text reflects important advances on the
issue. We welcome that it stresses the negative impact
of crimes that affect the environment, as well as the
recognition that the prevention of illicit trafficking
in both flora and fauna can be part of collective
international efforts to combat crimes that affect
the environment. In addition, we welcome the fact
that the resolution highlights the importance of the
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework,
which establishes clear goals for halting and reversing
biodiversity losses. That is why Mexico is joining the
consensus on this important resolution today.
Mexico’s position is clear. We reject any act that
has a negative impact on planetary biodiversity. We
therefore deeply regret the removal of the reference

23-251257/22

A/77/PV.96

to the international legally binding instrument on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. As
everyone is aware, the Agreement under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological
Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction was
reached by consensus among the members of the
General Assembly through their adoption of resolution
77/321, which is significant when we consider the
current state of the rule of law internationally. The
implementation of the Agreement is a watershed in the
conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, as it is
the first international treaty that regulates acts beyond
national jurisdiction. It therefore has a direct relation
to the illicit trafficking of flora and fauna through its
direct and indirect impact on marine life and diversity.
We want to take this opportunity to welcome the
Agreement’s adoption and urge all States to sign it on
20 September, with a view to ensuring its speedy entry
into force.
For those reasons, Mexico considers that the
resolution on tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife
should recognize the adoption of international
instruments that seek to preserve biodiversity and
reverse its losses.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/77/L.93)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.93.
Ms. Concepción Jaramillo (Panama) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for allowing
me to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.93 in the
General Assembly.
As the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Panama to the United Nations, I am honoured to address
the Assembly today as a co-facilitator with the United
Arab Emirates. I have the privilege of introducing a draft
resolution proclaiming the International Day of Clean
8/22

25/08/2023

Energy, an initiative of great importance for the future of
our planet. The proposal, presented to the membership on
21 June 2023 by Panama and the United Arab Emirates,
is an initiative that seeks to promote awareness of the
importance of energy transitions to achieve sustainable
development and drive the fight against the climate
crisis. We recognize that transitioning to clean and
renewable energy sources is essential to tackling our
current environmental and socioeconomic challenges, as
well as to guaranteeing human survival and welfare on
the planet. As Secretary-General António Guterres has
pointed out, if we do not end fossil-fuel pollution and
accelerate our transition to renewable energy, we will
incinerate the only home we have.
After weeks of intense negotiations and hard
work, we are pleased to present this draft resolution
for adoption at today’s plenary meeting of the General
Assembly. Through it we also highlight the importance
of integrating the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDG), especially SDG 7, as a guiding framework
for ensuring a just, inclusive and sustainable energy
transition. Clean energy, including renewable energy,
will also be an important element to consider when
addressing the challenges of sustainable development,
a matter that will be discussed this year during the SDG
Summit, the Climate Ambition Summit and later at the
twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
I want to express my sincere thanks for their
valuable support and endorsement of this initiative to
the members of the core group — Bahrain, Brazil, Cabo
Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Guyana, Morocco, Oman,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Suriname and
Uruguay — as well as those delegations that have joined
us as sponsors, for recognizing the importance and
relevance of the draft resolution. I also want to express
my gratitude to all delegations for their proactive
participation and flexibility during the negotiations. All
of their contributions enriched the process and enabled
this document to be balanced and representative of our
countries’ diverse perspectives and needs. It has been
a joint and collaborative effort that has demonstrated
our collective commitment to addressing the pressing
challenges to our energy system and our environment.
The proclamation of International Clean Energy
Day will serve as an annual reminder of the urgency of
transitioning towards the clean sources and technologies
that can enable us to achieve energy sustainability
23-25125

25/08/2023

A/77/PV.96

worldwide and strengthen our commitment to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Climate Change Agreement. From now on, 26 January
of each year will be a platform for driving the adoption
of policies and practices to promote awareness of the
sustainable use of our energy resources and to strengthen
collaboration and cooperation through the exchange of
best practices, technologies and knowledge in order to
promote the global energy transition. That said, I would
like to invite those who have not yet done so to join
this initiative as sponsors. It would also be an honour to
be able to count on the Assembly’s unanimous support
so that draft resolution A/77/L.93 can be adopted by
consensus. By doing so, we will be reaffirming our
collective commitment to a more sustainable future.

The United States strongly supports the
achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 7 to
ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all. To that end, we are pleased to join
consensus on this resolution establishing 26 January as
the International Day of Clean Energy. As the world
confronts the increasingly severe effects of the climate
crisis, the United States believes that we must redouble
our efforts in the critical decade of the 2020s towards
limiting warming to 1.5°C. The energy sector accounts
for over two thirds of global emissions. Achieving
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for all must therefore take into account the need
for a just transition to net-zero energy systems as soon
as possible.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.93.

With regard to the reference in the eighth
preambular paragraph to facilitating access to cleanenergy research and technology, we underscore our
position that trade language, negotiated or adopted by
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, or under their auspices, has no relevance for
United States trade policy, for our trade obligations
or commitments, or for the agenda at the World Trade
Organization, including discussions or negotiations
in that forum. This includes calls to adopt approaches
that may undermine incentives for innovation, such as
technology transfer that is not both voluntary and on
mutually agreed terms.

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations listed in document A/77/L.93,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Belarus, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
China, Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, the Maldives, Mauritania, Pakistan, Peru,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkmenistan, the United Republic of Tanzania, Viet
Nam and Zimbabwe.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.93, entitled
“International Day of Clean Energy”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.93?
Draft resolution A/77/L.93
(resolution 77/327).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Waldron (United States of America): On behalf
of the Government of the United States of America, I
would like to extend our thanks to the facilitators for
the successful shepherding of resolution 77/327.

Ms. Wood (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
United Kingdom, I would like to thank the facilitators
for resolution 77/327. We are pleased to join consensus.
The global transition to clean energy is central
to our efforts to reduce carbon emissions, maintain
our commitment to the Paris Agreement of 1.5°C of
warming and deliver on our Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) targets, particularly SDG 7. Key to success
is the global transition away from fossil fuels to zeroand low-carbon energy and technologies and renewables
to keep 1.5°C alive.
The United Kingdom believes that the best
option for future, robust and cost-effective energy
systems is not locking in fossil fuels unnecessarily
through advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel technologies.
Abatement technology should only be considered where
they are necessary for low-cost decarbonization of the
economy and particularly in hard-to-abate sectors.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
has emphasized the dire consequences should we fail to

23-251259/22

A/77/PV.96

act. In addition to committing to phasing out unabated
fossil fuels at the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, we must make immediate progress on
the shared commitment we made at the twenty-eighth
Conference of the Parties to phase down unabated coal
power. Achieving 1.5°C will be impossible without a
rapid transition away from coal.
Expanding access to the affordable clean energy
needed to achieve SDG 7 and meeting our climate-change
obligations are interdependent, although challenging,
especially for the least developed countries. We all
have a shared responsibility to build robust, resilient
and diverse energy systems, including by accelerating
roll-out of renewables, strengthening the regulatory
environment and expanding grid connectivity.
Ms. Segura (France): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
We would like to thank the facilitators as well as all
involved for their constructive engagement.
During the negotiations of resolution 77/327,
arguments were made that energy and climate are
unrelated issues. Yet the energy sector is by far the
biggest source of global greenhouse-gas emissions. The
EU and its member States regret that the resolution does
not adequately reflect the indisputable link between
energy and climate. We also regret that the resolution
contains the mention of cleaner fossil-fuel technologies.
We emphasize that joining consensus today does not
imply our approval of this formulation, which cannot be
seen as a precedent for future negotiations.
The EU and its member States look forward to
working with everyone to ensure that the decarbonization
of all sectors is accelerated and that universal energy
access is achieved. We trust the International Day of
Clean Energy will contribute to those objectives.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 18.
10/22

25/08/2023

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly concluded its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 18 at its 56th plenary
meeting, on 20 December 2022. In order for the
Assembly to take action on draft resolution A/77/L.96,
it will be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 18.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable development
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States
Draft resolution (A/77/L.96)
The President: Members will recall that at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General
Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (b) of agenda item
18 to the Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to
take action expeditiously on the document, may I take
it that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (b) of
agenda item 18 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 77/505 B).
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 18 to take action on the draft resolution issued as
document A/77/L.96. We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.96.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
23-25125

25/08/2023

A/77/PV.96

in document A/77/L.96, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft: Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cape
Verde, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Kenya, Kingdom of the
Netherlands, Kiribati, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Morocco, North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Samoa, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine
and Vanuatu.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/77/L.96, entitled “Further
modalities of the fourth International Conference on
Small Island Developing States”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.96?
Draft resolution A/77/L.96
(resolution 77/328).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly concluded its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 21 at its 56th plenary
meeting, on 20 December 2022. In order for the
Assembly to take action on draft resolution A/77/L.92,
it will be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 21. May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to reopen consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 21 (continued)
Groups of countries in special situations
(b) Follow-up to the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries
Draft resolution (A/77/L.92)
The President: Members will recall that at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General
Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (b) of agenda item
21 to the Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to
take action expeditiously on the document, may I take
it that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (b) of
agenda item 21 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 77/505 B).
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 21 to take action on the draft resolution issued as
document A/77/L.92.
We shall now
resolution A/77/L.92.
I give the
the Secretariat.

proceed

floor

to

to

the

consider

draft

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/77/L.92, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft: Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kingdom
of the Netherlands, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain
and Sweden.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/77/L.92, entitled “Further
modalities of the third United Nations Conference on
Landlocked Developing Countries”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.92?
Draft resolution
(resolution 77/329).

A/77/L.92

was

adopted

23-2512511/22

A/77/PV.96

25/08/2023

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 94?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 7 (continued)

Agenda item 127 (continued)

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations

The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
94 at its 46th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2022. In
order for the Assembly to take action on draft decision
A/77/L.101, it will be necessary to reopen consideration
of agenda item 94. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda
item 94?

(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization

It was so decided.
Agenda item 94 (continued)
Developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international
security
Draft decision (A/77/L.101)
The President: Members will recall that at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 94 to the
First Committee. To enable the Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the document, may I take it that the
Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 94 directly
in the plenary meeting and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 77/505 B).
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 94 to take action
on the draft decision issued as document A/77/L.101.
We shall now proceed to consider draft decision
A/77/L.101, which is entitled “Open-ended working
group on security of and in the use of information and
communications technologies 2021–2025 established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 75/240”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.101?
Draft decision A/77/L.101
(decision 77/512 B).
12/22

was

adopted

Draft resolution (A/77/L.102)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Azerbaijan to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.102.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The delegation of
Azerbaijan, on behalf of the members of the Economic
Cooperation Organization, has the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.102, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization”.
The Economic Cooperation Organization is
a regional organization consisting of 10 Member
States across West and East Asia, Central Asia and
the Caucasus, thereby forming a vital bridge that
connects Europe and Asia. With its strategically unique
geographical positioning, the Economic Cooperation
Organization fosters a platform for enhancing and
enriching regional cooperation in critical areas such
as trade, transport and connectivity, sustainable
energy, tourism, economic growth and productivity,
social welfare and the environment. At a time of
complex and interlinked global challenges facing the
world, cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization acquires
additional importance. The unparalleled expertise,
resources and capacities of the United Nations find
a valuable complement in the regional networks and
approach of the Economic Cooperation Organization,
which is better equipped to address localized challenges.
In this context, we believe that the relations between
the United Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organization hold the promise of being mutually
beneficial for both organizations.
As we approach the Sustainable Development
Goals Summit, a watershed moment in assessing
our collective progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals, the draft resolution before us lays
23-25125

25/08/2023

A/77/PV.96

down a solid foundation for extended collaboration
with the United Nations and its agencies, funds and
programmes in an extensive array of areas that hold
relevance for the Economic Cooperation Organization,
including but not limited to transport, connectivity,
trade, energy, agriculture, industry and tourism.
The draft resolution also underscores the challenges
faced by landlocked countries within the Economic
Cooperation Organization, calling on United Nations
agencies and international financial institutions to offer
assistance and cooperation in addressing these issues.
We are confident that the draft resolution serves
as a comprehensive road map for the collaborative
journey ahead. In conclusion, I would like to extend
our thanks and appreciation to all delegations for their
active participation and constructive contributions
during the negotiation process and strongly encourage
Member States to not only endorse and support the draft
resolution but also consider joining it as co-sponsors.
We hope to see it adopted by consensus.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.102.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
and in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/77/L.102, the following countries have also become
co-sponsors of the draft: Kazakhstan and Pakistan.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.102, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization”.

The European Union and its member States
support the resolution on “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organization” (resolution 77/330) and encourage
further cooperation between the two organizations, in
line with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. However, the resolution continues to contain
language that is problematic for our group. In reference
to language concerning the Baku Declaration, the
European Union reiterates that the references related
to Cyprus in this document are not consistent with
existing Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions on the issue, nor with international law or
the United Nations Charter. As the European Union
has consistently expressed this position during the
consultations and at the negotiations of the previous
iterations of this resolution during the seventy-third
and seventy-fifth sessions of the General Assembly,
we regret that no effort was made to address our
concerns regarding operative paragraph 3. We therefore
disassociate ourselves from that paragraph.
We also regret that we could not reach agreement
on the inclusion of a reference to human rights,
especially the human rights of women and girls, in
operative paragraph 37. We are gravely concerned by
the increasing and systematic erosion of respect for
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women
and girls in Afghanistan. Women and girls must be
able to participate fully, equally and meaningfully in
all spheres of public life, to live free from all forms
of violence and discrimination, and to have free and
equal access to justice, health care, employment and
education, as well as freedom of movement.

The President: Before giving the floor to
representatives for explanations of position after
adoption, may I remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.

We reaffirm our commitment to staying engaged
and to delivering assistance for the benefit of the
Afghan population, within a principled approach. The
European Union urges the Taliban to allow women
to participate equally and meaningfully in aid and
services delivery so that women can engage fully
and actively in society, as well as receive aid. Thus,
we believe that the implementation of the Advocacy
Programme for Afghanistan, including development
aid, should be based on the respect for human rights,
including those of women and girls, and on respect for
humanitarian principles.

Ms. Jimenez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States.

We trust that our positions will be taken into
account in the future so that we can continue to support
this resolution.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.102?
Draft resolution A/77/L.102
(resolution 77/330).

was

adopted

23-2512513/22

A/77/PV.96

Mr. Hakobyan (Armenia): I take the floor to
explain the position of the delegation of Armenia on the
resolution entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization”
(resolution 77/330).
Armenia had requested the deletion of paragraph 3
of the resolution, which refers to an outdated document
adopted back in 2012, which has been reflected in five
previous iterations of the same resolution since the
sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly and has
never enjoyed consensus. The document in question
contains one-sided formulations vis-à-vis conflicts,
which are quite beyond the scope and the mandate
of an organization dealing with issues of economic
cooperation. Therefore, the delegation of Armenia
disassociates itself from operative paragraph 3 of
the resolution and requests that this position be duly
reflected in the record of the meeting.
Mr. Aiello (United States of America): The United
States sincerely thanks Azerbaijan for its work in
facilitating this resolution (resolution 77/330) and is
pleased to join consensus. We take this opportunity to
clarify our position on several issues.
We underscore our position that trade language
negotiated or adopted by the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council or under their auspices
has no relevance for United States trade policy, for our
trade obligations or commitments, or for the agenda
at the World Trade Organization (WTO), including
discussions or negotiations in that forum. While the
United Nations and WTO share common interests, they
have different roles, rules and memberships.
The United States disassociates itself from
operative paragraph 37 on reconstruction and
development in Afghanistan. The Taliban’s repressive
policies exacerbate the challenges facing the people of
Afghanistan and limit the ability of aid organizations to
reach vulnerable communities. Supporting the Afghan
people, including by helping to address Afghanistan’s
ongoing economic and humanitarian crises, is an urgent
priority for the United States.
With those clarifications, the United States is
pleased to join consensus on the resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
14/22

25/08/2023

of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Çetin (Türkiye): Before I reply to an issue
raised in explanation of position read out on behalf
of the European Union (EU), I would first like to
welcome the successful adoption of the resolution
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization” (resolution
77/330). As a founding member of the Economic
Cooperation Organization, Türkiye attaches utmost
importance to the role of the organization in the face of
current global challenges. In that regard, Türkiye will
continue to support the organization for the promotion
of sustainable economic development and achieving
greater connectivity in the Economic Cooperation
Organization region. Furthermore, Türkiye advocates
for the advancement of the existing cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization and will contribute to all
efforts to this end.
The explanation of position read out on behalf
of the EU as far as the Cyprus issue is concerned, is
unfortunately an example of bias and prejudice. A
just, lasting and sustainable settlement on the island of
Cyprus can only be reached following a process that
will be initiated with the reaffirmation of the inherent
sovereign equality and equal international status of the
Turkish Cypriot people, which were acknowledged by
the 1959 and 1960 agreements. The EU admitted the
Greek Cypriot administration as a full member despite
the overwhelming Greek Cypriot vote in 2004 against
a comprehensive settlement. Since then, the EU has
been unable to adopt a balanced position on the Cyprus
issue. As long as the EU position exclusively reflects the
interests of the Greek Cypriots, the EU will continue to
disqualify itself from the role of an objective contributor
to the efforts in search of a solution.
Those who consider the Greek Cypriot side as the
sole owner of the island should abandon this attitude.
We call on all to focus on the realities. The Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus is one of the two States
on the island. The international community should
reaffirm the sovereign equality and equal international
status of the Turkish Cypriot people and act
accordingly. The recognition of the Turkish Republic
of Northern Cyprus, aligned with our President’s call
at the General Assembly last year (see A/77/PV.4), is
23-25125

25/08/2023

A/77/PV.96

one of the ways to this end. Türkiye by all means will
continue to stand by the Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus and to be the voice of the Turkish Cypriots in
all international platforms.

Mr. Pittakis (Cyprus): My delegation fully respects
the time of all delegations in this room. Therefore, I
will in brief reject in total the revisionism attempted by
the delegation of Türkiye.

Mr. Pittakis (Cyprus): I am obliged to exercise
the right of reply in response to the statement made by
the delegation of Türkiye. Cyprus is a United Nations
member, the only recognized State on the island under
international law, and the international community
has no doubts. The remarks just made by Türkiye
are objectionable on grounds of both relevance and
substance, since they blatantly contradict Security
Council resolutions.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (i) of agenda item 127?

In relation to the claim that the European Union
is biased against Türkiye because Cyprus became
a member State of the European Union prior to its
reunification — the European Union has proven that it
is unbiased as well as instrumental in the settlement of
the Cyprus question. The European Union has provided
to the Turkish Cypriot community significant financial
and technical support since 2006.
Allow me to also reiterate that, while the occupied
areas of Cyprus are a part of the European Union, the
European Union acquis remains suspended in those areas
until reunification, something which is not the fault of
anyone other than the occupying Power. Türkiye and its
secessionist entity in the occupied areas of Cyprus are
overtly supporting the partition of Cyprus by proposing
a two-State solution outside the long-established United
Nations parameters. It should be recalled that explicit
references to the established United Nations parameters
for the reunification of Cyprus are not discretionary
and have been consistently affirmed by the Security
Council, including in its latest resolution of January
2023 (Security Council resolution 2674 (2023)) and the
press statements of July and August 2023.
I would like to reiterate the commitment of the
Government of Cyprus to finding a just, factional and
viable solution to the Cyprus question on the agreed
basis of a bizonal, bicommunal federation in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Mr. Çetin (Türkiye): I want to state that the
counterpart of the Greek Cypriot representative is the
Turkish Cypriot representative, who is unfairly absent
in the room today. Further details on the issue can be
provided by the Turkish Cypriot representative’s office,
as needed.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of la
Francophonie
Draft resolution (A/77/L.97)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.97.
Ms. Chelbi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the States and Governments members of the
International Organization of la Francophonie, and
as representative of the Tunisian presidency of the
eighteenth Summit of la Francophonie and facilitator of
the draft resolution, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A /77/L.97, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Organization
of la Francophonie”.
The draft resolution submitted today for adoption
by the General Assembly reflects the close ties that unite
the United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie and highlights the fruitful cooperation
that continues to deepen and expand to new areas of
interest for both organizations, such as digital issues.
Moreover, the draft resolution recalls the eighteenth
Summit of la Francophonie, held in November 2022
in Djerba, Tunisia, on the theme of “Connectivity in
diversity: digital technology as a vector for development
and solidarity in the French-speaking world” and
the declaration adopted on that occasion. During the
Summit, Heads of State and Government that have the
French language in common discussed at length the
digital divide and the persistent disparities in access to
digital services and called for the promotion of access
to digital content and the development of digital skills
in young people, women and girls. They also called
for the acceleration of digital transformation to make
it a vector of inclusion, human, social and economic

23-2512515/22

A/77/PV.96

development and called for the promotion of digital
technology as a tool in service of the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by
2030. The Djerba declaration also contains a strong
plea for close collaboration with all stakeholders in
order to fight disinformation, illegal content and
large-scale manipulation operations, while respecting
the protection of freedom of expression, privacy and
personal data, which are all questions at the heart of our
concerns and debates at the United Nations on the eve
of the Sustainable Development Goals Summit, as well
as the Summit of the Future, which will be held in 2024.
On another level, the draft resolution stresses the
importance of partnership and cooperation for the
promotion of human rights, the achievement of the
SDGs, the improvement of peacekeeping operation
performance through increased consideration for
cultural and linguistic skills, or even the achievement
of gender equality and the promotion of youth
participation. The draft welcomes the participation
of the Organization of la Francophonie in the
Transforming Education Summit and highlights the
Digital Francophonie Strategy for 2022–2026, the new
Strategic Framework of la Francophonie 2023–2030, as
well as the declaration on the French language within
the linguistic diversity of la Francophonie, which are
all documents that also underline the extent of the
commitments of the States and Governments members
of the Organization of la Francophonie.
Before concluding, I would like to thank all the
delegations for their constructive engagement in the
negotiation process on this draft resolution, and the
Permanent Observer Mission of the International
Organization of la Francophonie for its support
and assistance, which have greatly contributed to
the consensus-based and substantive result that we
have achieved. Tunisia, the founding country of la
Francophonie, is delighted to pass the torch to France,
which will host the next Summit of Heads of State and
Government of la Francophonie in 2024.
Finally, allow me just to add a small point. As
coordinator of this draft resolution, my delegation
would like to present orally a minimal editorial revision
to operative paragraph 41 as follows. Strike out “the”
before “texts” in the fourth line and add the word
“very” before “following areas” in the fourth line of
the same paragraph.
16/22

25/08/2023

Paragraph 41
English version:

will

read

as

follows

in

its

(spoke in English)
“Also notes the firm commitment by the member
States and Governments of the International
Organization of la Francophonie to international
peace and security, democracy, human rights, the
rule of law, linguistic and cultural diversity, good
governance, sustainable development and bridging
the digital divide, as reaffirmed at the eighteenth
Summit of la Francophonie, and the commitment
of the States members of the International
Organization of la Francophonie to take specific
actions, as agreed at the eighteenth Summit and set
out in the Djerba Declaration and texts adopted at
the Summit in the very following areas”.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.97, as orally revised.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
and in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/77/L.97, the following countries have also become
co-sponsors of the draft, as orally revised: Albania,
Argentina, Benin, Canada, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, the
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Madagascar,
Mauritania, Morocco, North Macedonia, Portugal,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Togo
and Ukraine.
The President: The Assembly will take a decision
on draft resolution A/77/L.97, as orally revised, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.97, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/77/L.97, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 77/331).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after the adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
23-25125

25/08/2023

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, we would
like to thank the delegation of Tunisia for their efforts
and able leadership in facilitating the negotiations on
resolution 77/331.
The delegation of Azerbaijan actively participated
in the negotiation process. Azerbaijan recognizes that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is essential to the promotion of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations. The foundational
documents of the International Organization of la
Francophonie commit its member States, inter alia, to
respect the sovereignty of States, observe the strictest
neutrality and promote dialogue among cultures and
civilizations. Furthermore, the resolution just adopted
refers to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and highlights the importance
of developing friendly relations among nations, in
accordance with international law.
However, since the adoption of the most recent
resolution on the same topic, in 2021 (resolution 75/307),
two members of the International Organization of la
Francophonie have continued to abuse this multilateral
format by pushing through false narratives, spreading
disinformation, sowing dissension and interfering in
the internal affairs of non-member States, sometimes
even in breach of the decision-making procedures and
in apparent disregard for the positions of other members
of the organization.
We consider the attempts to promote xenophobic,
anti-Azerbaijan positions at the Summits of la
Francophonie as pursuing the goal to destabilize the
situation in our region and to encroach on the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of my country, in contravention
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, as well as the principles and objectives at the
heart of la Francophonie itself. Azerbaijan strongly
condemns and categorically rejects such destructive,
inflammatory and provocative policies and actions and
disassociates itself from operative paragraphs 2, 41 and
52 of the resolution, which mention certain documents
of the organization that are irrelevant for the United
Nations. We request that this statement be included in
the official record of the meeting.
Ms. Demi̇ r (Türkiye): At the outset, we would
like to thank the Permanent Mission of Tunisia for
facilitating the negotiations on the resolution entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie”

A/77/PV.96

(resolution 77/331). Our delegation has engaged
constructively in the negotiations on this resolution
as we believe that the cooperation between the United
Nations and international organizations is crucial. Yet,
as we raised during the negotiation process as well,
unfortunately in the adopted resolution there are direct
and indirect references to some documents that were
adopted by certain members of the Organization of la
Francophonie that are not fully in alignment with the
aim of preserving and enhancing regional cooperation
and peace. We believe that such references should be
avoided in United Nations resolutions in the context of
cooperation with other international organizations.
On that note, we would also like to underscore
the need for a more diligent approach by international
organizations while drafting decisions, resolutions
and declarations in a way that fully promotes peace
and security and that is not limited to reflecting the
interests of a small number of States. Henceforth,
Türkiye disassociates itself from operative paragraphs
2, 41 and 52 of the resolution.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the delegation of
Tunisia, as the coordinator of the negotiations, for their
constructive efforts to reach consensus.
The Russian Federation supported the Tunisian
prepared resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie (resolution 77/331). Nonetheless, we
would like the record of the meeting to reflect that
Russia would like to distance itself from the consensus
on operative paragraph 18 on the International
Criminal Court (ICC). This is a pseudo structure for
international criminal justice, and we have repeatedly
pointed this out.
Over the past 20 years of its work, the ICC
has not managed to achieve tangible results either
in investigating the most serious crimes under
international law or in implementing the instructions
of the Security Council. The pseudo court is just
involved in rubber stamping empty reports and
justifying aggressive neocolonial policies of the West.
Its contribution to achieving sustainable international
peace has been destroyed. We have seen this body in
action in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and in the Sudan. The
ICC continues to demonstrate its incompetence and its
bias, turning a blind eye and blatantly covering up the
crimes against humanity of the Kyiv regime. The ICC

23-2512517/22

A/77/PV.96

investigation in the context of the Ukrainian crisis that
is being paid for by the West shows once and for all that
it has been turned into a political instrument. We would
recommend that the Organization of la Francophonie
cease its cooperation with the Hague international
pseudo court so that it does not discredit itself in the
eyes of the international community.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (j)
of agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
Draft resolution (A/77/L.94)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Fiji to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.94.
Mr. Tarakinikini (Fiji): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.94, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum” on behalf of the members of
the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) with a presence in New
York. We also acknowledge the guidance of the Cook
Islands as Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum.
The Pacific Islands Forum facilitates regional
cooperation between our members to ensure a resilient
regional peace, harmony, security, social inclusion and
prosperity, all working together to shape a promising
future for our Blue Pacific. This draft resolution
builds upon resolution 75/288 and encourages further
cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific
Islands Forum. Let me highlight a few significant
updates in this year’s draft resolution.
The preamble underlines our region’s commitment
to taking urgent action to address our region’s
vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate change. We
encourage the international community to consider
multidimensional vulnerability, including through a
multidimensional vulnerability index, as a criterion to
access concessional finance. We recognize the important
role and contribution of the United Nations system
in the Pacific and welcome the continued mutually
beneficial dialogue between the Pacific Islands Forum
18/22

25/08/2023

leaders and the Secretary-General. In this regard, the
draft resolution encourages the scheduling of the next
meeting between the Secretary-General and the Pacific
Islands Forum leaders during the high-level week of the
General Assembly in 2023.
In paragraph 4, the draft resolution notes the 2050
Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent as the collective
vision of the Pacific Islands Forum for the region over
the next three decades.
Paragraph 20 looks forward to the convening of
the fourth International Conference on Small Island
Developing States (SIDS), to be held in Antigua and
Barbuda in 2024. Paragraph 10 encourages all parties,
in particular the small island developing States, to
support the preparation of the next high-level United
Nations Ocean Conference in June 2025. In paragraph
14, we acknowledge the far-reaching and enduring
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic for
the sustainable development of SIDS, as envisaged in
the Samoa Pathway in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Paragraphs 19 and 27 welcome the
progress towards enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum and its
associated institutions and reiterate the importance of
continuing to enhance and strengthen the United Nations
field presence in the Pacific with particular regard to
the operational activities of the multi-country offices.
We believe this draft resolution represents a text
that, after consultation, reflects our collective aim
of reaching consensus. We regret, however, that the
pursuit of consensus has required Forum members to
put aside issues of priority for our region. For instance,
in 2022, Pacific Islands Forum leaders declared that
the Pacific is facing a climate emergency that threatens
the livelihoods, security and well-being of its peoples
and ecosystems, backed by the latest science and the
daily lived realities in the Pacific communities. Pacific
Islands Forum leaders have also called for the Security
Council to appoint a special rapporteur to produce a
regular review of global, regional and national security
threats caused by climate change. We would have
liked to see recognition of the good work being done
on climate and security by the Peacebuilding Fund in
our region.
Finally, PIF members wish to welcome the adoption
of an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
23-25125

25/08/2023

A/77/PV.96

diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction and look
forward to its prompt implementation.
In pursuing our ambitions as the Blue Pacific, we
strive for genuine and enduring cooperation in the
spirit of our Blue Pacific principles for dialogue and
engagement, which recognize and support the collective
strength, voice and priorities of our Pacific region. This
sentiment is at the heart of our region’s collective vision,
as espoused in the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific
Continent, ensuring that we will ensure and sustain
peace and security in our region and that we engage as
one region. We believe and are committed to the values
of multilateralism, values that bring us together at the
United Nations to work for a better future. We seek the
broadest support possible across our region to ensure
full ownership and accountability in delivering on our
shared objectives.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.94.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/77/L.94, the following countries
have also become co-sponsors of the draft: Albania,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Estonia, France,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Montenegro, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway,
Poland, Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland, Ukraine and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

intergovernmental regional organization that has long
played an important role in promoting the sustainable
development of the island countries addressing climate
change and maintaining regional peace and stability.
China and the Pacific island countries are all located in
the Asia-Pacific region and are all developing countries
with a long history of friendship. China will continue to
promote more fruitful relations between the two sides
based on the principles of mutual respect and common
development and will continue to support the PIF in
strengthening its cooperation with the United Nations
and other international organizations.
The ocean is the common property of humankind,
and it is a blue home on which the Pacific island
countries depend for their survival. Twelve years
ago, a serious accident occurred at the Fukushima
nuclear power plant in Japan, releasing a large amount
of radioactive material into the ocean and causing
a huge disaster. Twelve years later, just yesterday,
the Government of Japan unilaterally and forcibly
activated the discharge of nuclear-contaminated water
into the ocean despite the international community’s
questioning and objections, which in turn caused
secondary damage to the local population and to people
all over the world. The disposal of the contaminated
water has transnational implications and is by no means
a private matter for Japan. It is extremely self-serving
and irresponsible of Japan to ignore the public interest
and openly transfer the risk of nuclear contamination to
the whole world, including the Pacific island countries.

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.

There is no precedent for the discharge of nuclearcontaminated water into the ocean, nor is there a
widely recognized disposal standard. For a long time
there have been grave concerns about the impact of the
discharge on the marine environment, food safety and
human health. The legitimacy, legality and safety of the
Japanese side’s approach have been widely questioned
by the international community. The Japanese side has
yet to address the major concerns of the international
community about the long-term reliability of the
water treatment equipment, the truthfulness and
accuracy of the data on nuclear-contaminated water
and the soundness and effectiveness of the monitoring
programme. China and other stakeholders have
repeatedly pointed out that if the contaminated water is
safe, there is no need for discharge. If it is not safe, then
it should not be discharged into the ocean.

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) is an important

China calls on the international community to
jointly urge the Japanese Government to rectify its

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.94, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.94?
Draft resolution
(resolution 77/332).

A/77/L.94

was

adopted

23-2512519/22

A/77/PV.96

erroneous decision, immediately stop the discharge,
communicate in good faith with the countries and
stakeholders concerned and dispose of the contaminated
water in a responsible manner so as to avoid causing
unpredictable damage and hazards to the global marine
environment and to the health and well-being of people
around the world.
Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes
the adoption of the resolution entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum” (resolution 77/332). It is a long-standing
principled position of Indonesia to support resolutions
that enhance cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the Pacific
Islands Forum (PIF). Indonesia shares various common
interests with Pacific Island countries, covering
multiple issues, such as climate change, disaster risk
reduction, agriculture, fisheries and tourism, and the
development of small- and medium-sized enterprises.
Acknowledging similar challenges that Indonesia faces
with our Pacific island brothers and sisters, including
climate change and sea-level rise, we further welcome
new elements in the resolution, including reference
to the mid-term review of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, the result of the
2022 United Nations Oceans Conference, as well as
the development of the multidimensional vulnerability
index for small island developing States.
Indonesia takes this opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to strengthening our cooperation with the
Pacific island countries in responding to our shared
challenges, including through capacity-building and
technical cooperation. Equally important is to increase
our cooperation on issues of common concern and
interest, based on mutual respect and with a spirit of
promoting common prosperity, security and stability
in the region. Going forward, Indonesia will continue
to support efforts to strengthen United Nations
cooperation with the PIF. It is important that such
cooperation be based on the most recent development
and progress and that such development and progress
be reflected in the biennial PIF resolution.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): With respect to the Japanese starting
the process of releasing radioactive water from the
Fukushima nuclear power station, we would like to
underscore that the Russian Federation is closely
following developments in the situation. We trust that
Tokyo will demonstrate full transparency regarding the
20/22

25/08/2023

impact of this process on the environment, provide all
necessary information to interested States and ensure
opportunities for them to take samples in the region of
the discharge.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Nishigori (Japan): We deeply regret that two
delegations have chosen to refer to a matter that holds
no relevance to this important resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum (resolution 77/332).
Regarding the water treated by the Advanced Liquid
Processing System (ALPS) at the Fukushima-Daiichi
nuclear power station, Japan never discharges treated
water into the sea in a way that endangers human health
and the marine environment. The comprehensive report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
also concluded that the approach to the discharge of
the ALPS-treated water into the sea and associated
activities are consistent with relevant international
safety standards, and the radiological impact on
humans and the environment is negligible. The IAEA
and international experts have been reviewing our
efforts and the review and monitoring will persist in
a transparent way. This matter should not be subject
to political discussions. We cannot accept any baseless
allegations that lack scientific evidence. Japan remains
fully committed to upholding transparency by providing
information based on scientific evidence.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
know we have other items on our agenda, and so I do
not want to take up too much of my colleagues’ time.
However, I would like to respond very briefly to the
statement by Japan.
In his statement, the Japanese representative
cited — as has the Japanese Government in its recent
position statements — the final assessment report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), but I
would like to draw the attention of delegates to the fact
that the Director General of the Agency, Mr. Grossi,
repeatedly stressed in the forward to the report and
23-25125

25/08/2023

at the relevant press conferences that the discharge of
nuclear-contaminated water at sea is a national decision
of the Government of Japan, and that the report of the
Agency is not a recommendation nor an endorsement of
such a policy.
I think it is abundantly clear to all that the IAEA
report is not a license for the Japanese side to push
for the release of nuclear-contaminated water into the
sea. The report does not endorse that effort, nor does it
absolve the Japanese side of its moral responsibility and
obligations under international law. It has transnational
implications. This is not a domestic matter of Japan
alone. None of their arguments will change the fact that
in the next 30 years Japan will discharge millions of tons
of contaminated water into the Pacific Ocean. Neither
will they change the fact that that will pose enormous
risk to the environment and human health, among
others. I would like to call on the Japanese Government
to squarely address the legitimate concerns of the
countries concerned and of stakeholders, to engage
in good faith with the countries and stakeholders and
to address this discharge of contaminated water in a
responsible manner.
Mr. Nishigori (Japan): I will make my second
reply brief. I would like to first say that I would not
like to see a matter that holds no relevance for this
important resolution (resolution 77/332) delaying its
consideration in the General Assembly. Lastly, I would
like to reiterate that Japan remains fully committed
to upholding transparency by providing information
based on scientific evidence. That is our commitment.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (p) of agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 131 (continued)
Sexual exploitation and abuse: implementing a
zero-tolerance policy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/748)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.98)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Egypt to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.98.
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my appreciation to
the General Assembly for discussing today agenda

A/77/PV.96

item 131, on sexual exploitation and abuse and
implementing a zero-tolerance policy. This item is
a high priority of shared importance for all United
Nations States Members.
Egypt is pleased to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.98, on sexual abuse and exploitation, as it
is fully committed to supporting United Nations
efforts in terms of zero tolerance for crimes related
to sexual exploitation and abuse. That is also part of
the important role that Egypt has played in adding this
item to the General Assembly’s agenda pursuant to
its resolution 71/278, entitled “United Nations action
on sexual exploitation and abuse”. That resolution
was adopted by consensus based on an initiative by
Egypt and holistically addressed that scourge in the
United Nations system, including agencies, funds,
programmes and peacekeeping missions and special
political missions, as well as troops that are not related
to the United Nations but given mandates by the
Security Council.
This draft resolution gives the victims of those
crimes high priority by enhancing the reporting
measures and the remedial measures taken by the
Organization in order to achieve accountability and
justice for the victims. Today’s draft resolution is
significant because it reiterates our efforts in preventing
and addressing sexual abuse and exploitation and in
continuing the dialogue, with a view to assessing the
progress made and to discussing ways to strengthen it.
The draft resolution aims to prevent and address
acts of sexual abuse and exploitation while taking a
balanced approach that strongly condemns the shameful
acts of individuals regardless of the perpetrators and
calls for urgent measures to address them and achieve
justice. The victims of those acts are the focus of the
efforts and attention by the United Nations. The draft
resolution does not ignore the important role played by
the United Nations, especially peacekeeping troops,
who make significant sacrifices to establish peace and
stability worldwide.
The draft resolution also calls upon the SecretaryGeneral and Member States to give priority to proactive
efforts and achieve harmony and consistency between
policies and practices in that regard. The draft resolution
calls on the Secretary-General to continue to present
his annual reports on the progress made.
As a country that contributes military and police
troops to United Nations peacekeeping missions, and

23-2512521/22

A/77/PV.96

25/08/2023

out of its commitment to zero tolerance with regard
to sexual exploitation and abuse, Egypt joined the
initiative launched by the Secretary-General that
designates a group of leaders to prevent and respond
to sexual abuse and exploitation in United Nations
operations. Egypt has taken a number of important
national preventive and remedial measures in that
regard. The Egyptian role is not limited to that. Egypt
makes effective contributions to build African and
Arab capacities by providing training courses through
the Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding. We also develop
relevant training materials.
Before concluding, I reiterate that coordinated
international and national efforts are necessary to end
the scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse. Egypt will
continue to work with all parties to achieve that end
within the context of our international Organization. I
express my sincere thanks to all the countries that have
co-sponsored the draft resolution and to those countries
that will support its adoption.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.98.
I give the
the Secretariat.

22/22

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed in
document A/77/L.98, the following countries have also
become co-sponsors of the draft resolution: Argentina,
Bangladesh, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Indonesia, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates
and Uruguay.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/77/L.98, entitled: “United
Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.98?
Draft resolution
(resolution 77/333).

A/77/L.98

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 131?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

23-25125
