A/65/PV.27

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

27

th plenary meeting
Friday, 8 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ndong Mba
(Equatorial Guinea), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 133
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/65/492)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): If
there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure, may I take it that the Assembly decides not
to discuss the report of the Fifth Committee that is
before it?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of
vote. The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main
Committee and in plenary meeting a delegation should,
as far as possible, explain its vote only once, either in
the Committee or in the plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from
its vote in the Committee. I remind delegations that,

also in accordance with General Assembly decision
34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report, I should like
to inform representatives that we are going to proceed
to take a decision in the same manner as in the Fifth
Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Committee adopted
the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments for
the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations: requests under Article 19 of the Charter”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
65/3).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 133.
Agenda items 71 and 72
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-57241 (E)

*1057241*

A/65/PV.27

Note by the Secretary-General (A/65/188)
Report of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Note by the Secretary-General (A/65/205)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to take note
of the fifteenth annual report of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to take note
of the seventeenth annual report of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I call
on Mr. Dennis Byron, President of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Byron: It is a great honour for me to address
the members of the General Assembly today and to
present the fifteenth annual report of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (A/65/188). Let me
commence by extending my congratulations and best
wishes to His Excellency Joseph Deiss of Switzerland
on his election to the presidency of the Assembly.
In Arusha and The Hague, we have a year of hard
work behind us, but I am pleased to report significant
progress in the completion of our mandate as a result.
We have been able to achieve that progress despite
major obstacles, in particular with regard to staffing.
Over the last year, the Tribunal was highly
productive in the delivery of judgements. The
Chambers rendered seven trial and four appeal
judgements during the reporting period — that is, from
July 2009 to June 2010 — and an additional trial
judgement was delivered in August. We expect three
more trial judgements and up to four more appeal
judgements before the end of this year.
In addition to the judgements, the Trial and
Appeals Chambers issued almost 400 written and
numerous oral decisions and orders. The delivery of
the judgements in all the ongoing or commencing cases
at trial level is expected before the end of 2011.

2

The workload is high and is shared equally
among the permanent and ad litem judges in the Trial
Chambers. I have raised the issue of the inequality of
their terms and conditions of service with the
Assembly before. It is a major concern for the Tribunal.
The work and the commitment of the ad litem judges
have been and continue to be indispensable to the
successful and timely completion of our work. Without
them, we could not have achieved what we did.
We very much welcome the resolution of March
2010 to resolve the issue as a priority of the General
Assembly at the main part of its sixty-fifth session
(resolution 64/261). While that issue will soon be
before the Fifth Committee, I ask members and their
Governments for support in the matter to provide for
equity and to ensure that the work of the Tribunal can
be successfully completed.
Like every other court, national or international,
the Tribunal’s achievements will ultimately be judged
on the quality of its trials and judgements and on the
efficiency of its judicial management. We continue to
work hard with respect to both aspects, but in all our
efforts we face one main stumbling block — the
staffing situation. We continue to lose many of our best
and most experienced staff members. One hundred and
sixty-seven staff members left the Tribunal during the
reporting period. They often leave for other institutions
in the same field, where they can obtain longer-term
contracts.
In Chambers, to give an example, three of the
four multi-accused cases have lost their coordinators
over the past few months, just a couple of months
ahead of the expected judgement delivery. It is almost
unavoidable that such departures, with their consequent
loss of institutional memory, result in delays in the
judgement drafting process. We cannot replace those
staff members easily. We face difficulties attracting a
sufficient number of good candidates with what we can
offer, which is mostly temporary contracts. That is
particularly relevant for the higher ranks of P-4 and
P-5 positions. The remaining staff face the uncertainty
of their professional future, which affects their morale
and productivity.
Let me now turn to the issue of fugitives. The
Office of the Prosecutor and its tracking team, in
cooperation with the national authorities, were able to
ensure the arrest of one fugitive — Jean Bosco
Uwinkindi — in Uganda. His case is one of those

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

earmarked for referral to a national jurisdiction. While
several options of possible referral countries are being
explored, the focus remains on Rwanda. The support
activities conducted by the Tribunal continue to further
strengthen the Rwandan judiciary, in particular with
respect to witness protection.
The number of remaining fugitives is now down
to 10. That number still includes three of the most
high-ranked accused: Félicien Kabuga, Protais
Mpiranya and Augustin Bizimana. I therefore reiterate
the call to all States, especially the States of the Great
Lakes region, in particular Kenya, to intensify
cooperation with the Tribunal and to render all
necessary assistance so that their arrest can be ensured
soon. Over 16 years have passed. We cannot wait any
longer for justice to be done. We must not give the fatal
signal to alleged perpetrators that their successful
hiding for 16 years will ultimately be rewarded with
impunity.
One focus of the work of the Registrar is the
search for countries to relocate acquitted persons and
those who have served their sentences. Currently, three
such persons remain in safe houses in Arusha. One has
been there for over four years. We must be aware that a
full commitment to the rule of law includes the
acceptance that those who have been lawfully acquitted
or who have completed their sentence need to be
enabled to recommence their life as free persons. I
appeal for the support of Member Governments to
make that possible.
The cooperation between States and the Tribunal
is a two-way street. Over the past year, the Office of
the Prosecutor has responded to over 100 requests for
mutual legal assistance in connection with proceedings
that national prosecuting authorities are conducting in
relation to crimes committed in Rwanda in 1994. The
number of such requests continues to increase and the
services of the Tribunal to national prosecuting
authorities become more and more important, as it is
they who will bear the burden of continuing the fight
against impunity after the Tribunal has closed down.
We therefore have to ensure that the residual
mechanism will be in a position to continue with that
essential support.
The Tribunal has submitted its revised estimates
for the rest of the 2010-2011 biennium. Despite some
delays, the progress seen in our completion strategy is
significant and the downsizing process is ongoing.

10-57241

Therefore, I am convinced that what we have achieved
so far will give the Assembly the confidence and the
trust to provide us with the necessary resources to
complete our mandate expeditiously during this and the
next biennium.
The Security Council continues its discussions on
the structure and functioning of the residual
mechanism for our Tribunal and our sister Tribunal in
The Hague. A resolution on that issue in the near future
will help us in preparing in the best possible manner
for a timely and smooth transition to that residual
mechanism. The preparatory work is time- and
resource-intensive, in particular with respect to the
archives of the Tribunal. They will document our
legacy and will form part of the historical memory for
the Rwandans and indeed for the entire international
community. We have to ensure that they will be easily
accessible in the future for all those who may be
interested, the general public and researchers.
I should like to conclude by once again thanking
Member Governments for the support they have
provided to the Tribunal over the past years. The
Assembly has walked this path with us for over
15 years, and we need its support in the last laps of this
journey, in the interest of the victims and of
international justice. We strive to earn that support with
our unceasing committed efforts.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the General Assembly, I thank the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
I now call on Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
Mr. Robinson: At the outset, I wish to
congratulate the President on his assumption of the
presidency of the General Assembly and to express my
gratitude for his country’s steadfast support for the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia.
It is an honour to appear before the Assembly
today in my capacity as President of the Tribunal and
to present the Tribunal’s seventeenth annual report
(A/65/205) to the General Assembly.
During the reporting period, the Tribunal faced
unprecedented challenges but also made unprecedented
advances in the implementation of its completion
strategy.

3

A/65/PV.27

Ten trials were conducted simultaneously in the
Tribunal’s three courtrooms, and the second of the
Tribunal’s three multiaccused trials, Prosecutor v.
Popović et al., was brought to a close. The Tribunal has
succeeded in conducting proceedings in 10 trials
concurrently by doubling up judges and staff so that
they are working on more than one case. In addition,
the Tribunal also handled three contempt cases,
disposing of two.
Currently there are nine trials ongoing, with a
tenth case being returned to the pretrial stage following
the Appeals Chamber’s decision to grant the
Prosecution’s request for a retrial in the case of
Haradinaj et al. It is anticipated that the Haradinaj
retrial will commence in the new year.
Judgements are anticipated to be delivered in the
Đorđević trial next month and in the Gotovina et al.
trial the following month. An additional two trials —
that of Perišić and the final multiaccused case of Prlić
et al. — will conclude in 2011. Five trials, including
the Haradinaj retrial, are anticipated to conclude in
2012, and the final case, that of Karadžić, should be
completed towards the end of 2013.
All appeals are still scheduled to be completed by
the end of 2014, although the recent unavoidable
delays in the Karadžić case suggest that that date has
become exceedingly optimistic and will have to be
reassessed at an appropriate time.
In total, the Tribunal has completed proceedings
in relation to 126 persons overall, with 13 cases
remaining to be completed.
The Tribunal continues to take all measures
possible to expedite its trials, without sacrificing due
process. However, as these anticipated completion
dates show, the estimates for the completion of trials
from the last reporting period have had to be
substantially amended. That is the result of unforeseen
factors not immediately within the Tribunal’s control,
including witness intimidation, failure of witnesses to
appear, illness of accused, the complexities associated
with cases of self-represented accused, and staff
attrition. Those factors are fully detailed in my report
to the Security Council of May 2010 (S/2010/270,
annex I).
It must be underscored that the trial schedule
produced by the Tribunal is a forecast only and is
estimated by reference to factors identified as falling

4

within the Tribunal’s control. But there are important
influences on the trial schedule that are not within the
Tribunal’s control.
To give but one example, earlier this year the
national authorities of Serbia discovered new evidence
relevant to at least six of the Tribunal’s cases, namely
18 military notebooks of Ratko Mladić allegedly
written during the period from 1991 to 1995. The
discovery of that new evidence has the potential to
delay all of those trials and could not have been
foreseen when the trial estimates were generated. For
the most part, it is not possible to ascertain the precise
impact of that new evidence, but it would seem that the
minimum delay would be a period of about three
months.
But more generally, it has to be understood that
assessments that are made prior to the commencement
of a trial are really nothing more than guesstimates. For
example, the Trial Chamber in the Karadžić case, in
assessing the time it would take to complete the trial,
considered it a fair assessment to allocate to Karadžić
the same time for the cross-examination of Prosecution
witnesses as it allowed the Prosecution for its own
examination
of
its
witness.
However,
the
unprecedented volume of written material tendered
through those witnesses has necessitated a significant
increase in the time allotted to Karadžić for crossexamination, and that could not have been anticipated
at an early stage of the proceedings.
That is the nature of trials, particularly trials of
the complexity of those heard at the Tribunal. It is
often the case that assessments made with the best of
intentions prior to the commencement of a trial are
shown to have been overly optimistic once the trial has
commenced. There is nothing unusual about that. As I
have said on many previous occasions, the estimation
of the length of trial and appeal proceedings is more an
art than a science. That is something that the
international community needs to respect.
It has occurred to us at the Tribunal that the
misunderstanding that Member States have in respect
of the time taken to complete the Tribunal’s mandate is
partially, if not wholly, due to the novelty of the
exercise in which the United Nations is now involved
in relation to the Tribunal. In the past, the United
Nations has wound up administrative bodies such as
peacekeeping operations. The Organization has
therefore developed a practice and a culture with

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

regard to exit strategies for such bodies. But the
Tribunal is not an administrative body. It is a court of
law, and as such it will always be prone to a certain
degree of unforeseeability, which is a natural element
in most kinds of judicial work, particularly in trials as
complicated as those at the Tribunal.

consultations has been complicated by the need to take
into account the competing obligations of judges and
staff to other cases. While the Tribunal has increased
its trial capacity from conducting six trials
simultaneously to 10 trials, it has not seen a
comparative increase in its resources.

The Tribunal cannot be wound up as though it
were a bakery producing bread. It can be wound up
properly only with appropriate sensitivity to the
judicial character of its work. To apply to the Tribunal
in this, the final stages of its life, the mindset and
culture that are relevant to the closure of administrative
bodies like peacekeeping operations is wholly wrong
and, what is more, is bound to have an effect on the
Tribunal’s capacity, and indeed duty, to deliver justice
in a fair and impartial manner, as will become apparent
in what follows.

Another factor that has impacted our work is the
constant departure of the Tribunal’s highly experienced
staff for more secure employment elsewhere.
Experienced staff continue to leave at an alarming rate.
In Chambers alone, the Tribunal has witnessed a 21 per
cent attrition rate. The impact of those departures on
the expeditious completion of the Tribunal’s trials and
appeals is profound, and I have consistently warned the
Security Council and the Assembly that the work of the
Tribunal will be protracted if we are unable to retain
staff and are forced to constantly recruit and train new
staff.

However, I should also underscore that, when
delays are shown to be inevitable and fully justifiable,
judges do not simply accept them as part and parcel of
the trial process. They proactively devise and
implement measures to reduce such delays by, for
example, increasing court hearings and reducing the
number of witnesses to be heard in a case. For example,
in the Karadžić case, the Trial Chamber has announced
its intention to adopt measures to reduce the slippage
resulting from its recent decision to allot more time to
Mr. Karadžić in the interests of fairness.
In that regard, I am bound to point out that judges,
and in fact all staff at the Tribunal, feel the pressure of
the completion strategy and of the international
community to expedite the work of the Tribunal. And
as a judge and as President of the Tribunal, I must say I
find that troubling. Judges are entitled to, and indeed
must work in, an environment free from all external
pressures, so that their judicial independence is not,
and does not appear to be, compromised. In that regard,
I note that motions have been filed by parties accusing
the judges of taking decisions for the sole purpose of
expediting the proceedings and in some cases alleging
that that was done in response to the completion
strategy and not on the basis of the merits of the case
and without regard for the fairness of those
proceedings.
There are some other obvious causes of delay that
cut across all the Tribunal’s trials, and some are simply
unavoidable. First is the doubling up of judges and
staff. The scheduling of hearings, deliberations and

10-57241

I have called upon the United Nations to assist
the Tribunal in devising incentives to retain its highly
qualified staff. I have also identified measures that
could be taken to alleviate staff attrition rates. However,
to date very little has been achieved.
The General Assembly offered us a measure of
hope through its adoption of resolution 63/256, in
December 2008, which authorized the Tribunal to offer
contracts to staff in line with planned post reductions
and the prevailing trial schedules. However, despite the
clear language and intention of the resolution, it has
not been implemented, because the budgetary
authorities at United Nations Headquarters consider the
Tribunal incapable of offering contracts to staff that are
not tied to approved budgetary submissions.
In desperation, I made a direct plea for assistance
to the Security Council in June of this year, and the
Council responded by passing resolution 1931 (2010),
which noted the importance of the Tribunal being
adequately staffed to complete its work expeditiously
and called upon the Secretariat and other relevant
United Nations bodies to continue to work with the
Registrar of the Tribunal in order to find practicable
solutions to address the issue as the Tribunal
approaches the completion of its work.
In the meantime, the Tribunal is still pressing for
action to be taken, as we continue to lose our highly
experienced and essential staff, and as the
expeditiousness of our proceedings continues to suffer
from delays that could be avoided through urgent

5

A/65/PV.27

action by the international community to devise
incentives encouraging our staff to remain with the
Tribunal until they are no longer necessary.

It is for these reasons that the work of the
Tribunal, which has been entrusted to us, is not only
our work but in fact the work of everyone here today. I
therefore call on all States members of the General
I should add that the updated trial schedule has
Assembly to assist us in our commitment to bringing
resulted in the Tribunal’s filing a supplementary budget,
the work of the Tribunal to a close, expeditiously and
which is before the Assembly. In so doing, the Tribunal
fairly.
was extremely sensitive to the current economic
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
climate, and has requested only that which it
considered absolutely necessary in order to ensure that the President of the International Tribunal for the
our expeditious operation is not compromised. In that Former Yugoslavia.
regard, I note that the efficiency and productivity of the
Mr. Iddi (United Republic of Tanzania): Let me,
Tribunal far surpass those of any other comparable
on behalf of my delegation, thank the Presidents of the
institution, and that is despite the many challenges it
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
has faced during the reporting period.
and the International Tribunal for the Former
There is one final matter that I feel compelled to Yugoslavia (ICTY), Mr. Dennis Byron and Mr. Patrick
raise before the Assembly yet again. I refer to my Robinson, respectively, for their comprehensive reports
commitment as President of the Tribunal to ensuring to the Assembly. I should like to express my
the establishment of a trust fund for victims from the Government’s sincere appreciation for the enormous
former Yugoslavia. The International Criminal Court efforts that the two Presidents have made to spearhead
and the 113 States that have ratified the Rome Statute the work of the Tribunals to Member States’
have demonstrated by their establishment of a trust satisfaction. Tanzania fully appreciates the extent of
fund for victims that they accept that justice must not the accomplishments that the principals of the
only be retributive, but that it must also be restorative Tribunals have been able to achieve over the past year,
if peace is to be lasting. It is my intention, as President despite all the odds, and we urge them to continue to
of the Tribunal, to take action to end this travesty, and I do so in the challenging times of transition to come.
hope that I will receive the Assembly’s support in
The reports of the Tribunals point to significant
doing so.
progress over the past year, which, as I said, deserves
In closing, I wish to reassure all Member States our sincere appreciation. They reveal that the Tribunals
that the Tribunal’s commitment to the completion have continued their efforts to complete their
strategy remains steadfast and that we are taking all remaining workload at both the trial and the appeal
measures within our power to expedite our proceedings, levels, and have thus far succeeded significantly.
while still fully respecting the rights of the accused to Without referring to the statistics, I also wish to
due process. I would also ask that all Member States commend the Tribunals for their efforts to bring
reflect for a moment on the remarkable achievements fugitives to book, and I wish to join the Tribunal
of the Tribunal. It was not so long ago that Presidents in their call on Member States to continue
international criminal justice was but a dream in the cooperating in bringing to justice those fugitives who
minds of those striving for a safer and more just world. remain at large. Speaking for Tanzania, I can assure the
But now the dream has been realized. The Tribunal has Assembly that our Government will continue to extend
demonstrated to the international community that the necessary support to both the ICTR and the ICTY
international humanitarian law is an enforceable body in whatever way we can.
of law, that it binds the conduct of the most senior
It is heartening to note that the Tribunals have
officials, and that the rule of law is a living, breathing
made important preparations as they head towards their
reality that forms part of the fabric of our civilization.
conclusion, including those aimed at avoiding
The Tribunal represents the aspirations of the
unnecessary gaps in the dispensation of international
international community to ensure that justice prevails
criminal justice. For instance, in the case of the ICTR,
over impunity, and that is something in which we all
the diffusion of information about its activities has
have a stake.
been enhanced. Outreach projects relating to youth
sensitization and genocide prevention in the Great

6

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

Lakes region have been made possible with the
generous financial support of development partners.
Capacity-building activities for legal professionals in
Rwanda are a good indication that there will be no gap
after the Tribunal concludes its work, as the national
authorities will be able to advance the disposition of
pending cases. We wish to thank all the development
partners that have extended financial support to the
Tribunal, and urge others to follow suit.
It is equally worth noting that the Tribunals have
played an important role in fighting impunity and
promoting the international cause of justice. As the
host country for the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, we have continued to facilitate its smooth
operations in accordance with the provisions of the
Headquarters Agreement. We will continue to do so
during this stage of transition towards the conclusion
of its mandate.
However, we note with concern that the Tribunals
have faced numerous challenges in recent years,
especially in the difficult area of staffing. Some staff
members have had to abandon their posts for more
stable and reliable employment elsewhere in the United
Nations system. We would urge the General Assembly
to pronounce on this delicate matter, which hampers a
smooth transition to the conclusion of the Tribunals’
mandate.
Likewise, we note that the reports have revealed
that the Tribunals continued to be hampered by a
shortage of volunteer countries to take acquitted
persons and where convicted persons could serve their
sentences. This is a serious problem that should be
addressed jointly. We therefore call upon Member
States to consider accepting this noble responsibility.
Another challenge facing the Tribunals is the fact
that a number of fugitives remain at large. We therefore
call upon Member States to continue to cooperate in
search of all fugitives so that they can be brought
before the Tribunals to face justice. Such cooperation
would go a long way towards preventing impunity and
indeed send a strong message to perpetrators of crimes
against humanity. By and large, it would enhance the
full realization of the celebrated principle of “extradite
or prosecute”, and thus deny safe haven to perpetrators
of heinous crimes.
As rightly stated in the report of the ICTR, “State
cooperation remains the cornerstone of the Tribunal’s
ability to complete its mandate” (A/65/188, para. 85).

10-57241

We call upon Member States to provide such
cooperation. We also urge Member States to consider
extending cooperation with regard to acquitted and
convicted persons, and to continue to provide the
Tribunals with the necessary resources so that they are
able to complete their work within the intended time
frame.
As the Tribunals draw closer to completing their
mandates, the United Republic of Tanzania has been
following with great interest the deliberations of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, chaired by Austria, on the
various options for the Tribunals’ residual mechanisms
and archives. To this end, the Government of Tanzania
considers that it would be desirable for sensitive
records of the Tribunals containing confidential records
to continue to be kept in a safe, peaceful, stable
environment accessible to the United Nations and
authorized persons without administrative bottlenecks,
security concerns or political constraints.
Tanzania is ready and willing to continue to host
the residual mechanism and the archives with the same
dedication and commitment we have demonstrated
throughout the operation of the ICTR from its
inception. We strongly believe that the infrastructure
already in place is suitable to maintain the records of
the Tribunal as an important historical learning
institution for the benefit of our future generations.
In conclusion, let me once again renew my
Government’s commitment to the cause of
international criminal justice by deed and action. We
will continue to provide the facilities necessary for the
smooth conclusion of the work of the ICTR, as well to
ensure that all issues relating to residual functions will
be handled with even greater care and due diligence in
Tanzania. We hope to be able to offer a helping hand as
we have always done. Together, we can overcome all
of these hurdles.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Montenegro; the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, Armenia and
Georgia align themselves with this declaration.

7

A/65/PV.27

This year once again, the European Union
reaffirms its unwavering support for the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Both Tribunals are making invaluable
contributions to our shared goal of ending impunity for
serious international crimes. The European Union
thanks both President Robinson and President Byron
for their reports (A/65/205 and A/65/188) and
commends them for their efforts in completing the
work of the Tribunals. The European Union also pays
special tribute to the work of all the staff of the
Tribunals.
The Tribunals have played key roles in
strengthening the rule of law and promoting long-term
stability and reconciliation — and not only in the
Balkans and Rwanda. Their jurisprudence has had far
wider effects. Since their establishment, both Tribunals
have embodied the need to fight impunity and the
international community’s refusal to let perpetrators of
the most serious crimes of international concern escape
justice. They have been forerunners in creating
jurisprudence that is a source of inspiration for all
national and international jurisdictions that will have to
address such crimes. Their records bear that out.
International criminal justice does exist; it prevails,
and sooner or later the perpetrators will be held
accountable for their heinous crimes.
The European Union recalls that State
cooperation — in particular cooperation in bringing
those indicted to justice — remains the cornerstone of
the Tribunals’ ability to complete their mandates. In
this respect, the European Union commends the
cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Ugandan authorities for the arrest and transfer
to the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
during the past year of Grégoire Ndahimana,
Idelphonse Nizeyimana and Jean Bosco Uwinkindi.
However, despite continuing appeals by the
international community, altogether 12 accused
individuals remain at large, of whom two have been
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and 10 have been indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The
failure to arrest these indictees remains a matter of
grave concern to the European Union. Among those
still at large are five key indictees allegedly
responsible for the most serious atrocities, including
Ratko Mladić, Goran Hadžić and Félicien Kabuga. We

8

call on all States, and in particular States of the
relevant regions, to further intensify their efforts to
ensure that all indictees are arrested and surrendered to
the Tribunals.
The European Union notes that the cooperation of
Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia was generally adequate during the reporting
period, although some important issues remain to be
addressed. While there are many commendable
instances of cooperation, the European Union
continues to urge all States to cooperate immediately
and unconditionally with both Tribunals, in full
adherence to their obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions regarding the arrest and
surrender of remaining fugitives and the transfer of any
documents requested by the Prosecutors.
The European Union remains committed to
ensuring that all indictees face justice. In this regard,
the European Union would like to recall that
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia is essential in relation to the
European Union’s Stabilization and Association
Process.
With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the European Union notes with
appreciation that the Prosecutor has held fruitful highlevel discussions with officials of several States on the
issue of cooperation with his Office, but regrets that
cooperation with Kenya remains a major challenge.
The European Union calls on the Kenyan authorities to
engage in further discussions with the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, as offered
by the Kenyan representative in the Security Council
debate of 18 June, on the present whereabouts of the
fugitive Félicien Kabuga (see S/PV.6342).
In recognition of strengthened domestic capacity,
the Security Council, in its resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004), called on the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to transfer
all lower- and mid-level accused to competent national
jurisdictions for trial by domestic courts. The European
Union welcomes the ongoing efforts of Rwanda, in
cooperation with international donors, to strengthen the
Rwandan legal system and its ability to adjudicate
cases from the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, and expresses the hope that these reforms will

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

permit the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
to transfer the cases of lower-level accused to the
Rwandan courts for trial and thus allow the Tribunal to
complete its work. The European Union confirms its
commitment to supporting activities aimed at
strengthening the capacity of the Rwandan judiciary.
The European Union regrets that there has been
further slippage in the completion timelines due to a
number of factors, some outside the Tribunal’s control,
including the late capture and transfer of fugitive
indictees. The European Union urges the Tribunals to
continue to identify further measures that will allow
them to complete their work as efficiently and
promptly as possible. However, the completion of the
Tribunals’ work should be done in an orderly manner
and not affect the quality of their adjudication and due
process. We acknowledge the importance of adequate
resources and of retaining qualified staff to enable the
Tribunals to complete their proceedings as soon as
possible. However, at the same time, it is important
that the Tribunals use their available resources as
efficiently as possible.
The European Union further welcomes the
progress made on residual issues by the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, including the preparation of a draft
resolution and draft statute on the establishment of a
residual mechanism. We highly value the open and
transparent work of the Informal Working Group on
those issues, under its Austrian chairmanship. We stand
ready to work with the Security Council to find the
most appropriate and cost-effective solutions to the
issues of legacy and residual functions. The European
Union also supports the idea of the establishment of
information centres in the countries of the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda to facilitate access to the
public records of the Tribunals by the interested public.
Ms. Robertson (Australia): It is my honour to
speak on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(CANZ). Canada, Australia and New Zealand wish to
take this opportunity to reaffirm our strong support for
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We thank Judge
Robinson and Judge Byron for being present here
today and for providing the comprehensive overview of
the reports of their respective Tribunals to us
(A/65/205 and A/65/188).

10-57241

We believe that the Tribunals and the
international community can be proud of the many
achievements the Tribunals have achieved to date. The
Tribunals have made an unprecedented contribution to
the international community’s goal of ending impunity
for serious crimes. Their jurisprudence has enriched
our understanding of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, as well as the practice and
procedures of international criminal law. By fostering
the development of national courts, the Tribunals have
strengthened the rule of law. Through their outreach
and coordination activities, the Tribunals have fostered
reconciliation and demonstrated that peace and justice
can be pursued in tandem.
We welcome the efforts being made to utilize the
legal and institutional legacies of the Tribunals to
inform the work of other international criminal
tribunals and to promote the advancement of
international criminal justice.
CANZ appreciates the efforts being made by both
the ICTY and the ICTR to achieve the goals set out in
their respective completion strategies. We welcome in
particular the ICTY’s implementation of the
recommendations of its Working Group on Speeding
up Trials and the ICTR’s issuing of practice directions
aimed at improving the management of trials.
CANZ recognizes that, in moving into the
completion phase of their work, both Tribunals are
facing significant challenges. It is evident from the
reports of the Tribunals that a key issue of concern is
the fugitive status of 12 indictees. It is imperative that
all remaining indictees be surrendered and that States
make special efforts to ensure that high-level indictees
Ratko Mladić, Goran Hadžić, Félicien Kabuga, Protais
Mpiranya and Augustin Bizimana face trial. As noted
by the Tribunals themselves, decisive and intensified
action by the relevant authorities is critical in this
regard.
It is equally important that the international
community respond to the calls of the Tribunals for
assistance in developing creative approaches to assist
with the retention of essential staff. We accept that the
Tribunals are being asked to undertake an ever-more
onerous workload at a time when they are losing
experienced personnel at an alarming rate as staff
members seek out positions with greater job security.
We hope that the Secretariat and other relevant bodies
will continue to work with the Registrars of the

9

A/65/PV.27

Tribunals to find practicable solutions to these very
pressing problems.

by the task ahead of us — to create a living legacy out
of that momentous effort.

CANZ recognizes that the completion of the
Tribunals’ mandates will not mean an end to all of the
Tribunals’ functions. It has long been understood that
there will be activities — such as the trial of
subsequently captured fugitives, the enforcement of
sentences, the protection of witnesses, the provision of
assistance to national authorities and the management
of archives — that must be continued. We welcome the
efforts being made by the Tribunals in that regard, as
well as those being undertaken by the Government of
Rwanda to address the impediments to the referral of
cases to Rwanda by the ICTR.

The Tribunals represent our effort to apply the
rule of law to those who have used their powers to
destroy the fabric of peace and committed
unimaginable atrocities. The significance of that effort
to ensure justice is not to be measured in isolation. It is
part of a larger ongoing movement to align
international law with the moral sense of humankind so
as to ensure that the reach of justice extends to every
corner of the world. It is our responsibility to ensure
that, years after the last office in the ICTY and the
ICTR headquarters has been vacated, the legacy of the
two Tribunals continues to ring. But how can that be
done? What exactly is or will be the legacy of the two
Tribunals?

We also note the reports and recommendations
made by the Security Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals in relation to the
establishment of a mechanism to carry out the residual
functions of the ICTY and the ICTR. We encourage the
ongoing discussion of those issues. While the situation
faced by every criminal tribunal is unique, those
discussions and their eventual outcomes will no doubt
be of great assistance to future planning undertaken in
relation to the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia, the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
The successful completion of the work of the
ICTY and the ICTR will require the cooperation and
support of all States. We call upon States to give
practical effect to their commitment to an effective
system of international criminal justice. For our part,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand will continue to
offer the Tribunals our full support and cooperation in
this vital and challenging stage of their existence.
Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): As the
Presidents of the two Tribunals have outlined in their
respective annual reports (A/65/205 and A/65/188), the
achievements of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) are so many as
to render it impossible to give appropriate credit to
them all. The staff members of the Tribunal and
anonymous individuals working behind the scenes to
support the Tribunals’ work deserve our tribute of great
gratitude and respect for that. The time is quickly
approaching for the closure of both the ICTY and the
ICTR. Now more than ever, we must remain humbled

10

In my mind, the legacy of the Tribunals is
threefold. First, on a technical level, the ICTY and the
ICTR have built a foundation for the development of
international criminal law. The Tribunals will leave
behind a valuable legal asset that includes the rules of
procedure, practices and judgements of the Tribunals.
Secondly, the institutional legacy of the two
Tribunals has sown the seeds for the creation of other
international and hybrid criminal courts around the
world. Having simultaneously contributed to the
development of national judiciaries to hold fair and
effective war crimes proceedings, the ICTY and the
ICTR set the standard for the principle of
complementarity to gain ground in the paradigm of
international justice.
Thirdly, the legacy of creating regional peace and
stability reminds us that only when we make all people
answerable to the law can we cast away tyranny and
violence. Today, the Tribunals have done much to
provide a sense of justice and reconciliation to the
victims and to society at large.
The next question is: What can we do to ensure
the utilization of the legal and institutional advances
that have resulted from the Tribunals? In short, how
can we secure the legacy?
The mortar for that effort will be the completion
strategy of the two Tribunals and, subsequently, the
residual mechanisms. While the Security Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
continues to determine the residual functions and what
form and structure they should take, it is equally

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

imperative for us to continuously relate that initiative
to a broader context.
Let us continue to take into account the rights of
all individuals concerned and offer our cooperation and
support to national authorities. As part of their
completion strategies, the Tribunals should intensify
their efforts to refer further cases to national
jurisdictions, which would strengthen domestic
judiciaries and act as a catalyst for legal reform. On
that note, we must express clearly the jurisdictional
continuity between the Tribunals and the mechanisms.
We must also call upon the experienced staff of
the Tribunals to provide institutional knowledge and
experience to the residual mechanisms, especially
through the prudent management of the Tribunals’
archives. Creating a separate regime to govern the
management of and access to the archives, including
confidential information, would be a good place to start.
We must also ensure that national judges, prosecutors
and lawyers have easy access to them, as well as to the
tools to understand them.

presidency, let me add my voice to the warm words of
congratulations extended to the President of the
General Assembly by the head of Ghana’s delegation
during the high-level segment of the general debate
and reiterate my delegation’s best wishes for his
success as he presides over the affairs of this Assembly
during its sixty-fifth session.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his two notes (A/65/188 and A/65/205), respectively
forwarding the comprehensive reports of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY).

My delegation also expresses deep gratitude to
the President of the ICTR, Judge Charles Michael
Dennis Byron, and the President of the ICTY, Judge
Patrick Robinson, for their thorough presentations of
their respective annual reports. We are pleased to learn
of the progress being made concerning the respective
completion strategies of the two Tribunals. We
comment on these two reports mindful that an accused
person is presumed innocent until proven guilty and
One of the most difficult issues facing us today is
bearing in mind the commitment made by the
the fact that several high-level fugitives remain at large.
international community to preventing and deterring
As individuals, their fates may be of little consequence
mass atrocities and to bringing to justice the
to the world; what makes them significant to us and to
perpetrators of such heinous crimes.
the communities affected is that they are living
symbols of atrocity, oppression and cruelty — the
The jurisprudence of the ICTR and the ICTY, like
darkest forces that demoralize a society.
that of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and other ad
hoc or hybrid tribunals, has contributed significantly to
Today, let us call upon all States to intensify
the strengthening of the legal regime of international
cooperation with the Tribunals to achieve the arrest and
criminal justice. The practice of engaging in a process
surrender of those fugitives. We cannot allow a culture
of dialogue among judges of the International Court of
of impunity to gain ground and give strength to such
Justice, the International Criminal Court and other ad
sinister forces. Those individuals will be brought to
hoc or hybrid tribunals will help to minimize or
justice and the mandate of the Tribunals fulfilled.
address concerns about the fragmentation of
The Republic of Korea will always be one of the international law and promote the rule of law and
most vocal supporters of the movement for respect for human rights.
international justice. The work of the ICTY and the
Ghana welcomes initiatives reflected in the
ICTR has proven to be pivotal to that movement. We
reports of the ICTR and ICTY to build archival records
look forward to the drawdown of the Tribunals in a
as part of their legacy to guide the future behaviour of
smooth and efficient manner. That is what we have
individuals and States. Perhaps a more durable legacy
achieved, but it is just the beginning. Now that task
will be for the international community to draw
falls to us, for those institutions will become what we
appropriate lessons from the legacy of cases or
make of their legacies. I wish for the future of
jurisprudence of the Tribunals in order to enhance the
international justice to stand high on the shoulders of
capacity of States Members of this Organization to
the ICTY and the ICTR.
undertake preventative action. The victims must also
Mr. Appreku (Ghana): This being the first time I continue to receive attention even after the work of the
have taken the floor since his assumption of the Tribunals is wound up. With a view to facilitating the

10-57241

11

A/65/PV.27

attainment of their completion targets, the requests of
the Tribunals for the various resource challenges
outlined in the reports before this Assembly to be
addressed deserve careful consideration.
The
need
for
prevention
cannot
be
overemphasized. Indeed, as a result of the experience
of violent civil wars and other violent conflicts that
have occurred on the continent of Africa, including
within our own subregion of West Africa, particularly
in the 1980s and 1990s, the African Union (AU) and
regional organizations on the continent have resolved
to take a more proactive active stance to prevent
conflicts or to take timely and decisive action when
prevention fails. Thus, for example, under the
Constitutive Act of the African Union, AU member
States have conferred a treaty right on the Union to
intervene at the request of any member State in
situations of genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity upon the recommendation of the AU Peace
and Security Council.
Pursuant to these provisions, the African Union
has developed the African Standby Force arrangement
and requested logistical and financial support from the
international community to ensure that the force can be
rapidly deployed for prevention or decisive action on
the continent of Africa, in accordance with the United
Nations Charter. African countries also joined the
consensus in this Assembly when it adopted the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), in particular
paragraphs 138, 139 and 140, in which world leaders
accepted their responsibility to protect their
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Adviser for the Responsibility to Protect and his
Special Representative for the Prevention of Genocide
and Mass Atrocities. Furthermore, early this year, the
Government of Ghana invited to Accra the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative for the Prevention of
Genocide and Mass Atrocities to exchange views on
measures to address the root causes of conflict, thereby
preventing genocide and other serious crimes within
the region of the Economic Community of West
African States.
I wish to conclude by commending the outreach
programmes undertaken by the ICTR and other
tribunals aimed at educating young people and other
segments of the population, for it is a truth that bears
repeating that, since war begins in the thoughts of men
and women, it is in the minds of men and women that
the defences of peace must be built. We must diligently
and passionately inculcate the culture of peace and
tolerance among all nations and civilizations.
The United Nations has answered the call made
in the African Union’s Kigali Declaration to
commemorate 7 April as a day of remembrance of the
victims of genocide in Rwanda and to renew our
commitment to the prevention of genocide in the world.
If or when the next mass atrocities threaten or do occur,
the international community must be prepared and
ready to answer the call to prevent them or take
appropriate action in a more timely and decisive
manner than it has done in the past.

Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me at the outset to welcome Judge Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Judge Charles Michael
As we consider the reports of the ICTY and ICTR Dennis Byron, President of the International Criminal
today, we should recall that which led to the Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and to thank them for
establishment of the Tribunals in the first place and their comprehensive and detailed reports (A/65/205
work at managing our ethnic or racial diversities in a and A/65/188) and briefings in today’s meeting. We
manner that will promote national integration and unity, commend their hard work in fighting impunity and
foster inter-ethnic harmony and prevent mass atrocities. their dedication to the cause of justice, as their every
To this end, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Ghana action uncompromisingly states that war crimes,
and Denmark co-hosted in New York a side event on genocide and crimes against humanity will not go
24 September 2010, attended by ministers for foreign unpunished. In addition, we find it necessary to
affairs and other ministers from some 25 countries in a mention the tireless work of all the staff of the
cross-regional endeavour to explore ways of moving Tribunals.
beyond the concept to the effective operationalization
We are also obliged to take note of all the efforts
of the responsibility to protect populations from
the Tribunals make to successfully complete their work,
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
and to provide them with all the necessary support.
against humanity. This will no doubt complement the
More than ever, we are convinced that a hasty closure
initiatives of the Secretary-General and his Special

12

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

would irrevocably undermine and tarnish their legacy,
a legacy that without a doubt represents one of the
cornerstones on which the international criminal justice
system as we know it today is built. We strongly agree
with the remarks made by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon on 17 July 2008 at the commemoration of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, when he stated that
the fight against impunity started in earnest with the
establishment of the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. Those
courts pioneered the emergence of international
criminal justice and the enforcement of international
humanitarian law. We must therefore not allow the
groundbreaking contributions of the Tribunals to
international jurisprudence to fall victim to pressure to
conclude their mandate, ending with partial results and
without adequate resolution.
I would also like to extend our appreciation to
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for his firm leadership in
chairing the Informal Working Group on the Tribunals.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great importance to
work of the Group, and further commends the Austrian
delegation for efficiently steering its deliberations,
with the valuable assistance of the Office of Legal
Affairs, to an adequate and credible residual
mechanism that will be the Tribunals’ legacy.
It is encouraging indeed that during the reporting
period of the ICTR three more fugitives were arrested,
bringing the total number of fugitives down to 10. On
the other hand, it is disappointing and frustrating that
Félicien Kabuga, Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić still
manage to evade justice and mock the entire
international community. We can appeal to the
Tribunals to comply with the completion strategy and
tirelessly work on the residual mechanism, but all of
that is useless unless we take some firm steps and
serious measures to bring those criminals to justice.
Only then — I repeat, only then — will we be able to
say that every condition of the founding resolutions of
the Tribunals has been met and their assigned mandates
fulfilled. For that matter, it is beyond doubt that the
unconditional cooperation of the relevant international
and regional organizations and States is essential and
necessary for the complete fulfilment of the Tribunals’
mandates.
I therefore underline the strong commitment of
my country to its obligations, and our undeniable
support and dedication to strengthening international

10-57241

criminal justice. The ICTY report before us (A/65/205),
as well as the previous ones, reflects that commitment
through the record of a steady and positive cooperation
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Tribunal. As
stated, the authorities of my country have effectively
responded to all requests of the Prosecutor’s Office,
providing documents, enabling unobstructed access to
Government archives and facilitating the appearance of
witnesses before the Tribunal. The cooperation has
been particularly constructive with regard to the
rule 11 bis cases transferred by the Office of the
Prosecutor to the War Crimes Chamber of the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Five of the six cases
transferred to Bosnia and Herzegovina have been
completed with final decisions.
Allow me to conclude by underlining that
throughout the years Bosnia and Herzegovina’s support
for the Tribunals, especially the ICTY, has been
unwavering, and today we reaffirm that support once
again. As the country most affected by the crimes
under the jurisdiction of one of the Tribunals, we
cannot emphasize enough how important it is to bring
justice to the victims and their families and to hold
accountable those who committed those heinous crimes.
Thus, we regard the work of the Tribunals in fighting
impunity as of the highest importance, as they have
advanced the rule of law in affected regions, brought
justice to those who suffered the most and eventually
paved the path towards reconciliation.
Mr. Panin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, let me express our appreciation
to the Presidents of both the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their reports (A/65/205 and A/65/188). The Russian
Federation is inalterably committed to the idea of the
dispensation of international criminal justice for the
perpetrators of the most severe crimes under
international law, and recognizes the significant
contribution of the Tribunals to establishing a system
of international criminal justice and to the cause of
restoring peace and justice in States established in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.
The contribution of the Tribunals to developing
the practice of international criminal justice is of an
enduring significance that will most likely only be
truly assessed by future generations. We have no
reservations that those indicted by the Tribunals who
have committed the crimes mentioned but who for

13

A/65/PV.27

various reasons are still at large must be brought to
stand before the law. We have consistently supported
and we now support the efforts of the two Tribunals to
deal with those fugitives. Both here in the Assembly
and in the Security Council, we have repeated our
assessment of the work of the Tribunals every year in
response to the Tribunal reports, and we are willing to
reaffirm now every word we have previously said.
Still, there is, unfortunately, a negative side to the
work of the Tribunals that diminishes its positive
aspect. The Tribunals have long since exceeded the
deadlines for their existence, thereby conflicting with
Security Council resolutions on a completion strategy
for their work. We are convinced that such a situation
does a disservice, both to the international community
and to the Tribunals themselves, and we intend to
continue to press to resolve this matter.
Moreover, an examination of the prospects for
moving the Tribunals’ work to completion leaves little
room for optimism. According to recent information
provided by the Tribunals this year, the Rwandan
Tribunal planned to close cases in the trial phase in
2011 and the recent appeals at the end of 2013. The
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia was looking to
close cases in the trial phase in 2012 and the recent
appeal litigation in the Karadžić case in 2014. Those
deadlines are very noticeably later than the dates
provided in 2009 — and have since been extended —
so we cannot escape the feeling that even these
extended deadlines are not final. One cannot help being
alarmed by the continuously significant extensions of
the trials, especially in the ICTY. The Rwandan
Tribunal has done better by comparison, having
provided more accurate forecasts and seeming closer to
concluding their cases.
Our position on this matter of principle remains
unchanged.
The extension of all proceedings beyond 2010 is
an exceptional measure. When one of the Presidents
spoke here, he talked about the future. We would like
to emphasize that we understand the difference
between an ad hoc court and a full court, and we agree
that the Tribunals cannot close their business quickly.
We understand that, when the completion strategy set
the finishing year at 2010, which was supposed to be
the final deadline, and the courts saw that they could
not manage to finish, the courts corrected that.

14

We understand the objective reasons why some
trials have dragged on. For instance, it is completely
understandable why there would be a deadline later
than the one originally planned for the ICTY to
complete the Šešelj case, or a possible extension of the
Tribunal’s operations owing to the decision to start a
partial retrial of the Haradinaj case.
However, we see a number of other significant
differences between the ad hoc and full courts. We will
talk about them later, in a less formal setting.
We are absolutely convinced that the particulars
of those cases, if the work were properly organized,
could not serve as grounds for significantly extending
the Tribunals’ deadline and are truly of no impact
whatsoever on the delays already registered, and that
we are in this situation through the fault of both the
Tribunals and States.
The problems of the extension of deadlines for
the ICTY and ICTR would be fully manageable, if the
efforts of the Tribunals themselves, the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the countries of
the two regions were coordinated and combined.
With respect to the work of the Tribunals, they
have already done much themselves to speed up their
trials. We welcome the efforts to speed up litigation
and to make rational use of court space and staff for
simultaneous hearings on a number of cases. However,
more can be done to optimize the work in this respect.
It is unacceptable that the defendant in the Šešelj
case, which we have already mentioned, had to await
the start of proceedings for over six years, in violation
of all reasonable procedural timelines and his right to a
speedy trial. Such a situation violates even elementary
human concepts of justice. Looking for support to
speed up the trials is, we think, possible and a way to
ensure maximal use of the judges’ work and time.
There have been examples of obvious success in
meeting that challenge. In particular, we are impressed
that the ICTY, in the Popović case, was able to support
the peak workloads of the judges, prosecution and
defence, and we are persuaded that such an intense
pace can be also supported in other cases.
The successful completion of the mandates of the
Tribunals would be helped if States in the region
extended further conscientious cooperation to them.
We call on those States to continue to actively facilitate
the work of the Tribunals through the timely provision

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

of the necessary information and to help in the search
for individuals still at large. We should especially
support the willingness of a number of States to
provide the Tribunal with the opportunity for those
convicted to serve their sentences in that country and,
in the case of Rwanda, even to take on a number of
cases under their national jurisdiction. That would
attest to the progressive development of legal
institutions in post-conflict areas and to the
establishment of the rule of law nationally, which was
one of the major challenges when the Tribunals were
established.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): Let me begin by
welcoming the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge
Patrick Robinson, and the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Mr. Dennis
Byron, and thanking them for their presentation of the
annual reports of the two Tribunals (A/65/205 and
A/65/188).
In this connection, I would like to reiterate
Serbia’s full commitment to cooperate with the ICTY
and to assist in the successful completion of its
mandate. My country has clearly expressed its political
will in that respect and has implemented it through its
efforts towards strong and continuous cooperation with
the Tribunal.
That political will was demonstrated also by the
fact that, on 31 March 2010, the National Assembly of
the Republic of Serbia adopted a declaration
condemning the crime at Srebrenica, an act of
exceptional importance for both Serbia and the entire
region. By that declaration, the National Assembly
gave full support to the work of Government agencies
in charge of processing war crimes and successfully
completing cooperation with ICTY, in which the
locating and arrest of Ratko Mladić and his transfer to
the Tribunal for trial is of particular importance.
Also, the President of Serbia was present at the
Potočari Memorial Centre on 11 July 2010 for the
commemoration of the 15 years since the crime at
Srebrenica. He said on that occasion that Serbia would
not desist from its efforts to track down the
perpetrators of war crimes, and Ratko Mladić in
particular, in order to make it possible for people to
continue to live together.
Regarding the technical aspects of cooperation
with the Tribunal, we consider that a very high level of

10-57241

cooperation has been reached and maintained over the
past several years, which is amply evidenced by the
reports of the ICTY Prosecutor to the Security Council.
That has been made possible by the dedicated work of
both the competent Government agencies of the
Republic of Serbia and the Tribunal, as well as by the
relations of trust and confidence established between
them. Today, excellent professional relations exist
between the representatives of Serbian institutions and
the representatives of the Tribunal, and this is evident.
To illustrate the existing level of cooperation, let
me point out the following. Serbia has thus far
responded in full to almost all the requests received
from the Tribunal related to the provision of
documentation, access to the archives of Serbian
Government agencies, the provision of waivers for
testifying in the proceedings before the Tribunal and all
other technical aspects of cooperation. As stated in the
report of the President of the Tribunal, the cooperation
of Serbia on those issues has been timely and adequate.
We consider it exceptionally important that the
report points out that Serbia has delivered to the
Tribunal the items seized during the search of the
apartment of Ratko Mladić’s family conducted by the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Serbia in
February 2010. Items seized include Mladić’s
notebooks, that is, handwritten wartime notes from the
period from 1991 to 1996. As stated in the report, they
also contain highly valuable evidence in certain other
cases before the Tribunal.
Serbia transferred to the Tribunal 43 persons
indicted for war crimes, while one person committed
suicide prior to being transferred. In addition to the
persons charged with the most serious crimes, Serbia
delivered to the Tribunal all persons found in contempt
of court. Mladić and Hadžić are the only remaining
fugitives. There should be no doubt about the resolve
of the authorities of the Republic of Serbia to arrest
Mladić and Hadžić and transfer them to the Tribunal.
Serbia considers that bringing these two fugitives to
justice, like the 43 before them, is in its best interest.
Serbia is well aware of the suggestions and
concerns regarding the fugitives expressed by the
President of the Tribunal in his report and by the ICTY
Prosecutor in his briefing to the Security Council in
June 2010 (see S/PV.6342). Serbia’s security services,
which are investing enormous efforts in bringing
Mladić and Hadžić to justice, are open to all

15

A/65/PV.27

recommendations and suggestions by the officials of
the Tribunal. We consider it very important that the
Office of the Prosecutor be provided with detailed
information about all the measures that are being taken
in that respect.

Both Tribunals are working hard to fulfil their
mandates. We commend them for their commitment to
implementing their completion strategies, while
ensuring that the standards of due process and
fundamental legal principles are fully respected.

During the recent visit of the President of the
ICTY to Belgrade, a regional project aimed at training
courts in the countries of the former Yugoslavia to
prosecute those accused of war crimes was launched.
Serbia considers that cooperation with the Tribunal and
the prosecution of war crimes in national courts are
basic preconditions for the establishment of the whole
truth about the war crimes committed during the armed
conflicts in the territory of the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. That also represents an
important contribution towards the normalization of
the societies of the region.

The Tribunals must continue to carry out their
work expeditiously, but that endeavour is not without
obstacles. During the reporting period, the Tribunals
faced difficulties in meeting the objectives set out in
their completion strategies owing to the disquieting
impact of staff attrition.

We are therefore firmly committed to continuing
the high level of cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway is a staunch
supporter of the International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The high
standards and achievements of the Tribunals are
reflected in their well-reasoned judgements and the
annual reports before us (A/65/188 and A/65/205). I
would like to thank the Presidents of the Tribunals,
Judges Byron and Robinson, for their informative
reports. They provide a detailed account of the
progress made during the past year.
The Tribunals have made important contributions
to international criminal law. They have developed a
jurisprudence that has set standards for national
tribunals, as well as for other international tribunals.
By effectively prosecuting the perpetrators of the most
serious international crimes, the Tribunals have not
only helped to bring justice to the victims in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia. They have also made
significant achievements in the fight against impunity
for mass atrocities in general.
I would like to focus on three specific issues that
are essential for the success of the Tribunals’ work.
Those are: first, the Tribunals’ continued efforts to
implement their completion strategies; secondly, the
cooperation of Member States; and thirdly, the work on
residual issues.

16

In that regard, we welcome Security Council
resolutions 1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010), which
extended the terms of 39 judges in total. Furthermore,
the resolutions called on relevant United Nations
bodies to explore ways to address the staffing issue as
the Tribunals approach completion of their work.
The Tribunals cannot successfully fulfil their
mandates without the full cooperation of States. It is
crucial that States give both Tribunals their unreserved
support. All States must honour their obligations to
provide full and effective assistance to the Tribunals.
Here, we would like to highlight two challenges,
namely, the enforcement of sentences and the
remaining fugitives. The responsibility to enforce
sentences must be shared by more States. We
encourage States to enter into agreements on the
enforcement of sentences, and we look forward to more
such agreements being concluded.
The failure to arrest the remaining fugitives
continues to be of grave concern to us. It is not
acceptable that perpetrators of serious international
crimes evade legal proceedings. Member States must
fulfil their obligation to arrest them and transfer them
to the Tribunals without delay. I am pleased to note the
determination just expressed from this rostrum by my
colleague from Serbia.
We are pleased to note that three fugitives have
been arrested since the last report (A/64/205). However,
12 fugitives are still at large. We cannot rest until the
remaining fugitives are apprehended and brought
before the court. Impunity is not an option.
How the residual issues of the Tribunals should
be dealt with is a pending issue for the Security
Council. While we commend the Tribunals for their
efforts, we would also urge them to ensure that as

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

much work on residual issues as possible is carried out
before the completion dates.
We welcome the ongoing work in the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals and the
support provided by the Secretariat. With regard to the
location of the residual mechanisms, Norway supports
an approach that also fully incorporates the needs of
other United Nations-assisted courts, and full
advantage should be taken of possible synergies.
The continuation of the residual activities of the
Tribunals is an important part of their long-term legacy
and is important for their legitimacy and for
international criminal law in general. Norway is a
strong supporter of the rule of law and criminal justice,
and will continue to work actively to assist the
Tribunals in achieving their completion dates.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity that you have
given my delegation to speak in this debate. The
Rwandan delegation thanks the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia for the presentation of their
reports (A/65/188 and A/65/205), and acknowledges
their tireless efforts to successfully carry out their work
and thus accomplish that noble task of doing justice to
humanity.
During the period under consideration, the
Government of the Republic of Rwanda continued to
provide the cooperation needed to enable the ICTR to
execute the mandate conferred on it by the Security
Council. Rwanda continued to facilitate access to
witnesses, whether for the defence or the prosecution,
and to ensure their unimpeded travel to Arusha. In that
regard, the Government continued to support the
Witnesses and Victims Support Section, set up in the
Office of the Prosecutor in Kigali, in order to ensure
full and complete security for witnesses of genocide.
Furthermore, as stated in the report, my Government
continued to support investigations, both by the
prosecution and by the defence, by providing the
documents needed for the trials.
The Government of Rwanda remains committed
to continuing to provide its full support for the ICTR’s
completion strategy, as set out in Security Council
resolution 1503 (2003).

10-57241

However, my delegation regrets the delay in
meeting the deadline for the completion of work and
notes the Tribunal’s commitment to conclude trials of
first instance by 2011 and appeals by the end of 2013.
As the report indicates, Rwanda will continue to
cooperate with the ICTR in order to remove any
obstacle to the transfer of cases that are still pending at
the end of the ICTR mandate to Rwandan jurisdiction.
Many legal reforms have been undertaken in that
respect and have been recognized by the ICTR.
In the meantime, my delegation thanks the
Tribunal for transferring to Rwanda the files on 25
suspects. Inquiries have been opened on those suspects
without proceeding to an indictment, in order to enable
us to undertake the appropriate legal procedures. In
that regard, we reiterate the fact that our request to
have the files of cases that have not yet been tried by
the ICTR transferred is based mainly on the fact that
the crimes tried by the ICTR were committed in
Rwanda, by Rwandans against their Rwanda
compatriots. Furthermore, it is appropriate to note that
the evidence and the witnesses come from Rwanda,
and that the justice carried out by the Tribunal will
have a greater impact on Rwanda than on the rest of
the world.
My Government welcomes the arrest of the three
fugitives during the period under consideration:
Grégoire Ndahimana, Idelphonse Nizeyimana and
Jean-Bosco Uwinkindi, and we once again thank the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Uganda for their cooperation in that respect. We
also thank the ICTR for their continuing efforts to
search for and arrest the remaining 10 fugitives. The
Government also expresses its gratitude to the
Governments of Canada, Belgium, Finland, Sweden
and France for their efforts to find and bring to trial
genocide suspects who are in those countries. However,
we regret that some countries have not yet extended the
necessary cooperation to the ICTR or the Rwandan
Government, and we therefore support the appeal of
the President of the ICTR in that regard.
My Government has often reiterated its views on
the transfer to Rwanda of the records of the ICTR at
the end of its mandate. Our request is based on the fact
that those documents are an integral part of our history.
They are essential to preserving the memory of the
genocide, as they will play an essential role in the
education of future generations and in preventing

17

A/65/PV.27

future genocides. We note the ongoing process to
determine the final destination of those records, and we
express once again our availability to join the United
Nations discussions on the subject.
Allow me once again to express the concern of
my Government on an issue of great importance,
namely, the increasing trend of defence lawyers in
Arusha and some members of the academic world to
trivialize and openly deny the fact of the genocide,
which nevertheless was recognized by the Security
Council through the very establishment of the ICTR.
Those jurists, who have spoken freely in the
international media, base their remarks on a mistaken
interpretation of the findings of the Tribunal, which is
supported by the recent report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
That worrisome trend is not going to promote the
peace and reconciliation that Rwandans have fought so
hard to achieve. The Government therefore again calls
for those who deny the genocide of Tutsis to be
brought before justice in accordance with Rwandan law,
a law that many other countries also have applied in
other instances of genocide.
To conclude, we reiterate our call for the ICTR to
continue its efforts aimed at respecting its completion
strategy as far as possible, while ensuring that justice is
done by transferring the remaining cases to Rwandan
jurisdiction. Once again, we reiterate our full support
for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
during this critical period of the conclusion of its work.
Mr. Maina (Kenya): My delegation congratulates
the President of the Assembly on his election to preside
over the deliberations of the Assembly at the current
session. We also congratulate the other members of the
Bureau and wish to assure the President of Kenya’s full
support as he discharges his task before the Assembly. I
thank the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for a comprehensive
annual report submitted to the Assembly (A/65/188) in
conformity with the respective statute establishing the
Tribunal.
Kenya, however, notes with concern the
persistent allegations by the Prosecutor of the Tribunal
that the fugitive Mr. Félicien Kabuga resides in Kenya.
On numerous occasions, Kenya has stated its position
on this matter before the Security Council and the
General Assembly. That position was once again

18

reiterated in June 2010 before the Security Council
(see S/PV.6342).
I wish to state from the outset that Kenya has
nothing to gain by harbouring Mr. Kabuga, especially
when Kenya and Rwanda have always enjoyed
excellent and cordial relations. To the contrary, we
have always cooperated and worked closely with the
ICTR with a view to tracing, arresting and indeed
surrendering genocide suspects to the ICTR to face
justice. It is important to mention that 14 suspects have
been arrested and handed over to the ICTR for
prosecution by the Government of Kenya. The
Assembly may wish to note that this is the largest
number of indictees to be apprehended and handed
over to the ICTR by a single jurisdiction.
In September 2009, Kenya concluded an
extradition treaty with the Republic of Rwanda, which
provides, inter alia, for the extradition of Rwandan
genocide suspects. The Government of Kenya has
always played a key role in the relocation, protection
and facilitation of movement of witnesses to the
Tribunal in Arusha, to ensure that the cause of justice is
served expeditiously. To that end, we have expended
considerable resources in the form of material,
equipment and personnel as a contribution to the rule
of law and justice.
In 2007, the Government of Kenya formed a joint
investigation team to search and apprehend
Mr. Félicien Kabuga and to freeze his assets and bank
accounts, including those of his associates in Kenya.
That team discharged its mandate and submitted
periodic reports of its findings to both the Kenyan
Government and the Tribunal. Part of the team’s
findings was that Mr. Kabuga’s wife had invested in
real estate and rents collected were being submitted to
a local financial institution. Further investigations
revealed that those funds had been transferred and
credited to the wife’s bank account in Belgium, where
Mr. Kabuga’s wife and children reside and hold
Belgian passports. Our attorney general promptly
obtained orders from the high court to freeze the bank
accounts in Kenya.
Joint investigations by Kenya and the ICTR into
the alleged sightings of the fugitive in Kenya have
yielded no fruit thus far. The joint investigation team
continues to carry out its mandate with the full support
of the Kenyan Government. The particulars related to
the investigations and actions undertaken are known to

10-57241

A/65/PV.27

the Tribunal. Kenya therefore finds the persistent
allegations that it shows complacency with regard to
apprehending Mr. Kabuga misleading, malicious and
lacking in merit. In this regard, we urge the ICTR and
international agencies to broaden the search for
Mr. Kabuga to include other jurisdictions.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms Kenya’s
commitment to upholding the rule of law. Kenya will
continue to act closely with the ICTR in that regard.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Let me start by expressing
our appreciation to the Presidents of the two Tribunals,
Judges Byron and Robinson, for their comprehensive
and informative reports on the actions taken and
progress made during the period from 1 August 2009 to
31 July 2010 (A/65/188 and A/65/205). My delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the European Union. However, I wish
here to stress a few more items.
The Tribunals’ determined performance, aimed at
the unwavering prosecution of perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide, has
served as a basis for an emerging culture of
accountability and a constant reminder that severe
crimes, regardless of who has committed them, will not
go unpunished. Croatia welcomes the continued
commitment of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 (ICTY) to its completion strategy and the
final conclusion of its work in accordance with its
mandate and without sacrificing due process. In that
context, Croatia supports endeavours by the President
of the Court to further streamline and improve the
Court’s core functions in order to expedite its
proceedings and make its work more efficient.
International ad hoc tribunals were never meant
to replace national courts, but rather to strengthen them
and help them properly fulfil their allotted functions. In
that light and in accordance with relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, Croatia supports calls on the
ICTY to transfer all appropriate cases to competent
national jurisdictions, thereby contributing to the
success of the Tribunal’s exit strategy. My country has
clearly demonstrated its ability to conduct trials of
even the most sensitive cases, including the one case
that was transferred to it by the ICTY.

10-57241

We are glad that the present report has confirmed
Croatia’s general responsiveness to the needs of the
Office of the Prosecutor. Croatia is strongly committed
to full and open cooperation with the Tribunal, as
demonstrated by the close and intense working
relationship established between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Croatian Government at all levels.
We have taken concrete administrative, investigative
and judicial measures in order to meet the requests of
the Office of the Prosecutor to the maximum extent
possible. These efforts were further recognized by the
recent decision of Trial Chamber I in the Gotovina et al.
case.
Let me express once again the deep concern of
my country with the fact that two accused, Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadžić, have continued to evade
justice for much too long — in the case of Mladić, for
more than 15 years. It must be made absolutely clear
that the trial of those fugitives does not hinge on the
Tribunal’s completion strategy dates, and we urge
Member States to do all within their power to ensure,
as a matter of urgency, the apprehension of those
fugitives and their transfer to the Court’s custody. We
fully share the President of the Court’s view that the
failure to bring those persons to justice will leave a
stain on the contribution of the United Nations to
peacebuilding in the former Yugoslavia and that it
remains of grave concern to the proper administration
of justice.
Croatia welcomes further cooperation between
countries in the region in the processing of persons
indicted for war crimes, as well as interaction between
the Tribunal and the Office of the Prosecutor and
competent national authorities responsible for war
crimes prosecutions. In that context, we welcome the
liaison prosecutors project funded by the European
Union, which is designed to bring prosecutors from the
region to work as liaison prosecutors within the Office
of the Prosecutor.
Let me also express here our satisfaction with
President of the Court Judge Robinson’s visit to
Croatia at the invitation of the President of the
Supreme Court of Croatia. On that occasion Judge
Robinson also met with the President of Croatia, the
Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice and other key
national and international actors and discussed many
important issues connected with Croatia’s processing
of domestic war crimes cases, the launching of the
Legacy Project, the announcement of plans for a new

19

A/65/PV.27

Legacy Conference, the status of the residual
mechanism and plans to establish ICTY information
centres in the region.
Finally, Croatia welcomes the work on residual
issues by the Security Council Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, including trials of
the remaining high-profile fugitives. Croatia is
particularly interested in finding just and practical
solutions for discharging the Tribunals’ residual
functions related to the future of the Tribunals’
archives, to liaison with the Office of the Prosecutor,
and to exploring the modalities of serving the
sentences. In that regard, we have found particularly
rewarding the open and transparent discussions on
those issues that have taken place under the Austrian
chairmanship of the Working Group. We are following
that discussion closely and stand ready to lend our full
support and cooperation to the efforts aimed at finding
the most appropriate and cost-effective solutions to
these issues.

20

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on the two
agenda items. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda items 71 and 72?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to inform members that the plenary meeting
devoted to the follow-up to the International Year of
Microcredit, originally scheduled for Monday,
11 October 2010 at 10 a.m., under agenda item 24 (a),
“Eradication of poverty and other development issues:
implementation of the Second United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017)”, has been
rescheduled to Wednesday, 13 October 2010, at 10 a.m.
in the General Assembly Hall.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

10-57241
