RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED AND DECISIONS TAKEN BY THE SECURITY COUNCIL
IN 1972

Part I. Questions considered by the Security Council under its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security

CONSIDERATION OF QUESTIONS RELATING TO AFRICA OF WHICH THE SECURITY COUNCIL
IS CURRENTLY SEIZED AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COUNCIL'S RELEVANT RESOLUTIONS

A. Request of the Organi,sation of African Unity concerning the holding of meetings of the Security
Council in an African capital (General Assembly resolution 2863 (XXVI), paragraph 2)

of all the members of the Security Council to study
the question of ,the convening of Council meetings in
an African capital in all its aspects-technical, administrative, financial, legal, political and others. The
Council further agreed that the Committee, in carrying
out its tasks should endeavour to draft general guidelines which could be applied in all similar situations
which might arise in the future in connexion with
A:r~ticle 28, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Decisions

At its 1625 meeting, on 11 January 1972, the Council decided to invite the representative of Saudi Arabia
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled "Request of the Organization of African
Unity concerning the holding of meetings of the Securi,ty Council in an African capital ( General Assembly
resolution 2863 (XXVI), paragraph 2: letter dated
29 December 1971 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council (S/10480)". 1

At the same meeting, the Council decided:
(a) To accede in principle to the request of the
Organization of African Unity to hold meetings in an
African capital early in 1972;
(b) To set aside the period 20 January to 20 February 1972 as the period within which meetings
of the Council in Africa should take place;
(c) To establish a Security Council Committee on
Council Meetings away from Headquarters composed

Resolution 308 ( 1972)
of 19 January 1972

The Security Council,
Having considered, at the invitation of the General
Assembly, the request of the Organization of African
Unity concerning the holding of meetings of the Security Council in an African capital (General Assembly resolution 2863 (XXVI), paragraph 2),

l Mimeographed; for the text of General Assembly resolution 2863 (XXVI), see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 29.

Recalling the decisions taken at its 1625th meeting
on 11 January 1972,

1

than Friday, 4 February 1972, devoted to the item
entitled "Consideration of questions relating to Africa
of which the Security Council is currently seized and
implementation of the Council's relevant resolutions";
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of
Ethiopia for its stated readiness to act as host to the
Security Council meetings and to provide certain
facilities without cost to the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to enter into
immediate negotiations with the Government of Ethiopia with a view to concluding a conference agreement
along the lines set out in annex II of the Committee's
report.

RecaUing in particular the decision to accede in principle to the request of the Organization of African
Unity,
Taking note with gratitude of the offers by the
Governments of Ethiopia, Guinea, Senegal and Zambia
to act as hosts to the Security Council in their respective
capitals,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Council Meetings away from Headquarters, 2
Taking note in particular of the statements concerning cost estimates reproduced in annex I of the
Committee's report,
Bearing in mind the recommendations submitted by
the Committee in chapter VI of its report,
1. Decides to hold meetings in Addis Ababa, beginning on Friday, 28 January, and ending no later

Adopted at
meeting.a

2 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-seventh
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1972,
document S/10514.

the

1626th

a In the absence of any objection, the President stated that
the draft resolution was adopted unanimously.

B. Decisions and resolutions adopted at the 1627th to 1639th meetings of the Security Council held in
Addis Ababa from 28 January through 4 February 1972

Decisions

Peoples, the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania; and to the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the representative of Pakistan.

At its 1627th meeting, on 28 January 1972, the
Council heard statements by His Imperial Majesty
Haile Selassie, Emperor of Ethiopia, and His Excellency Moktar Ould Daddah, President of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania and Chairman of the eighth
session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity.

At its 1630th meeting, on 31 January 1972, the
Council decided to invite ,the representatives of Algeria,
Burundi and the Libyan Arab Republic to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 1628th meeting, on 28 January 1972, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Cameroon, the Congo, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Nigeria, Senegal, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zaire and Zambia
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled "Consideration of questions relating to
Africa of which the Security Council is currently seized
and implementation of the Council's relevant resolutions".
At the same meeting, in view of the decisions taken
by ·three United Nations bodies to be represented at
the Security Council meetings in Africa,4 the Council
decided to ex,tend the appropriate invitations to the
representative of the Special Committee on Apartheid,
the representative of Trinidad and Tobago; to the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and

At the same meeting, the Council decided, in principle, at the request of ,the representatives of Guinea,
Somalia and the Sudan11 to extend an invitation, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, to the following persons:
Mr. Mohamed Fouad El-Bedewi
Mr. Amilcar Cabral
Mr. M. Luvualo
Mr. M. dos Santos
Mr. Peter Mueshihange
Mr. Richard Hove 6
Mr. Portlako Leballo
Mr. Alfred Nzo
Mr. George Silundika
Mr. Abdul Minty
Mr. Diallo Telli
document S/10602/Rev.2.
Instead of Mr. Hove, Mr. M. K. H. Hamadziripi made a
statement to the Council, at its 1633rd meeting, with the consent of the Council.
5 Ibid.,

4 See

Official Records of the Security Council, Twentyseventh Year, Supplement for January, February and March
1972, document S/10600.

6

2
