UNITED NATIONS

/ NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

UNIES

COUNCIL

RECORDS

FIFTH

YEAR

459th MEETING : 10 JANUARY 1950
CINQUIEME

ANNEE

No.1

4S9eme SEANCE: 10 JANVIER 1950

C O N S E I L DE

SECURITE

PROCES-VERBAUX

OFFICIELS

LAKE

SUCCESS,

NEW

YORK

TABLE OF C O N T E N T S
Page

1. Provisional agenda

1

2. Statements regarding representation in the Security Council {continued)

1

3. Welcoming of new members of the Security Council

10

TABLE DES MATIERES

1. Ordre du jour provisoire

1

2. Declarations relatives a la representation au Conseil de securite {suite)

1

3. Souhaits de bienvenue aux nouveaux membres du Conseil de securite

10

CEIVED

TED

NATIONS

ARCHIVES

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings of the
Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans le texte
des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements mensuels aux
Proces-verbaux officiels.
Les documents des Nations Unies portent tous une cote, qui se compose de
lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie
qu'il s'agit d'un document des Nations Unies.

FOUR HUNDRED AND FIFTY-NINTH MEETING
Held at Lake Success, New York, on Tuesday, 10 January 1950, at 3 p.m.

QUATRE CENT CINQUANTE-NEUVIEME SEANCE
Tenue a Lake Success, New-York, le mardi 10 Janvier 1950, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. T. F. TSIANG (China).

President: M. T. F. TSIANG (Chine).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, France, India,
Norway, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Yugoslavia.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Chine, Cuba, Equateur, Egypte, France, Inde,
Norvege, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'lrlande du
Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Yougoslavie.

1. Provisional agenda ( S / A g e n d a 4 5 9 )

1. Ordre d u jour provisoire

(S/Agenda 459)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Letter dated 6 December 1949 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council transmitting the text of a resolution concerning the regulation and reduction of conventional
armaments and armed forces adopted by the General
Assembly at its 268th plenary meeting on 5 December 1949 (S/1429).

2. Lettre, en date du 6 decembre 1949, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par le Secretaire
general et transmettant le texte d'une resolution
relative a la reglementation et a la reduction des
armements de type classique et des forces armees,
adoptee le 5 decembre 1949 par l'Assemblee generale
a sa 268eme seance pleniere (S/1429).

2. Statements regarding
the Security Council

in

2 . Declarations relatives a la representation
au Conseil de securite
(suite)

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian) : Members of the Security
Council, during the fourth session of the General
Assembly the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China forwarded to General
Romulo, President of the General Assembly, a statement issued by Mr. Chou En-lai, Foreign Minister of
the People's Republic of China, to the effect that the
Central People's Government repudiated the legal
status of the delegation sent to the fourth session of
the General Assembly by the so-called Chinese National
Government, and that it held that that delegation could
not represent China or speak for the Chinese people
in the United Nations.1 At the fourth session of the
General Assembly, the USSR delegation informed the
United Nations that it supported the statement of the
Government of the People's Republic of China and did
not recognize that delegation's competence, inasmuch
as it did not represent China or the Chinese people.2

M. MALIK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Messieurs les membres
du Conseil, au cours de la quatrieme session de
l'Assemblee generale, le Gouvernement central de la
Republique populaire de Chine a envoye au general
Romulo, President de l'Assemblee generale, une declaration signee par M. Tchou En-lai, Ministre des
affaires etrangeres, et aux termes de laquelle le
Gouvernement populaire central refusait de reconnaitre
le caractere legitime des pouvoirs de la delegation que
le pretendu Gouvernement national chinois avait
envoyee a la quatrieme session de l'Assemblee generale;
il re fusait egalement de reconnaitre le droit que
s'arrogeait cette delegation de representer la Chine et
de parler, a l'Organisation des Nations Unies, au nom
du peuple chinois1. Au cours de la quatrieme session
de l'Assemblee, la delegation de l'URSS a informe
l'Organisation des Nations Unies qu'elle appuyait cette
declaration du Gouvernement de la Republique populaire de Chine et qu'elle ne reconnaissait pas les
pouvoirs de ladite delegation puisque celle-ci ne representait pas la Chine ou le peuple chinois2.

representation
(continued)

1
Voir le document A/1123.
'See document A/1123.
' See Official Records of the fourth session of the General 'Voir les Documents officiels de la quatriime session de
l'Assemblee generale, 254eme seance pleniere.
Assembly, 254th plenary meeting.

In accordance with that attitude, the delegation of
the USSR in the Security Council informed the Council
on 29 December 1949 [458th meeting] that it supported the aforementioned statement of the Government of the People's Republic of China, that it would
not recognize the representative of the Kuomintang
in the Security Council as representing China, and
that, in its opinion, he did not have the right to speak
in the name of the Chinese people in the Security
Council.

En consequence, le 29 decembre 1949, la delegation
de l'URSS a declare au Conseil de securite [458erne
seance] qu'elle soutenait la declaration faite par le
Gouvernement de la Republique populaire de Chine,
qu'elle ne reconnaitrait pas le delegue du Kouomintang
au Conseil de securite comme representant k Chine et
que, a son avis, ce dernier n'etait pas habilite a parler
au nom du peuple chinois au Conseil de securite.

On 8 January 1950, the Foreign Minister of the
Central People's Government of the People's Republic
of China sent the following communication to the
President of the General Assembly, General Romulo,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr.
Trygve Lie, and the Governments of the States represented on the Security Council:

Le 8 Janvier, le Ministre des affaires etrangeres^ de
la Republique populaire de Chine a envoye au general
Romulo, President de l'Assemblee generale, a
M. Trygve Lie, Secretaire general de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, ainsi qu'aux gouvernements des
Etats membres du Conseil de securite, le telegramme
suivant:

"This is to inform you that the Central People's
Government of the People's Republic of China holds
as illegal the presence of the delegates of the Chinese
Kuomintang reactionary remnant clique in the Security
Council of the United Nations. The position of the
Central People's Government of the People's Republic
of China is that the said delegates be expelled from
the Security Council. It is hoped that this position be
adopted and action be taken accordingly."

"Le Gouvernement central de la Republique populaire
de Chine estime illegale la presence, au Conseil de
securite de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, du representant des restes de la clique reactionnaire chinoise
du Kouomintang, et il insiste pour que cette personne
soit ecartee du Conseil de securite. En faisant cette
communication a titre special, le Gouvernement central
de la Republique populaire de Chine exprime l'espoir
que le fait susmentionne sera pris en consideration et
que des mesures seront prises en consequence."

The text of this communication, received by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations has been distributed to all the members of the Council. It was sent
in the name of the Government of the People's Republic
of China by Mr. Chou En-lai, was dispatched to the
Government of the USSR, as a member of the Security
Council, and was received by that Government.

Le texte de cette communication regue par le
Secretaire general a ete distribue a tous les membres
du Conseil. Au nom du Gouvernement central de la
Republique populaire de Chine, il a ete envoye par
M. Tchou En-lai au Gouvernement de l'URSS en sa
qualite de membre du Conseil de securite, et ce
gouvernement l'a regu.

Upon instructions from the Government of the
USSR, the Soviet Union delegation in the Security
Council informs the Council that it supports the statement of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China and, for its part, insists
upon the exclusion from the Security Council of the
representative of the Kuomintang group. The representative of the Kuomintang does not represent China;
it is therefore illegal for him not only to serve as
President, but even to remain any longer in the Security
Council.
In view of the foregoing, the delegation of the
USSR, in support of the statement of the Government
of the People's Republic of China, and insisting upon
the exclusion from the Security Council of the representative of the Kuomintang—as he represents neither
China nor the Chinese people—is authorized to state
that should the Security Council fail to take appropriate
measures for the exclusion from its membership of
the representative of the Kuomintang group, the delegation of the USSR will not participate in the work
of the Security Council as long as the representative
of the Kuomintang is not excluded from that body.

Conformement aux instructions qu'elle a regues de
son gouvernement, la delegation de l'URSS fait savoir
au Conseil de securite qu'elle appuie la declaration du
Gouvernement central de la Republique populaire de
Chine et qu'elle insiste, elle aussi, pour que le representant de la faction du Kouomintang soit exclu du
Conseil de securite. En effet, celui-ci ne represente
pas la Chine. II n'a pas le droit d'exercer les fonctions
de President, et sa presence meme au Conseil de
securite est illegale.

The delegation of the USSR, in accordance with
the position as I have indicated it, submits the following draft resolution :3

En consequence, la delegation de l'URSS presente le
projet de resolution suivant 3 :

3
This draft resolution was subsequently given the symbol
S/1443.

8
Ce projet de resolution a ete distribue ulterieurement sous
la cote S/1443.

Ainsi done, la delegation de l'URSS, qui appuie la
declaration du representant de la Republique de Chine
et qui insiste pour que le representant du Kouomintang
soit ecarte puisqu'il ne represente ni la Chine ni le
peuple chinois, est autorisee a declarer que, ai le
Conseil de securite ne prend pas les mesures necessaires
pour ecarter le representant de la faction du
Kouomintang, elle ne participera pas aux seances du
Conseil tant que ce representant continuera a en faire
partie.

"The Security

Council,

"Le Conseil de securite,

"Having considered the statement made by the Central People's Government of the Chinese People's
Republic on 8 January 1950 to the effect that it considers the presence in the United Nations Security
Council of the representative of the Kuomintang group
to be illegal and insists on the exclusion of that representative from the Security Council,

"Ayant examine la declaration du Gouvernement
central du peuple de la Republique populaire de Chine,
en date du 8 Janvier 1950, selon laquelle ce gouvernement juge illegale la presence au Conseil de securite
de l'Organisation des Nations LInies du representant
du groupe Kouomintang et insiste pour que ce dernier
soit exclu du Conseil de securite,

"Decides not to recognize the credentials of the
representative referred to in the statement by the
Central People's Government of the Chinese People's
Republic and to exclude him from the Security
Council."

"Decide de ne pas reconnaitre les pouvoirs du
representant mentionne dans la declaration du Gouvernement central du peuple de la Republique populaire
de Chine et de l'exclure du Conseil de securite."

The PRESIDENT : At the 458th meeting of the Security
Council held on 29 December 1949, presided over by
the representative of Canada, the representative of the
Soviet Union made a similar statement. On that
occasion I had the honour to reply as the representative
of China. That reply is in the records of the Security
Council. I do not find it necessary to add to my reply
which I made on the previous occasion.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais) : A la 458eme
seance du Conseil de securite, qui s'est tenue le 29
decembre 1949 sous la presidence du representant du
Canada, le representant de l'Union sovietique a fait
une declaration analogue. A cette occasion, j'ai eu
l'honneur de lui repondre en tant que representant de
la Chine. Ma reponse figure dans le compte rendu de
la seance. II me parait inutile d'y ajouter quoi que
ce soit.

Speaking now as President of the Security Council,
I rule that the proposal of the representative of the
Soviet Union will be printed and distributed to the
members of the Security Council, and a special meeting will be called for its consideration. Do I hear any
objection to this procedure which I have just suggested ?

Parlant maintenant en qualite de President du
Conseil de securite, je decide que la proposition du
representant de l'Union sovietique sera imprimee et
distribute aux membres du Conseil de securite et
qu'une seance speciale sera convoquee pour l'examiner.
Quelqu'un a-t-il une objection a formuler a l'egard de
cette procedure?

Mr. M A L I K (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian) : I object to any ruling given
by a person who does not represent anyone here.

M. M A L I K (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Messieurs les membres
du Conseil, je proteste contre toute decision emanant
d'un monsieur qui ne represente personne au Conseil.

For the reasons mentioned in my statement, I am
unable to consider as legal any ruling made by that
person; I insist upon my proposal being put to the
vote without delay, as the meeting of the Security
Council cannot continue until such a vote has been
taken, for the competence of the person concerned to
remain in the Security Council and to serve as President has been challenged.

Pour les raisons que j'ai exposees, je considere
comme illegale toute decision prise par cette personne,
et j'insiste pour que mon projet de resolution soit mis
aux voix; tant que ce vote n'aura pas eu lieu, le
Conseil de securite ne pourra continuer a sieger,
puisque l'habilite de cette personne a faire partie du
Conseil et a presider la presente seance a ete mise en
doute.

I must therefore insist upon a vote being taken on
my proposal. Should the English and French texts of
that proposal not be ready, I suggest that the meeting
be suspended for a few minutes until the text is available and that my proposal be then put to the vote.

J'insiste done pour que ma proposition soit mise aux
voix. Si les textes anglais et frangais ne sont pas
encore prets, je propose de suspendre la seance pour
quelques instants, et de passer au vote sur ma proposition des qu'on en aura regu le texte.

I wish to state, furthermore, that the delegation of
the U S S R does not consider it possible that further
meetings should be called under the presidency of a
representative who does not represent China and the
Chinese people and whose presence in the Security
Council is illegal. I am therefore addressing myself
to the members of the Security Council, and insist that
my proposal be put to a vote immediately.

Je tiens a declarer egalement que la delegation de
l'URSS estime inadmissible que la prochaine seance soit
convoquee sous la presidence d'un representant qui ne
represente pas la Chine et le peuple chinois et dont la
presence au Conseil de securite est illegale. J e demande
done instamment aux membres du Conseil de securite
de mettre immediatement aux voix le projet que je
viens de presenter.

The PRESIDENT: I have ruled that the proposal of
the representative of the Soviet Union shall be circulated to members of the Security Council and that it
shall be considered at a subsequent meeting of the
Council. That ruling has been challenged. I shall
therefore ask the Council to vote upon my ruling.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : J'ai decide
que la proposition du representant de l'Union sovietique
serait distribute aux membres du Conseil de securite
et qu'elle serait examinee a une seance ulterieure. Cette
decision a ete contestee. Je mets done cette decision
aux voix.

A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

II est procede au vote a main levee.

In favour: China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, France,
Norway, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Votent pour: Chine, Cuba, Equateur, Egypte, France,
Norvege, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'lrlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Against: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Yugoslavia.

Votent contre: Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Yougoslavie.

Abstaining: India.
The ruling was sustained by 8 votes to 2, with 1
abstention.
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on a point of
order.
Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian) : Members of the Security
Council, the delegation of the USSR cannot agree
to the ruling which has been adopted. It would be
quite abnormal for the Security Council to consider
any political question on its agenda when five members
of the Council have severed relations with the group
whose representative now sits as its President. That
would mean that the Security Council would be meeting
under the presidency of a person who, from the point
of view of common sense and of the legal principles
involved, represents no one. No real meeting, but a
parody of a meeting, would be the result.
For the reasons which have been fully explained in
my statement today, I, as representative of the Soviet
Union, cannot participate in the work of the Security
Council or take part in this meeting of the Council
until the Kuomintang representative has been excluded
from membership in the Council.
I am therefore leaving the Council chamber.

S'abstient: l'lnde.
Par 8 voix contre 2, avec une abstention, la decision
du President est maintenue.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais): Je donne la
parole au representant de l'URSS pour une motion
d'ordre.
M. MALIK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Messieurs les membres
du Conseil, la delegation de l'URSS ne peut accepter
la decision presidentielle qui vient d'etre approuvee,
car il serait tout a fait anormal que le Conseil examine
les problemes politiques figurant a son ordre du jour,
alors que cinq de ses membres ont rompu les relations
diplomatiques avec le groupe que represente le monsieur
qui preside la seance. En effet, le Conseil de securite
siegerait alors sous la presidence de quelqu'un qui, du
point de vue logique et juridique, ne represente personne. Ce ne serait pas une seance, mais une parodie
de seance.
Pour les raisons que j'ai exposees d'une fagon
suffisamment detaillee au cours de la presente seance,
je ne puis, en ma qualite de representant de l'Union
sovietique, prendre part aux travaux du Conseil de
securite. Je ne pourrai participer a cette seance tant
que le representant du Kouomintang continuera a faire
partie du Conseil de securite.
Je quitte done la salle du Conseil.

At this point, the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics left the Council chamber.

A ce moment, le representant de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques quitte la salle du
Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: Before presenting the provisional
agenda for this meeting I wish to express, on behalf
of the Security Council, its thanks for the services
rendered by General McNaughton, its President for the
month of December.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais): Avant de
presenter l'ordre du jour provisoire de la seance, je
tiens a adresser au general McNaughton, President du
Conseil de securite pour le mois de decembre, les
remerciements du Conseil pour les services qu'il a
rendus.

Mr. BEBLER (Yugoslavia) (translated from French):
Gentlemen, it would be difficult to maintain that the
two statements just made by the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are devoid of
common sense. We find ourselves, in fact, in a situation which cannot contribute to the authority of the
Security Council and the respect which it can rightfully expect from world public opinion. We are in a
situation in which we must work, enter into discussion
and adopt decisions on extremely important questions
under the presidency of the representative of a Government which is no longer recognized by almost half of
the Governments represented on this Council.

M. BEBLER (Yougoslavie) : Messieurs, il serait difficile
d'affirmer que les deux declarations que nous venons
d'entendre de la bouche du representant de l'Union
sovietique sont depourvues de bon sens. En verite, nous
sommes tous dans une situation qui ne peut pas contribuer au respect et a l'autorite que le Conseil de
securite est en droit d'attendre de l'opinion publique
mondiale. Nous nous trouvons dans une situation ou
nous devrions travailler, discuter, prendre des decisions
sur des questions d'une tres grande importance, sous
la presidence du representant d'un gouvernement qui
n'est plus reconnu par ores de la moitie des gouvernements dont les representants siegent a cette meme
table.

Accordingly, the decision just taken by the Council
on the basis of its rules of procedure does not seem to
me to be very felicitous; from the procedural point of

Par consequent, la decision que le Conseil vient de
prendre en se fondant sur son reglement interieur ne
me parait pas etre la plus heureuse; au point de vue

view, that decision is correct, but from the point of
view of political significance it is far less correct. I
therefore believe that we must seek some other solution, and in my opinion the best solution would be to
decide immediately to adjourn the debate on all other
questions in order to allow the necessary time for the
distribution of the proposal of the representative of
the USSR, in accordance with our rules of procedure.

de la procedure, elle est correcte; mais elle Test
beaucoup moins au point de vue de sa signification
politique. Je crois done que nous devrions rechercher
une autre solution, et il me semble que la meilleure
serait de prendre immediatement la decision d'ajourner
nos debats sur toute autre question, afin de nous laisser
le temps necessaire pour proceder, conformement a
notre reglement interieur, a la distribution de la proposition du representant de l'URSS.

In view of the fact that our rules require distribution on the day preceding a meeting, I formally propose that the meeting should be adjourned and that
the Council should meet again after an interval which
will allow the requirements of the rules of procedure
regarding the distribution of documents to be observed.

Etant donne que notre reglement exige que cette
distribution soit effectuee la veille d'une seance, je
propose formellement d'ajourner la seance et de reunir
le Conseil a une date permettant de nous conformer
aux dispositions du reglement relatives a la distribution
des documents.

I need hardly add that my proposal is made in
accordance with the position long since taken by my
Government with regard to the question of China,
which we clearly stated in the course of the discussion
during the fourth session of the General Assembly,
as a result of which my country does not recognize the
former Government of China and recognizes its new
Government.

J'ai a peine besoin d'ajouter que je fais cette proposition dans un esprit conforme a l'attitude prise depuis
longtemps par mon gouvernement au sujet de la
question de Chine, conforme a ce que nous avons dit
clairement au cours des debats durant la quatrieme
session de l'Assemblee generale, et dont la consequence
a ete que le gouvernement de mon pays ne reconnait
pas l'ancien Gouvernement de la Chine et reconnait
son nouveau Gouvernement.

I repeat my formal proposal to adjourn the present
meeting and resume our work when the conditions set
forth in the rules of procedure have been met; we
could then undertake consideration of this question,
which, by its nature and its significance in our work,
is a preliminary question, since it concerns the very
membership of the Council which will then have to
adopt decisions on other questions.

Je repete ma proposition formelle d'ajourner la
presente seance et de reprendre nos travaux lorsque
les conditions prevues par le reglement seront remplies;
nous pourrons alors aborder l'examen de cette question
qui, par sa nature et sa signification pour notre propre
travail, est une question prejudicielle, puisqu'elle concerne la composition meme du Conseil qui devra
prendre ensuite des decisions sur les autres questions.

Mr. GROSS (United States of America): I am moved
to intervene in the debate by reason of my delegation's
respect for the processes of orderly procedure. Far
from agreeing with the statement of the representative
of Yugoslavia that this meeting should be adjourned
for reasons of orderly procedure, I should like to point
out that decent respect for orderly procedure would
seem to have dictated a different course than that which
has been followed here by the representative of the
Soviet Union. I am referring to rule 17 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
which states, as explicitly as words can state any point:

M. GROSS (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de
I'anglais): Le respect que ma delegation porte au
reglement m'oblige a intervenir dans ce debat. Bien loin
de partager l'avis du representant de la Yougoslavie
suivant lequel il y a lieu d'ajourner la seance pour se
conformer au reglement, je tiens a souligner que le
respect de ce reglement aurait du dieter au representant
de l'Union sovietique une attitude differente de celle
qu'il a prise. Je me refere a l'article 17 du reglement
interieur provisoire du Conseil de securite, qui stipule
aussi expressement qu'il est possible de le f aire que:

"Any representative on the Security Council, to
whose credentials objection has been made within the
Security Council, shall continue to sit with the same
rights as other representatives until the Security
Council has decided the matter."

"Tout representant au Conseil de securite dont les
pouvoirs soulevent des objections au sein du Conseil de
securite continue a sieger avec les memes droits que
les autres representants, jusqu'a ce que le Conseil de
securite ait pris une decision a ce sujet."

It seems to my delegation that this rule should have
been complied with in this case. It is therefore a
matter of concern and regret that the representative
of the Soviet Union has seen fit to disregard this rule.

Ma delegation estime que cette regie aurait du etre
observee dans le cas qui nous occupe. II est done tres
regrettable que le representant de l'Union sovietique
ait cru devoir n'en pas tenir compte.

So far as the statement of the representative of
Yugoslavia is concerned, it seems to my delegation that
the Council may with propriety proceed to take up the
business properly on its agenda. As a matter of fact,
it had been the intention of my Government to move
ahead with the matter on the agenda in compliance with
the wishes of the General Assembly as embodied in
its resolution which is before us.

En ce qui concerne la declaration faite par le representant de la Yougoslavie, ma delegation estime que
le Conseil est fonde a examiner les questions qui
figurent a son ordre du jour. En fait, mon gouvernement se proposait de poursuivre l'etude de la question
inscrite a l'ordre du jour, conformement au desir
exprime par l'Assemblee generale dans la resolution
dont le Conseil est saisi.

However, I believe that the motives which seem to
us to have characterized the action taken by the representative of the Soviet Union today in ignoring both
rule 17 and the rights of the President of the Council
under that rule might also impel him, if the Council
should proceed today with a motion to refer the General
Assembly's resolution to the Commission for Conventional Armaments to take the position that that matter
is actually not before the Commission.

Je pense toutefois que les motifs qui semblent avoir
inspire l'attitude prise aujourd'hui par le representant
de l'Union sovietique, en ne tenant compte, ni de
l'article 17, ni des droits que cet article confere au
President du Conseil, peuvent aussi, dans le cas ou le
Conseil deciderait aujourd'hui de renvoyer la resolution
de l'Assemblee generale a la Commission des armements
de type classique, le pousser a pretendre que la Commission n'est pas regulierement saisie de la question.

It is for that reason, and for that reason alone, that
my delegation would be prepared to agree not to press
for the action today which we feel the Council might
take with propriety and with legality. Because of the
importance which we attach to the matter of the
reduction of conventional armaments and armed forces,
we would not wish that matter to be under any cloud
in the Commission. With reluctance, therefore, we
would be prepared to accede to the suggestion which
has been made that we do not take up the item on the
provisional agenda at this time.

C'est pour cette raison, et pour cette raison seule,
que ma delegation consent a ne pas insister pour que
le Conseil prenne aujourd'hui la decision qui, estime-telle, serait reglementairement valable. C'est parce que
nous attachons une importance toute particuliere a la
question de la reduction des armements de type classique et des forces armees que nous ne voulons pas
que le moindre doute plane sur la competence de la
Commission, lorsqu'elle l'etudiera. Nous sommes done
disposes, non sans regret, a accepter la proposition qui
a ete faite de ne pas examiner, pour l'instant, la question
qui figure a 1'ordre du jour provisoire.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) : I was
going to remind my colleagues on the Council of
rule 17, but that has already been done by the representative of the United States, and I am sure that my
colleagues will have refreshed their memories on that
point.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit
de Vanglais) : Je me disposals a rappeler a mes collegues du Conseil le texte de l'article 17 du reglement
interieur provisoire, mais le representant des EtatsUnis s'est charge de ce soin, et je suis certain que mes
collegues du Conseil se sont remis ces dispositions en
memoire.

With regard to the particular proposal made by the
representative of Yugoslavia, I find it difficult to accept
the implication of that proposal, which is that, until
we have settled this other question raised by the representative of the Soviet Union, the Council can proceed
with no business. In the view of my Government, the
proposal made by the representative of the Soviet
Union has been raised prematurely. At this moment,
not many Governments have recognized the new
Government in China, and, therefore, it might be
premature and precipitate on the part of this organ of
the United Nations to take, or attempt to take, a
definite decision in the near future. If that is so, I
cannot help regarding with some apprehension the
situation in which this Council might find itself in a
period of shorter or longer duration, in which, according to the doctrine, as I understand it, of my Yugoslav
colleague and also of my United States colleague, it
would not be able to proceed with business. I think
we have to consider that matter very carefully, and,
therefore, I cannot support—in fact, I should oppose
—the proposal to adjourn this meeting. I should hope
the Council would agree to discuss this item on the
provisional agenda. I admit the agenda has not been
approved, but it is on the table and it is before us,
and I hope we shall tackle that question.

En ce qui concerne la proposition faite par le representant de la Yougoslavie, il m'est difficile d'en accepter
les consequences, a savoir que, tant que la question
soulevee par le representant de l'Union sovietique
n'aura pas ete reglee, le Conseil ne pourra s'occuper
d'aucune autre question. De l'avis de mon gouvernement, la proposition du representant de l'Union
sovietique a ete formulee prematurement. Pour le
moment, quelques gouvernements seulement ont reconnu le nouveau Gouvernement de la Chine; en consequence, ce serait peut-etre, de la part de 1'organe des
Nations Unies qu'est le Conseil, agir de fagon prematuree et avec une hate extreme que de prendre ou
de tenter de prendre dans l'avenir immediat une decision definitive. S'il en est ainsi, je ne pourrai songer
sans apprehension a la situation dans laquelle le Conseil
pourrait se trouver pendant la periode plus ou moins
longue ou, selon la these de mon collegue yougoslave
et de mon collegue des Etats-Unis, il serait dans
l'impossibilite de poursuivre sa tache. J'estime que nous
devons examiner cette question tres attentivement. C'est
pourquoi je devrais, en fait, me prononcer contre la
proposition d'ajourner la presente seance. Je ne puis,
en tout cas, l'appuyer. J'espere que le Conseil decidera
d'examiner la question qui figure a 1'ordre du jour
provisoire. Cet ordre du jour n'a pas ete approuve, j'en
conviens, mais le Conseil en est saisi, et j'espere que
nous aborderons la question.

Mr. VITERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador) (translated
from
Spanish) : In my opinion, the question we are considering is one of the highest importance; it involves an
interesting problem which bears directly on the good
faith and prestige of an institution in which we represent not only our own countries but also all Members
of the United Nations and the Organization itself.

M. VITERI LAFRONTE (Equateur) (traduit de I'cspagnol) : La question dont le Conseil est saisi me semble
presenter une tres grande importance: il s'agit la d'un
probleme interessant, qui touche de pres au caractere
objectif et au prestige de l'institution aupres de laquelle
nous representons, non seulement nos pays respectifs,
mais aussi tous les Membres des Nations Unies et
l'Organisation elle-meme.

A legal question has been raised regarding which the
representatives present are not all in agreement. W h a t
is being questioned is the right of a representative,
who has hitherto been recognized by the majority of
us, to continue to sit on the Council. It must, however, be pointed out that there is now a strong minority
which no longer recognizes the Government of that
representation, and a few minutes ago, when a vote
was taken, we were all able to note the Council's
indecision in the matter.

II s'est pose un probleme juridique a l'egard duquel
les membres du Conseil ont adopte des attitudes
diverses: il s'agit du droit de sieger au Conseil de
securite d'un representant qui, jusqu'ici, a ete reconnu
par la majorite. II convient de faire observer qu'une
minorite importante ne reconnait deja plus le gouvernement de ce representant. II y a quelques instants, au
moment ou Ton a vote sur la question, nous avons pu
nous rendre compte de l'indecision qui regnait au
Conseil de securite a ce sujet.

Of those five representatives of Governments which
have already recognized the Government of Communist China, two voted one way, two voted the other
way and one chose to abstain. Thus we are confronted
with a twofold division: there are six representatives
who still recognize the Nationalist Government of
China and five who no longer recognize it but who, at
the first opportunity to adopt a definite position on the
matter, have given different opinions on what action
should be taken.

En effet, sur les cinq representants des gouvernements qui ont deja reconnu le regime communiste en
Chine, deux ont vote pour, deux ont vote contre et
un s'est abstenu. Nous sommes done en presence d'une
double division: six representants reconnaissent encore
le Gouvernement nationaliste chinois, alors que cinq
representants ne le reconnaissent plus; toutefois, a la
premiere occasion qu'ils ont eue de se prononcer sur
la question, ces cinq derniers membres ont exprime des
vues differentes quant a la maniere de proceder.

I need not say that I have the greatest respect for
the views of each of my colleagues on the Council,
but I myself represent a Government which has not
recognized the Government of Communist China,
which maintains diplomatic relations with the Nationalist Government, and, so long as that state of affairs
remains unchanged, my delegation will have to take
account of that fact and act accordingly.

Je n'ai point besoin de dire que je suis le premier
a respecter le point de vue de chacun de mes collegues
au Conseil de securite; mais, pour ma part, je represente un gouvernement qui n'a pas reconnu le Gouvernement communiste chinois et qui maintient les
relations diplomatiques avec le Gouvernement nationaliste. Tant que la situation juridique n'aura pas
change, ma delegation devra en tenir compte et agir
en consequence.

Now that I have explained the position of Ecuador
in this matter, I must say I feel that, in the interests
of the prestige of the Council, it would be better to
adjourn the meeting. Perhaps it is not really urgent
to take an immediate decision on the item on our provisional agenda, which has not yet been adopted. Moreover, from the ruling of the Chair, which was upheld
by the vote, I understand we have decided not to deal
with the U S S R proposal until it has been duly printed
and circulated, and in the circumstances I cannot see
that we would lose anything by adjourning the meeting
now. The President, in virtue of his powers, can convene the next meeting for tomorrow, for the day after,
or for whenever he deems best, provided the conditions
laid down by the President himself for the consideration of the U S S R representative's proposal will then
have been fulfilled.

Ayant precise l'attitude de mon pays a cet egard, je
tiens a ajouter que, a mon avis, il serait preferable de
lever la seance afin de sauvegarder le prestige du
Conseil de securite. En effet, il n'est pas du tout necessaire d'adopter immediatement une resolution sur la
question qui figure a 1'ordre du jour provisoire; celuici n'a meme pas encore ete adopte. En outre, il me
semble que la decision du President, qui a ete sanctionnee par un vote, tend a ce que le Conseil n'examine
la proposition de l'URSS qu'au moment ou celle-ci
aura ete reproduite et distribute en bonne et due forme.
Dans ces conditions, je ne vois done pas pourquoi on
ne pourrait pas lever la seance maintenant. Le President
pourrait, en vertu des pouvoirs dont il dispose, fixer la
prochaine seance a demain, a apres-demain ou a tout
autre jour qu'il estimerait convenir, pourvu que soit
remplie la condition a laquelle il a lui-meme subordonne
l'examen de la proposition du representant de l'URSS.

I think it would be most helpful in the present circumstances to clarify the situation so that we may
safeguard the prestige of the Security Council in the
strictest and most proper manner.

II me semble que, dans les circonstances actuelles, il
conviendrait de faire preciser la situation, afin de
sauvegarder, de la fagon la plus rigoureuse, de la fagon
qui convienne le mieux, le prestige du Conseil de
securite.

There is no doubt that the representatives who
referred to rule 17 of the rules of procedure, which
stipulates that "any representative on the Security
Council, to whose credentials objection has been made
within the Security Council, shall continue to sit with
the same rights as other representatives until the
Security Council has decided the matter" are wholly
in the right. Such an argument is legally unassailable.
But frankly, I feel that in view of the desirability of
maintaining unchanged the belief that the Security
Council considers the matters within its purview calmly

On ne saurait douter que les representants qui se
sont re feres a l'article 17 du reglement interieur aient
parfaitement raison; en effet, cet article prevoit que
"tout representant au Conseil de securite dont les
pouvoirs soulevent des objections continue a sieger avec
les memes droits que les autres representanrs jusqu'a
ce que le Conseil de securite ait pris une decision a
ce sujet". Juridiquement, cet argument est inattiquable.
Cependant, devant l'interet qu'il y a a maintenir intacte
la conviction que le Conseil de securite etudie avec la
plus grande attention les questions qui relevent de sa

Now, actuated by my desire to help in finding a
formula which will facilitate the solution of the rather
delicate situation in which we find ourselves, and as
the provisions of rule 17 have been invoked, I would
suggest that the provisions of rule 20 might also be
considered. I feel sure, however, that throughout the
present discussion, the President has not lost sight of
the possibility of invoking that rule in order to facilitate
the discussion and solution of the matter before us,
the more so as the question in point directly and
definitely concerns him as President. In accordance
with rule 20, the President could waive his right to
preside over our meetings and call upon the representative of the member next in English alphabetical order
to replace him, as is provided in that rule.

competence, je pense en toute franchise que le Conseil
ne perdrait rien en levant la seance et en se reunissant
a nouveau aussitot que le President le jugera necessaire, des que la condition qu'il a posee aura ete
remplie.
Desireux de contribuer a trouver une formule permettant de sortir de la situation si delicate dans laquelle
se trouve le Conseil, et etant donne qu'on a deja
invoque l'article 17, je me permets d'attirer l'attention
du Conseil sur l'article 20, bien que je sois convaincu
que le President lui-meme n'aura pas neglige un seul
instant la possibilite d'appliquer les dispositions afin de
faciliter — si je puis m'exprimer ainsi — la discussion
et le reglement du probleme qui nous occupe. En effet,
il s'agit la d'une situation qui interesse directement la
personne meme du President. En vertu de ces dispositions, le President actuel pourrait s'abstenir de diriger
les debats en demandant au membre suivant du Conseil
de securite, dans 1'ordre alphabetique anglais mentionne
a l'article 20, de le remplacer a la presidence.

I repeat my conviction that the President has already
considered this possibility and that he is only awaiting
the opportune moment to take all the necessary
measures wihch will make it possible, in discussing and
settling this problem, to maintain the good will and
understanding which should prevail in the debates of
the Security Council.

Je suis convaincu, je le repete, que le President a
deja pris en consideration cette possibilite et qu'il
n'atttend que le moment opportun pour prendre toutes
les mesures qui s'imposent en vue de maintenir, au
cours de l'examen et du reglement de cette question,
l'esprit de cordialite et de comprehension qui doit
presider aux debats du Conseil de securite.

Sir Benegal N. RAU (India) : I have only just seen
the English translation of the draft resolution proposed by the representative of the Soviet Union and
for that reason I should welcome a short adjournment
to study it. Meanwhile, I should like to submit the
following point for the consideration of the Security
Council. I am a newcomer here and my knowledge of
the rules of procedure is derived not from experience,
which in my case is only about two hours old, but
from such study as I have been able to make of the
book of rules. Speaking with the diffidence proper to
this occasion, may I say that the rules in chapter III
relating to representation and credentials appear to me
to be defective. Let us look at the first rule in chapter
III, rule 13:

Sir Benegal N. RAU (Inde) (traduit de Vanglais):
Je viens seulement de prendre connaissance de la traduction anglaise du projet de resolution soumis par le
representant de l'Union sovietique; une breve suspension de seance, qui me permettrait d'etudier ce texte,
me serait done agreable. En attendant, je tiens a soumettre le point suivant a l'attention du Conseil de
securite. Je suis un nouveau venu au Conseil, et ma
connaissance du reglement interieur a ete acquise, non
pas par la pratique, puisque je ne siege au Conseil que
depuis deux heures environ, mais par l'etude que j'ai
pu faire de l'opuscule qui contient ce reglement. Avec
toute la modestie qui convient en la circonstance, je
me permets de signaler que les articles du chapitre III,
qui ont trait a la representation et a la verification des
pouvoirs, me paraissent defectueux. Prenons, par
exemple, le premier article de ce chapitre, e'est-a-dire
l'article 13:

"Each member of the Security Council shall be
represented at the meetings of the Security Council
by an accredited representative. The credentials of a
representative on the Security Council shall be communicated to the Secretary-General not less than
twenty-four hours before he takes his seat on the
Security Council. The Head of Government or
Minister of Foreign Affairs of each member of the
Security Council shall be entitled to sit on the Security
Council without submitting credentials."
•
That is the part of the rule to which I should like
to draw attention at this moment. Suppose, for
example, I come here and say that I am the Head of
the Indian Government or the Foreign Minister of
India. The rule says that I am entitled to sit in the
Security Council without submitting credentials. The
Council does not know whether I am the person I
claim to be. Rule 15 does not help, because rule 15

"Chaque membre du Conseil de securite est represente aux reunions du Conseil de securite par un
representant accredite; les pouvoirs des representants
au Conseil de securite sont communiques au Secretaire
general vingt-quatre heures au moins avant que ces
representants occupent leur siege au Conseil de securite.
Le Chef du gouvernement ou le Ministre des affaires
etrangeres de chaque membre du Conseil de securite
est autorise a sieger au Conseil de securite sans presenter de pouvoirs."

and painstakingly, we will lose nothing by adjourning
the meeting and reconvening as soon as the President
deems it necessary, once the conditions laid down by
the Chair itself have been met.

Cet article du reglement est celui sur lequel je tiens
a attirer l'attention pour le moment. Supposons, par
exemple, que je me presente au Conseil en disant que
je suis le Chef du Gouvernement ou le Ministre des
affaires etrangeres de l'lnde. Le reglement dit que j'ai
le droit de sieger au Conseil de securite sans presenter
de pouvoirs. Or, le Conseil ne sait pas si je suis la
personne que je pretends etre. L'article 15 n'est d'aucun

"Any representative on the Security Council, to
idiose credentials objection has been made within the
Security Council, shall continue to sit with the same
ights as other representatives until the Security
Council has decided the matter."

secours dans ce cas, car il a trait aux "pouvoirs des
representants" qui doivent etre examines par le
Secretaire general; cependant je viens de soumettre au
Conseil un cas dans lequel il n'est pas exige de pouvoirs
du tout, de sorte que l'article 15 n'est pas applicable.
L'article 17 ne saurait etre d'aucun secours non plus,
car il ne s'applique qu'a un representant qui siege deja.
II stipule en effet:
"Tout representant au Conseil de securite dont les
pouvoirs soulevent des objections au sein du Conseil
de securite continue a sieger avec les memes droits
que les autres representants, jusqu'a ce que le Conseil
de securite ait pris une decision a ce sujet."

Obviously, therefore, that applies to a representative
yho is already sitting and whose right to continue to
it has been challenged, but it does not apply to a case
if the kind I have put.
The rules seem to me to be silent on this particular
ioint. Clearly, in the hypothetical case that I have put,
here must be some body, some authority, specifically
lesignated to decide whether I am what I claim to be.
While, therefore, I shall support the proposal for the
djournment that has just been made, I would suggest
hat the question of amending the rules might be
tudied in the meantime.

Cette regie s'applique done evidemment a un representant qui siege deja et auquel on a conteste le droit
de continuer a sieger, mais elle ne s'applique pas a
un cas du genre de celui que j'ai suppose.
Le reglement semble rester muet sur ce point particulier. Pourtant, dans le cas hypothetique que j'ai
suppose, il doit y avoir quelque organe, quelque autorite
expressement designee pour decider si je suis bien la
personne que je pretends etre. C'est pourquoi, tout_ en
appuyant la proposition d'ajournement qui vient d'etre
faite, je propose d'examiner dans l'intervalle la question
de savoir s'il n'y aurait pas lieu de modifier le reglement.

Mr. GROSS (United States of America): I must
.pologize for a second intervention, and I shall be
irief. My purpose is to make perfectly clear what the
losition of my Government is.

M. GROSS (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de
I'anglais) : Je m'excuse de redemander la parole, et
je m'efforcerai d'etre bref. Je voudrais preciser parfaitement la position de mon gouvernement.

I had stated that we would regard the Council's
ontinuing with its business as an action of complete
iropriety and legality, and that, of course, remains our
losition. It was the intention of my Government to
ndicate, however, that we would not believe the best
iterests of the Council would be served if we were to
roceed with our business today and, as a result of
fie discussion today, refer the item that is on our
genda to the Commission for Conventional Armalents, or, indeed, take any other action. I stress the
rord "today" because it was simply the purpose of my
tatement to make clear that the motion which has
een submitted by the representative of the Soviet
Jnion is not before us today, as a result of the ruling
f the Chair, which ruling my delegation agreed to
nd concurred in.

J'ai dit tout a 1'heure que, si le Conseil decidait de
poursuivre ses travaux, ma delegation considererait
cette decision comme reglementairement valable, sans
aucun doute, et, bien entendu, son attitude reste la
meme a cet egard. Cependant, mon gouvernement tient
a faire connaitre qu'a son avis il ne serait pas de
l'interet bien compris du Conseil de poursuivre ses
deliberations aujourd'hui pour renvoyer a Tissue de ses
debats le point qui figure a son ordre du jour a la
Commission des armements de type classique, ni,
d'ailleurs, de prendre aucune autre mesure. J'insiste
sur le mot "aujourd'hui", car je tiens simplement a
preciser que, a la suite de la decision presidentielle que
ma delegation a approuvee et appuyee, le Conseil n'est
pas encore officiellement saisi du projet de resolution
propose par le representant de l'Union sovietique.

It would, therefore, be our view that we should postone discussion of the item on the agenda until the
ext meeting, at which time, as we understand it, the
ecurity Council will consider what action, if any, to
ike upon the motion of the Soviet Union. At the time
f our next meeting whatever action, if any, the Security
'ouncil decides to take would be completely without
rejudice, in our judgment, to the right and authority
f the Security Council to proceed with its business,
ertainly, it was not the intention of the United States
elegation to indicate in any way that we believed it
ould be desirable, or proper or politic to suspend our
;liberations until a decision were taken by the Security
ouncil upon the credentials of the representative of
hina.

La delegation des Etats-Unis est done d'avis de
renvoyer a la prochaine seance l'examen du point en
question de 1'ordre du jour; a ce moment-la, le Conseil
de securite, sauf erreur de notre part, examinera quelle
suite il y aurait eventuellement lieu de donner a la
motion de l'Union sovietique. A la prochaine seance,
toute mesure que le Conseil de securite pourra decider
de prendre ne devra, estimons-nous, nullement prejuger
le droit et le pouvoir du Conseil de securite de poursuivre son activite. La delegation des Etats-Unis
n'entend certes nullement laisser croire qu'a son avis il
serait utile, convenable ou de bonne politique, de suspendre les deliberations jusqu'a ce que le Conseil ait
pris une decision au sujet des pouvoirs du representant
de la Chine.

It is for that reason that I have made this second
atement. We wish to suggest postponement of the

Telle est la raison pour laquelle j'ai redemande la
parole. Ce que la delegation des Etats-Unis propose,

efers to "the credentials of representatives" which
re to be examined by the Secretary-General, but I
ave put before the Council a case in which no creentials are required at all and in which rule 15 thereore does not apply. Nor does rule 17 help, because
riat applies only to a representative already seated. It
ays:

discussion of the item on today's provisional agenda
only until the Soviet L'nion motion has come before
the Security Council in accordance with the ruling of
the Chair, and the Security Council has considered
what action, if any, to take upon that motion.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) : I only
want to explain my vote. I emphasize that I am speaking only for that purpose because rule 33 states t h a t :
"any motion for the suspension or for the simple
adjournment of the meeting shall be decided without
debate". I think that that does not exclude short
explanations of vote, and I want to say that, after
the elucidation just given by the representative of the
United States, I am quite ready to vote for the adjournment, because I shall vote with the same intention in
mind—that is to say, that we shall defer going on
with our other business on the agenda until we take up
this question in the course of the next day or two, but
that, whatever decision we take on the Soviet Union
proposal, the Council will be free then to proceed with
any other business.

c'est de ne remettre la discussion du point qui figure ;
1'ordre du jour provisoire de la presente seance qui
jusqu'a ce que le Conseil de securite ait ete saisi
conformement a la decision du President, de la motioi
de l'Union sovietique et qu'il ait examine la suite ;
lui donner eventuellement.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(tradui
de I'anglais) : Je voudrais simplement expliquer le vot<
que je vais emettre. Je souligne que je ne prends k
parole qu'a cette fin, car l'article 33 du reglemen:
interieur du Conseil de securite stipule qu' "il est statue
sans debat sur toute proposition touchant la suspensior
ou le simple ajournement de la seance". Je pense que
cette disposition n'exclut pas de breves explications d«
vote; je tiens a dire que, apres les eclaircissements que
vient de fournir le representant des Etats-Unis, je suis
tout a fait dispose a voter en faveur de l'ajournement
du debat; je voterai, en effet, dans la meme intentiorj
que mon collegue des Etats-Unis. J'entends par la que
le Conseil remette l'examen des autres points de son
ordre du jour jusqu'a ce qu'il ait aborde la question
dont il s'agit, dans un jour ou deux, mais que, quelle
que soit la decision adoptee en ce qui concerne la
proposition de l'Union sovietique, le Conseil soit libre
ensuite de poursuivre ses travaux.

the

3 . Souhaits de b i e n v e n u e a u x nouveaux
m e m b r e s d u Conseil d e securite

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt) : I have noticed for
quite a while, as has the representative of the United
Kingdom, that we were proceeding without regard to
rule 33, paragraph 2, of our rules of procedure concerning motions for adjournment, upon which a
decision should be taken immediately without debate.
However, I did not want to assume for myself or my
delegation the responsibility of stopping any useful
clarification of the point we have been discussing
and the implications of which may be of extreme
importance.

Mahmoud F A W Z I Bey (Egypte)
(traduit
de
l'anglais) : Comme le representant du Royaume-Uni, je
remarque depuis un certain temps que nous ne tenons
pas compte du deuxieme paragraphe de l'article 33 du
reglement interieur du Conseil, relatif aux motions
d'ajournement et qui prevoit qu'il doit etre statue sur
toute proposition de ce genre immediatement et sans
debat. Neanmoins, je ne veux pas prendre, en mon
nom ou en celui de ma delegation, la responsabilite
d'arreter le cours d'explications tres utiles concernant
la question en discussion et qui peut avoir des consequences extremement importantes.

I should like at this time, with the permission of the
President, to discharge a very pleasant duty on behalf
of my delegation and my country, namely, to welcome
the new members of the Security Council: Ecuador,
India and Yugoslavia. Besides being important by themselves, they are highly esteemed Members of the United
Nations and of the world family of nations at large
The latest expression of this esteem has been their
election to the Security Council, for the membership
of which they are eminently qualified. They represent
three great areas and three great cultures. They will
no doubt contribute abundantly to the future work of
the Security Council.

J'aimerais, si le President le permet, m'acquitter a
present, au nom de ma delegation et de mon pays, d'un
devoir extremement agreable en snuhaitant la bienvenue
aux nouveaux membres du Conseil de securite:
l'Equateur, l'lnde et la Yougoslavie. En dehors de
l'importance qu'ils ont, chacun en particulier, ces pays
sont des Membres tres estimes de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies et de la communaute international toul
entiere. La derniere marque d'estime qu'aient regue ces
pays a ete leur election au Conseil de securite, organe
auquel ils ont toute qualite pour appartenir. Ces pays
representent trois grandes regions du globe et trois
grandes cultures intellectuelles. Leur contribution au>
travaux f uturs du Conseil de securite sera certainemen'
considerable.

The representatives of Ecuador, India and Yugoslavia
are no newcomers to the United Nations and to its
Councils. W e all have the privilege of knowing them
well and we all value their sterling qualities, and look
forward with real pleasure and trust to our continued
association with them in our future work.

Les representants de l'Equateur, de l'lnde et de li
Yougoslavie ne sont pas des nouveaux venus dan:
l'Organisation et les Conseils des Nations Unies. Nou:
avons tous le privilege de les bien connaitre, nou:
apprecions tous a leur juste valeur leurs solides qua
lites, et c'est avec un plaisir et une confiance veritable
que nous envisageons de continuer a collaborer ave
eux au cours de nos travaux futurs.

3.

W e l c o m i n g of new m e m b e r s
Security Council

of

10

n
1 wish at the same time to avail myself of this
opportunity to recall our association with the distinguished represcntatives of the three outgoing members of the Security Cot1lleil, Argentina, Canada and
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, whom we
have learnecl to esteem and whose excellent qualities
have gained our sincere admiration.

Je tiens en même tcmps à profiter de l'occasion pour
rappeler notrc collaboration avec les distingués représentants dcs trois membres sortants du Conseil de
sécurité, l'Argentine, le Canada et la République socialiste soviétique d'Ukraine; nous avons appris à estimer
ces représentants qui, par leurs hautes qualités, se sont
acquis notre sincère admiration.

The PRE[';IDENT: Before 1 recognize the other
speakers, 1 should like to make a brief remark regarding
our procedure. The Council has had a general expression of opinion with regard to actjournment. l fmd
that the general sentiment of the Council is for
adjournment, although delegations do not qllite agree
on the reasons for adjourt1ment Unless l hear objection from the Couneil, 1 shall soon adjourn the meeting
without plltting the motion to a vote.

Le PRÉSIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant de
donner la parole aux autres orateurs inscrits, je tiens
à faire une brève observation concernant la procédure.
La majorité des membres ont émis leur avis au sujet
de l'ajournement. Je constate que cette majorité est en
faveur d'lm ajournement du débat, 'bien que les diverses
délégations ne soient pas tout à fait d'accord sur les
motifs de cette décision. A moills d'objection, je lèverai
clonc bientôt la séance sans mettre aux voix la motion
d'ajournement.

However, before c10ing that, l shollld like to cali
the attention of the Couneil to certain papers which
are before us. V'l e have communications from the
Secretary-General in documents S/1438, S/1439 and
S/1440, notifying us of the credentials of the three
new membcrs of the Security Counci1.

Toutefois, j'aimerais auparavant attirer l'attention
des membres du Coriseil sur certains documents dont
nous sommes saisis. Le Secrétaire général nous a
transmis, dans les documents 5/1438, 5/1439, S/1440,
des communications nous informant que les trois
nouveaux membres du Conseil de sécurité avaient
communiqué leurs pouvoirs.

As President of the Council, l wish to extend to
the delegations of Ecuador, India and Yugoslavia the
we1come of the Security CounciL The representative
of Egypt has already expressec1 his own we1come, and
1 find that the sentiments expressed by him are quite
general among us ail. Therefore, before recognizing
the next speaker, 1 should like formally to extend the
we1come of the 5ecurity Council to our three new
colleagues.

En tant que Président du Conseil, je tiens à accueillir
les délégations de l'Equateur, de l'Inde et de la
Yougoslavie au sein du Conseil de sécurité. Le représentant de l'Egypte a déjà prononcé, en son nom
personnel, des paroles de bienverme. Je pense que les
sentiments qu'il a exprimés sont partagés par nous tous.
C'est pourquoi, avant de donner la parole au prochain
orateur, je tiens à souhaiter officiellement la bienvenue
à nos trois nouveaux ,collègues.

Sir Benegal N. RAU (Iudia): l hope the President
will, for a few moments, turn a blind eye to rule 33
and permit me to thank him and also the representative
:nnsabi\ilé
:'oncernant " of Egypt for their ki11(1 words of vvelcome. My Governàl'$ consè·. ment greatly appreciates the honour which has been
doue to Inc1ia by those who electecl it to a seat on the
Icquit.ter fi-1,.· Security Council which is, in some ways, the 1110St
pays, d'urt_ important organ of the United Nations. It is, however,
110t merely an hononr but also a responsibility, and at
hil~nvenue
the moment it is the responsibility which weighs most
SL'C u rité:.
dchl)1"s (\~' heavily npon my mind.
r. ces pay;
isation de;
Ltiona 1 lor:
Like Ecuador, India was e1ected to this place by an
l t l"{'ÇUe cta11110st
1.1l1animons vote of the General Assembly in
.ité, organ;
Octobcr 1949. 4 That is a cirC1.1mstance which, while it
'. Ces l'la~-;
be et t:ro~ en han ces the hononr, also adds to the responsibility.
butinl:1. aur l have had occasion to say a few words on this snbject
~rtain~nîet outside this Councîl this afternoon, and 1 shol1lc1 like
ta repeat them here.

Sir Benegal N. lüu (Inde) (b'aduit de l'anglais):
J'espère que le Président voudra bien oublier pendant
quelques instants l'article 33 et m'autoriser à le rcmercier, ainsi que le représentant de l'Egypte, des aimables
paroles de bienvemle qu'ils ont prononcées. Mon
gouvernement est profondément sensible à l'hommage
rendu à l'Inde par ceux qui l'ont appelée à siéger au
Conseil de sécurité, c'est-à-dire à un organe qui, à
certains égards, est le plus important de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Cependant, cela ne représente pas
simplement un honneur, mais une responsabilité, et, en
ce moment, c'est surtout cette responsabilité qui me
préoccupe.

LTnc1er the Inclian Constitution, :Ministers and Jndges
have, before assl1ming office, to take an oath promising
to clis charge tl1eir c1uties, in the rather qnaint words
of the Constitution, "without fear or favour, affection
or i11 will". Thcre is no similar oath, so far as l know,
prescribcd for the members of the Security COl1ncil,

Aux termes de la Constitution de l'Inde, les ministres
et les juges doivent, avant d'cntrer en fonctions, s'engager par serment à remplir leurs devoirs - je reprends
sous leur forme traditionneIle les termes de la Constitution - "sans crainte, sans partialité, abstraction faite
de tout attachement personnel et de toute idée pré-

• Sec Official Records of tl,e fOHrtTt session of the General
Assambly, 231st plcnary meeting.

• Voir les Documents officiels dl! la quatl'iè1lle sessio1ê de
l'Assemblée générale, 231ème séance plénière.

);"1.l.veal.IX .

.té

ad ltit

de

'l(~-LTni, je

t"H~ tenons
icle 33 du

~

11.1otions

statué sur
1. t
pt sans

,

en

lTIOn

Comme I!Equateur, l'Inde a été élue au Conseil par la
quasi-unanimité de l'Assemblée générale en octobre
1949'1. Cette circonstance, si elle accroît encore
l'honneur fait à mon pays, lui impose aussi de plus
lourdes responsabilités. J'ai déjà eu l'occasion de dire
quelques mots à ce propos ailleurs, cet après-midi
mêl"!1e, et j'aimerais les répéter ici.

11

but doubtless a similar promise holds—at least for the
Indian member of the Council. In any case, I shall
do my best to act in that spirit.

congue". Les membres du Conseil de securite n'ont pas,
que je sache, a preter de serment de ce genre, mais le
representant de l'lnde, tout au moins, s'estime certainement lie par une promesse analogue. De toute fagon,
je ferai de mon mieux pour agir dans cet esprit.

Mr. VITERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador) (translated from
Spanish): While expressing my thanks to the President and the representative of Egypt for their kind
remarks about my country, I should also like to thank
the Governments whose representatives at the recent
General Assembly voted in favour of Ecuador's membership of the Security Council. That election and its
unanimous character are a high honour which the
Government and the people of Ecuador deeply appreciate as a demonstration of faith in a nation which is
living under a truly democratic regime, and as an
appointment which carries with it grave responsibilities.

M. VITERI LAFRONTE (Equateur) (traduit de I'espagnol) : Je tiens a remercier le President et le representant de l'Egypte des paroles genereuses qu'ils ont
adressees a mon pays. Je suis egalement reconnaissant
aux gouvernements dont les representants, a la recente
session de l'Assemblee generale, ont vote en faveur de
l'admission de mon pays au Conseil de securite. Cette
election, qui a eu lieu a l'unanimite, constitue un grand
honneur, que le Gouvernement et le peuple de
l'Equateur apprecient comme il sied. lis l'interpretent
comme une preuve de confiance donnee a un peuple
qui vit sous un regime veritablement democratique et
comme une designation qui impose a ce peuple de graves
responsabilites.

I think it only right for me to associate myself with
the Council's words of appreciation for the work of
the representatives of Argentina, Canada and the
Ukrainian SSR, which have just completed their term
of membership in the Council.

Je crois etre fonde a m'associer aux remerciements
que le Conseil de securite a adresses aux representants
de TArgentine, du Canada et de la RSS d'Ukraine,
membres sortants du Conseil.

The Charter adopted in San Francisco imposes on
the Security Council the notable, complex and allimportant mission of maintaining international peace
and security. This mission can be effectively carried
out if there is agreement and understanding among the
five Powers which are permanent members of the
Council. On these nations the Charter has conferred
very special and exceptional powers, which in turn
entail very heavy responsibilities indeed. It would be
somewhat insincere to say the Security Council has
satisfactorily fulfilled the purpose for which it was
created, in conformity with the spirit of the Charter
adopted in San Francisco. The difficulties of this
unique period in history, and circumstances which are
known to all, have engendered an atmosphere of doubt
and distrust regarding the efficacy of the Council's
work. Yet, the Council has accomplished a great deal,
although it is no secret that it could accomplish much
more if only the permanent members could find general
grounds for agreement and good will which would
really guarantee international peace and security.

La Charte adoptee a San-Francisco charge le Conseil
de la mission noble, elevee et complexe de maintenir la
paix et la securite internationales; cette mission, le
Conseil ne peut s'en acquitter que si l'accord et l'entente
mutuelle regnent entre ses cinq membres permanents,
auxquels la Charte a accorde des pouvoirs tres
speciaux, qui impliquent des responsabilites particulieres. II serait peu sincere d'affirmer que le Conseil
s'est acquitte d'une fagon satisfaisante de la mission
qu'il avait a remplir conformement a l'esprit et a la
lettre de la Charte adoptee a San-Francisco. Les
difficultes qui ont surgi a cette heure unique de
l'histoire et les circonstances que nous connaissons tous
ont provoque une atmosphere de doute et de mefiance
quant a l'efficacite reelle du Conseil de securite. Cependant, le Conseil a accompli une ceuvre importante;
mais nous savons tous qu'il aurait pu faire encore bien
davantage si ses membres permanents avaient trouve
la formule necessaire pour assurer l'entente et la
comprehension mutuelles qui constituent la meilleure
garantie de la paix et de la securite internationales.

The representative of Ecuador earnestly hopes that
there will be fuller agreement, co-operation and understanding among the permanent members of the Council
than there has been in the past, for the good of all and
for the sake of the peace of the entire world. I speak
of the entire world and not only of the Members of
the United Nations, because the Charter includes a
provision to which all too little attention is paid, but
which requires the United Nations as such to see that
non-member States act in such a way as may be necessary for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

En tant que representant de l'Equateur, je souhaite
vivement qu'il s'etablisse, entre les membres permanents
du Conseil de securite, une collaboration et une entente
plus etroites que celles qui ont existe jusqu'a present,
pour le bien de tous et pour la tranquillite du monde
entier. Si je dis "du monde entier", et non pas seulement des Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
c'est parce que, aux termes d'une disposition de la
Charte dont on ne tient d'ailleurs pas suffisamment
compte, l'Organisation a le devoir de faire en sorte que
les Etats qui ne sont pas membres des Nations Unies
agissent conformement aux principes de la Charte dans
la mesure necessaire au maintien de la paix et de la
securite internationales.

The non-permanent members, I am convinced, also
have special obligations of which one of the most
important is to assist in finding a common meeting

Je pense que les representants des membres non
permanents assument, eux aussi, des obligations particulieres. L'une des obligations les plus importantes
12

ground whereby differences will be mitigated, acrimony
reduced, agreement promoted among the permanent
members and harmony ensured in the work of the
the Security Council in general.

consiste a rechercher des formules transactionnelles, en
vue de rapprocher les divers points de vue, d'aplanir
les difficultes, de favoriser l'entente entre les membres
permanents et d'assurer ainsi, d'une fagon generale, le
bon fonctionnement du Conseil de securite.
Conformement aux instructions expresses que j'ai
regues du President de la Republique de l'Equateur et
du Ministre des affaires etrangeres de mon pays, qui
etaient tous deux delegues a la Conference de SanFrancisco, j'aurai l'honneur de travailler au Conseil de
securite et de collaborer avec les membres eminents de
ce Conseil, sans jamais perdre de vue les buts, les
principes et les dispositions de la Charte adoptee a
San-Francisco.
M. BEBLER (Yougoslavie) : Messieurs les representants, a l'occasion de cette premiere seance du Conseil
de securite a laquelle j'ai l'honneur d'assister en qualite
de representant d'un Etat Membre des Nations Unies
nouvellement elu au Conseil, et en presentant mes
remerciements pour les paroles de bienvenue qui ont
ete prononcees, je desire exprimer brievement les
sentiments qui animent mon gouvernement et les
peuples de Yougoslavie a propos de l'entree de leur
pays au Conseil de securite des Nations Unies.

In virtue of special instructions received from the
President of the Republic of Ecuador and from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country, both of
whom were delegates to the San Francisco Conference,
I shall be honoured to work and co-operate actively
with the members of this body, and I shall ever bear
in mind the purposes, principles and provisions of the
Charter adopted in San Francisco.
Mr. BEBLER (Yugoslavia) (translated from French):
Members of the Council, on the occasion of this first
meeting of the Security Council which I have the
honour to attend as the representative of a Member
State of the United Nations newly elected to the Council, I should like, in expressing appreciation for the
words of welcome which have been pronounced, briefly
to express the feelings inspired in my Government and
the peoples of Yugoslavia in connexion with the admission of their Government to the Security Council of
the United Nations.
The peoples of Yugoslavia are proud to be in a
position to state that, faithful to the traditions of their
age-old struggle for national freedom, they did their
duty in the great war which brought about the victory
of the United Nations. Their sacrifices were tremendous. The country lost more than 11 per cent of its
population; at the end of the war thousands of villages
were in ruins; our cities, particularly our capital, were
heavily damaged, and our lines of communication were
unfit for use. The economic consequences of such a
state of affairs, particularly in the case of a country
which, like ours, was technically backward, were
extremely serious, and the difficulties of rapid reconstruction defy description.

Les peuples de Yougoslavie sont fiers de pouvoir
dire qu'ils avaient, fideles a leurs traditions de lutte
seculaire pour leur liberte nationale, fait tout leur devoir
dans la grande guerre qui a amene la victoire des
Nations Unies. Leurs sacrifices ont ete enormes. Le
pays a perdu plus de onze pour cent de sa population;
des milliers de villages etaient, a la fin de la guerre,
completement en ruines; nos villes — la capitale du
pays en premier lieu — etaient gravement endommagees, nos voies de communication inutilisables. Les
consequences economiques d'un tel etat de choses,
surtout quand il s'agit d'un pays arriere au point de
vue technique comme l'etait le notre, etaient extremement graves et les difficultes d'une reconstruction
rapide indescriptibles.

Nevertheless, we have achieved recovery; we have
gone even further; we are endeavouring to abolish the
backwardness of our economy, our low cultural level,
poverty and illiteracy, as well as all the other evil
legacies of the past. That task was made possible
through the independence and the popular democracy
achieved through victory over our common enemies:
the forces of the hitlerite and fascist Axis.

Pourtant, nous nous sommes releves; nous avons fait
meme davantage: nous nous sommes attaques a la
liquidation de l'etat arriere de notre economic de notre
niveau culturel inferieur, de la misere et de l'analphabetisme ainsi que de toutes les autres tristes survivances
de notre passe, ce qui a ete rendu possible par l'independance et la democratic populaire conquise par la
victoire sur nos ennemis communs: les forces de l'Axe
hitlerien et fasciste.

Is it not obvious that a people which had a recent
history of that kind and was devoted to such tasks
would cherish its independence, yet at the same time
yearn for peace, which alone could enable it to achieve
the noble goals to which it aspired? Is it not natural
that a people such as ours should be attached to the
great democratic, humanistic and pacific principles
inscribed in our Charter? Finally, is it not natural
for the Government of such a country to be consistent
in its peaceful foreign policy of good neighbourliness
and broad international co-operation?

N'est-il pas evident que les peuples avec une telle
histoire recente et atteles a de telles taches soient jaloux
de leur independance, mais en meme temps assoiffes de
cette paix qui, seule, peut leur permettre d'atteindre les
nobles buts qu'ils se sont proposes? N'est-il pas naturel
que des peuples comme le notre soient attaches aux
grands principes democratiques, humanistes et pacifistes
inscrits dans notre Charte? N'est-il pas naturel, enfin,
que le gouvernement d'un tel pays soit consequent dans
sa politique exterieure pacifique de bon voisinage et de
large collaboration internationale ?

Privileged as I am to represent the Federative
People's Republic of Yugoslavia on this Council, I
shall do my best in all circumstances to give adequate

Ayant le privilege de representer la Republique
populaire federative de Yougoslavie au sein de ce
Conseil, je m'emploierai de mon mieux a donner une
13

expression to the yearning for peace and the adherence
to the principles of international justice which inspire
the people of Yugoslavia and which guide my Government's peaceful foreign policy. In so doing, we—the
entire Yugoslav delegation and I—believe that we can
at the same time serve to the utmost the interests of
all people and fulfil to the best of our ability the
responsibilities which fall on our shoulders in participating in the work of the Security Council, a body on
which each individual delegation is morally a trustee
of all the United Nations and all the peoples of the
world.
All peoples are concerned in the maintenance of peace
since, as members of the human collectivity, they have
nothing to gain but much to lose from a new world
conflict. Basically they are all agreed that the best
safeguard of peace is the application of the principles
of the Charter. Indeed, if the equality of the rights
of peoples and their right of self-determination were
fully respected, what better foundation for a solid and
lasting peace could be imagined?

expression adequate, dans toutes les circonstances, a
cette soif de la paix et a cette fidelite aux principes de
justice internationale qu'eprouvent les peuples de
Yougoslavie et qui inspirent mon gouvernement, ainsi
qu'a la politique exterieure pacifique de ce meme
gouvernement. Ce faisant, nous croyons — la delegation
yougoslave tout entiere et moi-meme — pouvoir en
meme temps servir au mieux les interets de tous les
peuples et remplir au mieux les devoirs qui nous
incombent en participant aux travaux du Conseil de
securite, au sein duquel toute delegation particuliere
est moralement mandataire de toutes les Nations Unies
et de tous les peuples.
Car tous les peuples sont interesses au maintien de
la paix, puisque, comme parties de la collectivite
humaine, ils n'ont rien a gagner, mais enormement a
perdre, d'une nouvelle conflagration mondiale. Et, au
fond, ils sont tous d'accord pour penser que la meilleure
sauvegarde de la paix reside dans la mise en ceuvre des
principes de la Charte. En effet, l'egalite de droits des
peuples et leur droit a disposer d'eux-memes pleinement
respectes, quelle meilleure assise d'une paix solide et
durable pourrait-on rever?

In our opinion, the following practical conclusion
must be drawn from that fundamental t r u t h : the
more those principles are respected, the fewer will be
the points of friction between States, and the less
reason will there be for tension among great Powers.
The Security Council, the organ responsible for preserving peace in what might be termed day-to-day
efforts, will, in our opinion, be well advised to seek,
in each situation or dispute brought to its attention the
solution most nearly in accordance with the fundamental principles of the Charter. Such solutions will
be the only ones to stand the test of time, while
solution contrary to the principles of the Charter will
subsequently prove to be mere expedients which sooner
or later will cause the same situation or dispute to arise
in more acute form.

De cette verite fondamentale, il faut tirer, a notre
avis, la conclusion pratique suivante: plus ces principes
seront respectes, moins il y aura de points de friction
entre Etats, moins il y aura de raisons pour une
tension entre grandes Puissances. Le Conseil de securite, organe charge de preserver la paix par des efforts
pour ainsi dire quotidiens sera en consequence, a notre
avis, bien inspire quand il recherchera, dans chaque
situation ou dispute soumise a son attention, la solution
qui soit dans la plus grande mesure possible conforme
aux principes fondamentaux de la Charte. De telles
solutions seront les seules a pouvoir resister a l'epreuve
du temps, tandis que les solutions contraires aux principes de la Charte s'avereront par la suite comme des
expedients qui feront surgir, tot ou tard, la meme
situation ou la meme dispute sous une forme plus
aigue.

In that spirit and in the desire to accomplish constructive work, the Yugoslav delegation will spare no
effort towards the realization, at least in part, of the
hopes of mankind for a turning point in the near
future leading to better international understanding.

Dans cet esprit et avec le desir de faire du travail
constructif, la delegation yougoslave n'epargnera pas
ses efforts pour que se realisent, au moins en partie
les espoirs des peuples de voir apparaitre, dans un
proche avenir, un tournant vers une meilleure entente
internationale.

The PRESIDENT: I intend to call the next meeting
of the Security Council for 3 o'clock Thursday afternoon. Two items will be on the provisional agenda:
first, the Soviet Union draft resolution which has just
been put before us, and secondly, the item relating to
conventional armaments.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : J'ai l'intention
de convoquer la prochaine seance du Conseil de
securite pour jeudi prochain a 15 heures. Deux points
figureront a 1'ordre du jour provisoire: le projet de
resolution de l ' U R S S qui vient de nous etre soumis
et la question des armements de type classique.

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.in

La seance est levee a 17 h. 20.

Printed in the U.S.A.

Price in the United States : 15 cents

3354—April 1950—2770
