S/PV.9181

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9181st meeting

Thursday, 3 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Botchwey

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania
Brazil
China
France
Gabon
India
Ireland
Kenya
Mexico
Norway
Russian Federation
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Immongault
Mr. Kwatra
Mr. Byrne
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Integrating effective resilience-building in peace operations for sustainable
peace
Letter dated 24 October 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/799)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-67233 (E)
*2267233*

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

a letter dated 24 October 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Ghana to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Integrating effective resilience-building in
peace operations for sustainable peace

The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Ghana for organizing this open debate on integrating
effective resilience-building in peace operations for
sustainable peace.

Letter dated 24 October 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Ghana
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/799)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General and the Ministers and other
high-level representatives present today. Their presence
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Algeria, Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh, Canada,
Chile, Ecuador, Egypt, Germany, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Lebanon, Malta, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Tunisia and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa in
the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and Peace Operations; His Excellency Mr. Bankole
Adeoye, Commissioner for Political Affairs and Peace
and Security of the African Union Commission; Her
Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders;
and Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of
Security Council Report.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Mr. Silvio
Gonzato, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/799, which contains the text of
2/33

03/11/2022

Our peace operations, which include peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, provide
the space for political solutions. They help to protect
civilians and prevent violence. They enable the work of
peacebuilding, development, humanitarian and human
rights actors. But the local and global contexts in which
they operate are becoming more challenging by the
day. Geopolitical tensions are increasing. Insecurity is
spreading, and the drivers of instability are powerful,
many and mutually reinforcing. They include escalating
climate catastrophes, worsening hunger and poverty,
deepening inequalities, spreading violent misogyny,
misinformation and disinformation and waning trust
in institutions.
All those factors are fuelling political tensions,
economic despair and social unrest. Unconstitutional
changes of Government are proliferating, alongside
inter-State conflicts, invasions and wars. Entrenched
divides between world Powers continue to limit our
ability to collectively respond. The chasm between
humanitarian needs and humanitarian assistance
continues to widen. Human rights and the rule of law
are under assault. Cyberwarfare and lethal autonomous
weapons present risks that we barely comprehend and
for which we lack the global architecture to contain.
Our world is transforming at a breakneck speed. We
must keep pace to keep peace.
The peacebuilding gains on the African continent
and elsewhere are reversing. We must ensure a sharper
focus on prevention and building resilience. The New
Agenda for Peace proposed in my report Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) will prioritize investment in
prevention and peacebuilding. Our peace operations
must be empowered and equipped to play a greater
role in sustaining peace at all stages of conflict and in
all its dimensions. That requires committed, inclusive
national ownership that considers the needs of the
most vulnerable, including women, young people and
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

minorities. Above all, development and respect for all
human rights —economic, social, cultural, civil and
political — are the world’s best preventive tools against
violent conflict and instability.
Allow me to focus on four priorities today.
First, we must deepen engagement with local
communities and promote more responsive and
inclusive Governments and institutions. Peace
operations are manifestations of the political leverage
of the Council. They bring the normative role and
technical capacities of the United Nations system to
bear on the ground, and they contribute to shared goals
for legitimate, responsive and inclusive governance.
Peace operations create space for dialogue and political
participation, reduce community violence, secure the
delivery of basic services, encourage reconciliation
and promote equal access to justice. But we must act
more quickly and effectively to address needs and
grievances. Specifically, that means strengthening a
whole-of-society approach and increasing investments
that build trust, community engagement and cohesion.
Secondly, we must bolster the leadership of women
and youth in shaping the future of their countries and
ensure that they benefit from peace and development
gains. The contributions of women peacekeepers
and local women networks are pivotal to building
community resilience and ensuring that women’s
concerns are front and centre in conflict-prevention
and -resolution efforts.
We know that securing women’s rights and
equal participation in decision-making is essential to
building and maintaining peace. That is why we are
investing in partnerships with local women leaders and
peacebuilders, including by increasing the number of
women personnel at all levels. And we are pursuing
policies that guarantee full gender parity and women
leadership, including through quotas, across election
monitoring, security sector reform, disarmament and
justice systems.
At the same time, we must ensure the voices of
young people are heard loud and clear in articulating
peacebuilding priorities. Our youth, peace and
security agenda — together with the African Union’s
2020 Continental Framework on Youth, Peace and
Security — are important and complementary tools to
amplify those critical voices.

S/PV.9181

Thirdly, we need a more holistic and integrated
approach to building resilience and sustaining peace,
with tailored investments across the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus. That means strengthening
synergies across the range of peace work — from
conflict prevention and resolution to peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and long-term development. It means
deepening partnerships among the United Nations, the
African Union and other regional organizations, as well
as international and regional financial institutions. And
it means better integrating the work of United Nations
country teams with the mandates of peace operations,
particularly in transition contexts.
Fourthly, and fundamentally, is the crucial question
of financing. We all recognize that prevention and
peacebuilding are cost-effective and save lives. But
that understanding in principle is not matched with
the necessary resources in practice The international
community continues to underinvest in peace. It
is time to walk the talk. The General Assembly’s
financing for peacebuilding resolution (General
Assembly resolution 76/305) reflects a commitment to
find solutions for increased and more predictable and
sustainable funding.
The Peacebuilding Fund continues to be an
invaluable resource. Last year, the Fund provided
$150 million to 25 countries in Africa and became the
catalyst for much larger contributions by other financial
institutions. But needs far outpace resources. Funding
must be scaled up, and partnerships with international
financial institutions must be further strengthened.
The Security Council plays a critical role in
supporting the efforts of our peace operations to build
resilience and sustain peace. By acting early, engaging
strategically and speaking with one voice, the Council
can mobilize the international community’s political
and financial support and foster the commitment of
conflict actors to secure peace.
I look forward to continuing to work with the Council
to strengthen peace operations and advance peace.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his introductory remarks.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee: I join the Secretary-General in thanking
the Government of Ghana for organizing this timely
open debate on a topic that lies at the heart of the work
of the Security Council.

22-672333/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The nature of crises in today’s increasingly
unpredictable world calls for our renewed efforts to
adapt United Nations peace operations to fast-changing
conflict dynamics. They call for renewed efforts to
preserve the trust of the affected civilian populations in
the capacity of international and regional partners — the
United Nations in particular — to help preserve peace.
I will try to elaborate, in all modesty, on a couple
of elements that the Secretary-General touched upon
in his thoughtful remarks — the need for holistic and
integrated approaches and for inclusive processes. As the
Secretary-General just noted, we cannot rely on security
responses alone. Holistic and integrated approaches are
necessary. Peace operations mandates, as defined by
the Security Council, range from protecting civilians
to strengthening institutions, supporting disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, enabling justice and
reconciliation, holding credible elections and extending
legitimate and accountable State authority. In order
to ensure the success of peace operations, we need
inclusive strategies that consider the entire spectrum
of peace — from prevention, conflict resolution and
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and development. It
also requires the mobilization and engagement of
all related actors — whether international, regional
or national — working together in an integrated and
coordinated manner.
The Security Council has a vital role to play in that
regard. Peace operations need clear, realistic and topical
mandates, with well-identified priorities, adequate
sequencing and the flexibility to evolve over time. Let
me be clear. I am not suggesting that peace operations
should be tasked with or take upon themselves all
aspects related to building resilience as part of such
approaches, or that the Security Council should indeed
engage in issues of a socioeconomic nature. However,
we need to recognize that purely security-oriented
responses are proving increasingly insufficient.
That is clear in the Sahel, for instance. Whether in
Mali, Burkina Faso or Somalia, where years of focus
on security efforts have yet to turn the tide of violent
extremism, building resilience requires responses that
are part of wider political strategies and are mindful
of, and responsive to, socioeconomic realities and
needs. In the case of the Sahel, the ongoing assessment
of the Independent High-level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel, led by former President
Issoufou, should hopefully offer some useful elements
in that regard.
4/33

03/11/2022

Support to locally oriented, nationally owned
political solutions remains at the core of the work of
the United Nations, most especially within the context
of sustaining peace. For that reason, truly holistic and
integrated solutions cannot rest on expediency. They
must be based on a national vision and be inclusive.
They must recognize the needs and contributions of all
segments of society, including women and youth, as
agents of peace and development.
Women carry a particularly large burden of conflict
and climactic or socioeconomic shocks. Inequality
and discrimination increase their vulnerability and
undermine their coping capacities. Yet they often
have unique knowledge that allow them to protect
livelihoods and decrease tensions. The deployment
of peace operations presents a unique opportunity
to support progress towards gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls. Through the
combined contributions of women peacekeepers and
local women, women’s concerns become an integral
part of conflict-prevention and -resolution efforts.
Mainstreaming the youth, peace and security
agenda in the mandate of peace operations offers new
momentum to promote inclusive processes, create space
for dialogue, reduce community violence, encourage
reconciliation and promote equal access to justice.
To support resilience-building, it is essential to
ensure that peace operations pursue people-centred
approaches, and not just focus on the State. The
United Nations needs meaningful engagement with a
multiplicity of communities and groups, especially at the
local level, to help strengthen social cohesion, enhance
trust and foster the credibility of the United Nations.
I also want to stress the importance of
complementarity and collaboration between peace and
security efforts, the protection of human rights and
development and humanitarian work. United Nations
country teams play a critical role in supporting countries
with a long-term perspective, and they are an integral
part of our efforts to sustain peace. That is especially
important during United Nations transitions, such as in
Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau in the recent
past, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
near future.
Furthermore, to achieve sustaining peace and
sustainable development, we need to engage in
strong collective action and enhance collaboration
and partnerships with regional and subregional
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

organizations, financial institutions, civil society and
the business community. Working more closely with
international and regional financial institutions is
particularly important. The recent World Bank Gulf of
Guinea Northern Regions Social Cohesion Project is a
good example of how they can bring resources to bear
while complementing United Nations prevention and
peacebuilding efforts.
As we develop those partnerships and innovative
approaches, I look forward to the continued support
of the Security Council in orienting collective efforts
and resources to build resilience in the countries and
regions where United Nations peace operations are
deployed, and beyond.
The President: I thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.
Mr. Adeoye: I address the Security Council from
Abuja, where we have just concluded the inaugural
Lessons Learned Forum on African Union Peace
Support Operations and the African Standby Force. We
were pleased to be joined by Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix. Like today’s open debate, the
African Union seeks to enhance our resilience-building
in peace support operations for sustainable peace.
The identified drivers of conflict in Africa vary from
structural economic dependence, with limited growth
opportunities to provide jobs, to uneven development,
insecurity and further limited opportunities related to
socio-political and economic exclusion. The resulting
high level of discontent requires a rapid response
through structural transformation.
Peace operations lay the foundation for entities
better suited to take over and support affected countries
towards a post-conflict context. One way the that the
Security Council can ensure that peace operations
in Africa help provide a pathway to addressing the
underlying causes of conflict is to adopt a whole-oforganization approach in implementing mandates. Since
today’s peace support operations are multidimensional
and multifunctional, with mandates that go beyond
military pacification of the conflict theatre, it is
imperative — in our view — to ensure that the relevant
United Nations and other stakeholders support deployed
missions as early as possible.
Experience has shown that addressing the
underlying causes of conflict is primarily the
responsibility of affected countries. Another pathway

S/PV.9181

is to align programmes for complementing critical
political transitions with exit strategies for peace support
operations in order to build relevant institutional and
normative capacities towards resilience. To that end,
the African Union has entered into a collaborative
arrangement with the United Nations Development
Programme to create a facility to support critical
political transitions in a country support model. I urge
the Council to support the African Union-United Nations
Regional Governance Facility for Managing Inclusive
Transitions in Africa, in order to gain traction as
one of the responses to addressing underlying causes
for conflict.
Over the past decades, Africa has been saddled with
a plethora of conflicts requiring prompt, innovative and
comprehensive international, regional and subregional
intervention. That includes humanitarian disasters and
other threats to human security. The nature of those
emerging threats, particularly in Africa, has shown
that no single institution, no one country, no one region
in some cases, can adequately and rapidly respond
to them.
Therefore, to improve synergy between the African
Union and the United Nations, we call for common
purpose in addressing existing and emerging threats
to regional and international peace, where there is a
need for increased collaboration and coordination.
Hopefully, the upcoming high-level inter-institutional
consultations between the African Union and the
United Nations in December — at the level of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General — will provide further impetus to
strengthen our common peace endeavours.
Within the continent, the African Union continues
to engage meaningfully with member States as well
as regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms to enhance capacity to rapidly address
those threats as they arise —
The African Union remains committed to continuous
strategic engagement with the United Nations on early
warning, conflict prevention and crisis —
The President: I would like to draw your attention,
Ambassador Adeoye, to the fact that the audio is quite
poor, and we cannot hear you. May I therefore suggest
that you provide us with your statement for circulation
to members.
Mr. Adeoye: I regret the audio difficulties.

22-672335/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The changing nature of conflicts and security
threats in Africa compel a new agenda for building
resilience, and we need to build our commitment to that
agenda together in order to face the challenges of today.
The President: I thank Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Robinson.
Mrs. Robinson: It is an honour and a privilege to
address the Security Council today in such distinguished
company for this timely discussion, and I would like to
extend my thanks to Mr. Harold Agyeman, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Ghana, for his
generous invitation and convening efforts.
I speak today in my capacity as Chair of The Elders,
a group of independent global leaders founded by
Nelson Mandela 15 years ago, which works on tackling
conflict and the existential threats facing humankind,
including the climate-change crisis, nuclear weapons
and pandemics.
The Elders have a special bond with Ghana through
the life and legacy of our dearly missed friend and
former Chair, Kofi Annan. In preparing my remarks
today, I was reminded of one of his insights that is
particularly relevant to our discussion today, which
was that the human family will not enjoy development
without security, will not enjoy security without
development and will not enjoy either without respect
for human rights.
Security, sustainable development and human rights
should be the bedrock of effective and resilient United
Nations peace operations, but we know there remain
significant challenges in turning that core principle
into practice. The Security Council needs to lead by
demonstrating coherence, acting in the collective
interests of the whole United Nations and working more
closely with other parts of the Organization.
In order for United Nations peace operations to
focus effectively on the underlying causes of conflict
and insecurity, and not just their immediate symptoms,
the Security Council should play a more proactive role
and promote a whole-of-United Nations approach that
supports just and sustainable peace, while making
sure that peace operations draw on and complement
the insights and experience of staff working in all
parts of the United Nations at the country level. As a
former Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, I am under no illusions as to how
6/33

03/11/2022

challenging that is, but I am equally aware of the risks
of failure and fatalism.
We believe that the Council currently faces the
greatest threats to global peace and security since
its formation, including through violent conflict and
its intersection with global environmental, food,
energy and financial crises. The war on Ukraine has
fully exposed the inability of the Council to respond
to aggression by a permanent member against a
non-nuclear sovereign State.
Too often, Council members have acted to keep
friends and regional allies off the Council’s agenda,
which seriously undermines conflict-prevention
efforts. The Elders support the principle of enabling
regional organizations, such as the African Union and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, to take
a leading role in conflict prevention and resolution
where they are best placed to do so, in their own
regions, including through regional peace operations.
The Council should cooperate closely with regional
organizations, but where they are unable to take
effective action, the Council also has a responsibility
to step in.
From the outset, peace operations should be
equipped to respond to the shifting conflict landscape
we see today. As has been mentioned, there needs
to be a more holistic focus on the underlying causes
of conflict, from political and economic instability
to poverty, inequality and the marginalization of
minorities within countries. I am pleased that today’s
debate has expressly acknowledged women and young
people as two particularly important groups that are too
often excluded from decision-making.
Through the women and peace and security
agenda, the United Nations has sought to promote the
equal representation of women in peacebuilding and
mediation processes, but the evidence tells us that
there is a long way to go. Analysis by UN-Women of
40 peace processes since the end of the Cold War shows
that, in cases in which women were able to participate,
they had a strong influence on the negotiation process
and there was a much higher chance that an agreement
would be reached.
In order to ensure both fair representation and the
meaningful integration of the rights and perspectives
of women and girls into peace processes, it is critical
for women to be equitably represented in security and
defence structures, as well as in peacebuilding and
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

mediation. It is encouraging to see United Nations
peace missions pushing for greater representation of
women in the national security and defence sectors.
Firmer action must be taken to deter and deal with
the reprisals that women peacebuilders and human
rights defenders face by providing targeted and rapid
resources for responding to threats, as called for earlier
this year by our President of the Council today, Ghana’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs (see S/PV.9090).
In the context of resilience-building within peace
operations that addresses the root causes of conflict, I
want to focus particularly on the climate-change crisis,
a threat-multiplier and driver of conflict. I am pleased
that there has been increasing recognition among the
members of the Security Council — albeit not yet
consensus — concerning the security dimensions of
climate change, and there have been some modest steps
towards integrating climate-change considerations
into United Nations peacebuilding operations, such as
through the appointment of an Environmental Affairs
Officer in the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia.
That is progress, but in The Elders’ view we must
go much further. As the climate-change crisis becomes
ever more acute across the world, similar roles should be
considered for other United Nations peace operations.
Last year, six of the 10 biggest United Nations peace
operations — more than 80 per cent of United Nations
personnel — were deployed in countries that are highly
exposed to climate change. We therefore believe that
integrating environmental analysis into the work of the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
must now be a priority.
I first visited Somalia 30 years ago, in 1992, as
President of Ireland, because of the food crisis there at
the time. I returned in 2011 with Irish aid agencies, as
famine had been declared. Now in 2022, Somalia faces
its third famine in 11 years, as ever-greater climate
shocks have been exacerbated by the ongoing conflict
and terrorism. Last Saturday, at least 100 people were
killed by explosions in Mogadishu, but the world barely
noticed. Those were mothers, fathers, sons, daughters
and grandparents leaving behind grieving families,
targeted by Al-Shabaab extremists. The agonies endured
by Somalia’s people over the past three decades should
compel all Council members to redouble their efforts to
tackle the interconnected threats of violent extremism,
conflict and the climate-change crisis.

S/PV.9181

The links between conflict and climate change are
also evident in Tigray, which I visited in 2016 as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on El Niño and
Climate and where I witnessed the great cooperative
work done by the United Nations and aid agencies
to counter the drought there, because there was no
conflict at that time. Today communities in Tigray
and northern Ethiopia are suffering from both conflict
and climate shocks, with truly dire consequences. The
Elders commend the African Union-led negotiations
that have secured a new cessation in hostilities, and
we urge the Council to actively support that process in
order to help turn the ceasefire into a lasting resolution
of that devastating conflict.
Now is the time for the Council to step up and speak
with one voice. Only through sustained engagement to
tackle the root causes of conflict and build just and
sustainable peace will its mandate be fulfilled and the
promises of the Charter of the United Nations delivered
to current and succeeding generations.
The President: I thank Mrs. Robinson for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: I thank you, Madam, for inviting
me to brief the Security Council at today’s open debate.
Peace operations fit for contemporary times need
to devise new approaches that include responsiveness
to the underlying causes and drivers of conflict. That is
the ambitious framing of our discussion today because,
as Ghana’s concept note (S/2022/799, annex) states,
evidence suggests that unaddressed structural factors
can contribute to conflict resurging during or after
peace support missions. I want to focus my remarks
today on the Security Council’s achievements in taking
up these issues to date.
The Council has moved towards greater
acknowledgment of these unaddressed structural
factors, including non-traditional threats, in its
discussions and also in its mandating. In Haiti, the
Council has increasingly voiced concern about the
deleterious effects of gang violence and other criminal
activities, and it recently established a sanctions regime,
while also stressing that addressing the root causes of
instability in Haiti requires political solutions.
Many past Council resolutions have referred to
organized crime, and the Council has repeatedly
made reference to corruption in Guinea-Bissau, Mali,

22-672337/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/11/2022

Somalia, South Sudan and Iraq, among other situations.
Renewing the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, for example, the Council noted

development”, as we sometimes hear; rather, it is
part and parcel of bringing resilience-building to the
forefront of peace operations.

“the importance of the Government of Iraq
urgently delivering meaningful reforms aimed at
meeting the Iraqi people’s legitimate demands to
address corruption” (resolution 2631 (2022), eighth
preamblar paragraph).

The first Secretary-General’s report on transitions
in United Nations peace operations, issued in late June,
emphasized the efforts that are needed to safeguard the
“hard-fought achievements” of peace operations and
“to ensure that the follow-on presence can succeed”
(S/2022/522, para. 41).

The Council has frequently supported transitional
justice initiatives, including in mandating peace
operations in the Central African Republic and
Colombia, and has explicitly associated this area of
work with addressing root causes of conflict.
In its concept note for an October 2021 Council
meeting on diversity and State-building (S/2021/854,
annex), Kenya pointed out that most situations on the
Council’s agenda stem from domestic conflicts over
ethnic, racial, religious, partisan, or socioeconomic
identity. It noted that marginalization and exclusion
of groups from political processes and from economic
resources have led to violence and the formation of
separatist movements.
Liberia is one example of Council resolutions that
cite social exclusion. When I served there, Liberia was
a study in contrasts between the vast wealth derived
from exploitation of its natural resources, on the one
hand, and the acute deprivation of most of its population
and a financial structure that had remained unchanged
for a very long time, on the other hand. Members of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and Council
members would tell me that this was a “development”
issue. But every peace operation needs to consider
all the factors that could trigger or retrigger conflict.
The social and economic exclusion I observed in
Liberia was also about power, inequality and mistrust
of government. The Council’s language in this case
helped provide an additional opening to discuss social
exclusion, which was valuable. Matters such as a State’s
financial structure and management, the impact of
parallel informal power networks, the role of organized
crime, and accountability issues, including corruption,
can be hard to raise and to acknowledge at the national
level. They are very difficult issues for Governments to
own and to address.
Ideally, the Council will approach these issues with
hope and vision. Not every structural problem will
lead to conflict. But it would be wrong to dismiss the
Council’s consideration of these issues as “securitizing
8/33

Past achievements of peace operations have often
been won at a cost of a decade or more of engagement,
expenditure of billions of dollars, and lives of many
peacekeepers lost. These investments in peace deserve
to be protected. This may be an area where the Council
could consider additional steps.
Signalling the Security Council’s strong interest in
sustained peace, and in tandem with the work of the
PBC, Council members might check back in with the
country concerned from time to time. The Security
Council could invite that country, with the Secretariat
and members of the United Nations country team, to
present on progress in areas of the former mandate
at, say, the one-year, three-year and five-year marks
after mission closure. Council members could consider
paying a visit to see for themselves. For example, why
should there not be a Security Council visiting mission
to Sierra Leone, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, countries
whose United Nations peace operations closed in 2014,
2017 and 2018, respectively?
The basis of integrating structural and
societal factors into the work of peace operations
is understanding — understanding not just of the
history, politics and conflict of the country, but of its
economy and of the levers of informal power within
the society, including those elements that benefit from
continued conflict or from the continued weakness of
State institutions.
The recommendations of the 2015 High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO)
remain highly relevant to devising better approaches
to peace operations. The HIPPO report observed
that “more often than not”, peace operations did not
address “root causes and conflict drivers” effectively
(S/2015/446, para. 14). It recommended that the United
Nations Secretariat embrace “a more nuanced analysis
of the complex drivers of the conflict” (ibid., para. 51).
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Today’s topic amplifies the continued importance
of this HIPPO recommendation. While no peace
operation is expected to address every last issue, we
should still, with all humility as outsiders, reflect on
and speak to the full, intricate context in which these
operations intervene.
The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Republic of Ghana.
Let me begin by thanking all the Ministers and
officials who have travelled from their capitals, as well
as all Security Council members and non-members
of the Council, for their participation in today’s
open debate.
I thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement and welcome the clarity of his views on how
best to integrate effective resilience-building in peace
operations for sustainable peace. I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Pobee, Ambassador Bankole
Adeoye, Commissioner for Political Affairs and Peace
and Security of the African Union Commission,
Ms. Mary Robinson, former President of Ireland and
current Chair of The Elders, and Ms. Karin Landgren,
Executive Director of the Security Council Report, for
their informative and insightful briefings.
As the Security Council, we have a primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Getting the balance right with the
instruments we deploy for peace operations is critical
for ensuring that the peace we seek is sustained across
the world.
The link between peace and development is clear
for all. The latest report on the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) has stated that cascading and interlinked
crises are putting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in grave danger, along with peace and
security and humankind’s very own survival. We agree
with the Secretary-General’s statement to a meeting of
the Economic and Social Council in May 2022, which
is on point:
“We must rise higher to rescue the Sustainable
Development Goals — and stay true to our promise
of a world of peace, dignity and prosperity on a
healthy planet”.

S/PV.9181

We must therefore ensure funding across the peace
continuum if we are to achieve any measure of success
in addressing the protracted and complex conflicts we
are currently confronting. In addition, there is a need
for a strong ecosystem to make the triple cross-pillar
nexus a reality and to promote the transformative,
prevention-focused and conflict-sensitive responses
required to accelerate action to achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Ghana is concerned about the fact that not
enough resources have been devoted to non-military
interventions in peace operations by comparison
with military components. As the 2015 High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations noted,
the changes in conflicts may be fast outpacing the
ability of United Nations peace operations to respond
(see S/2015/446). That sustainability gap now threatens
current peacekeeping missions, as a number of
mission host countries are turning to outside forces
for interventions while at the same time limiting the
mandates of the peace missions.
What is even more worrying is that poor
countries are shouldering the burden of addressing
the socioeconomic and political complexities and
challenges that are driving the rising levels of terrorism
and violent extremism, while at the same time bearing
the costs of the military operations needed to defeat
terrorists. Integrating effective resilience-building into
peace operations must be a central preoccupation of the
Council if it is to remain a credible guarantor of peace
and security around the world. If any evidence were
needed, we need look no further than the Sahel, where
the stability and viability of States are tested daily, with
violence and deaths increasing with each attack. But
the Sahel — which, according to the latest edition of
the Global Terrorism Index, is experiencing 35 per cent
of terror-related deaths in the world — is not the only
region where the Council’s traditional response fails to
meet the nature of the threat.
It is clear that sustainable peace today requires that
even as we consider ways to further reform peacekeeping
to ensure adequate programmatic funding, we must
also look at ways to make the successes of military
operations against terrorists more durable by
addressing the underlying factors that exacerbate the
terrorist threat. In the Sahel and coastal West Africa,
the impacts of climate change, including displacement
and food insecurity, poverty and exclusion, low levels
of education and youth unemployment, among other

22-672339/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

things, create a fertile ground for radicalization and
recruitment. Finding a solution to the widening gap
between the expectations of citizens and the capacity
of States to deliver on public goods and maintain
a State presence is as much a security question as it
is a development resilience challenge. The Council
cannot ignore that concern, which is so relevant to
international peace and security and has traditionally
been considered part of peacekeeping transitions. I
would now like to make a number of points about ways
to integrate effective resilience into peace operations
for sustainable peace.
First, there is an overwhelming and urgent need
for United Nations peace operations to be reconfigured
to ensure a situationally determined balance between
military actions aimed at restoring peace, including
through defeating terrorism, and non-military measures
to address the underlying causes of conflicts. We hope
that today’s debate will lead to a process that transforms
the peace-operations model to respond to the conditions
of today. Resilience-building cannot be left to the tail
end of peacekeeping; it must be a key objective, even at
the beginning of peace operations.
Secondly, the Council has to rise to its mandate and
deal with the critical recommendation in the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
on the need for new modalities to deal with terrorism
and violent extremism and the emerging threats to
peace and security in our world today. The threats to
international peace and security continue to multiply
each and every day that no action is taken.
Thirdly, we need to operationalize the Council’s
agendas for youth and women, making them essential
pillars of United Nations support for resilience-building
in addressing the present challenges of insecurity.
Women and young people face peculiar challenges in
their communities, because they are disproportionately
affected by conflict and violence.
Finally, while the different organs of the
United Nations have separate responsibilities that
impact the peace-development nexus, in practice, the
sum of our efforts does not add up to conditions in
which peace thrives. It is important that the Council
encourage coherent action across the United Nations
system that is targeted at the resilience-building agenda
for sustainable peace. The collective contribution of the
system has to be integral to the way in which mandates
are adopted and executed.
10/33

03/11/2022

In conclusion, our capacity to deliver peace and
security rests as much on our ability to understand and
address the underlying conditions for conflict as on our
ability to manage conflict. I hope that this open debate
gets us closer to that understanding.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Permanent Representative of the United
States and member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): We appreciate Ghana’s efforts in convening
us for this important discussion. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, as well as
all the other briefers for their insightful contributions.
I want to start by taking a moment to recognize
those who risk their lives every day in the pursuit of
peace, especially those who have made the ultimate
sacrifice to protect others.
Sustainable peace requires all of us to come
together and ensure that modern United Nations peace
operations are truly multidimensional and integrated.
In order to achieve sustainable peace, as Ms. Robinson
noted, security, sustainable development and human
rights are key. The Secretary-General has called on
us to do just that through the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which emphasizes the primacy of politics in
conflict resolution and the role that peace operations
play in supporting political solutions. It reminds us that
the task of peacekeepers is to create space for political
solutions and support local stakeholders as they tackle
the root causes of conflicts.
Here is what that looks like in practice. For the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the Security
Council has outlined a strategic vision for the Mission’s
role in supporting inclusive and accountable governance.
In Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali is tasked with
supporting Malian implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and a strategy to
address the root causes of violent conflict in the centre
of the country. In both cases, we have found that leaders
of peace operations can operate more effectively and
confidently when they have a clear sense of what the
Security Council expects them to achieve. That is why
we started to introduce longer-term strategic visions
into peace-operation mandates.
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9181

But let us be clear. To be successful, we must have
the support and cooperation of host countries for the
full implementation of United Nations peace operations
and mission mandates. We also recognize that peace
operations alone cannot address the underlying
causes and drivers of conflict, which are generational
challenges that require a full range of actors to come
to the table, including local and national Government,
civil-society leaders, humanitarian organizations, the
private sector and United Nations Member States.

I also want to note that the United States is now
implementing its own strategy to prevent conflict
and promote stability. That effort builds on lessons
learned from our own experiences in conflictaffected environments and integrates best practices for
addressing the root causes of conflict and preventing
future ones. In fact, the United Nations has applied many
of the same lessons, from the value of local buy-in to the
importance of integrating all diplomatic, humanitarian
and security activities under a coherent plan.

Another key group that is too often shut out of
the political process is women. We must work to
ensure that women’s perspectives are integrated across
peace operations functions so that the meaningful
inclusion of women and girls in the political process
and decision-making becomes the norm. The women
and peace and security agenda has a vital role to play
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. At the
same time, we must ensure that young people have a
seat at the table, since we know that their participation
in peace and security is essential to the longevity of
peace. Just look at Africa alone: the median age is 19
years old. That tells us how important young people are
to the future of any peace operation.

The United States stands ready to continue working
within and outside the Council to address all causes of
armed conflict. Together let us continue to support the
heroic work of United Nations peacekeepers and do
everything in our power to end protracted conflicts and
build sustainable peace.

In many situations, we have also seen the importance
of regional actors taking the lead, particularly in the
case of the African Union. We applaud the AU’s efforts
to promote peace and stability on the continent, and we
encourage the AU to continue implementing compliance
frameworks for peace support operations.
The United Nations has a unique comparative
advantage in advancing sustainable peace. We have the
power to coordinate across the international community
to identify clear and achievable goals. The SecretaryGeneral’s New Agenda for Peace, as contained in the
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), offers an
important opportunity for considering how to make the
United Nations more responsive to modern challenges
as we address the root causes of conflict.
For its part, the United States remains deeply
committed to United Nations peacebuilding efforts. As
called for in Our Common Agenda, we strongly support
the expanded role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) across a range of issues, including human rights
and climate change, and we welcome its contribution to
today’s meeting. The PBC has an important convening
role to play and can help mobilize attention and
commitment to international peacebuilding efforts.

Mr. Immongault (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
congratulate Ghana on its presidency of the Security
Council and assure you, Madam President, of Gabon’s
brotherly support.
I thank you for taking the initiative of convening
this high-level debate, which is of particular interest
to Gabon. We are indeed convinced of the central role
that peacekeeping operations play in the resolution
of conflicts and the promotion of international peace
and security.
I thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
informative briefing and the reforms undertaken during
his first term related to both the Secretariat’s peace and
security architecture and the structure of peacekeeping
operations themselves, with the stated objective of
reducing fragmentation within the United Nations
system in fulfilling its peace and security mandate.
I also thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa, Ambassador Martha Pobee; the African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security,
Ambassador Bankole Adeoye; the Chair of The Elders,
Ms. Mary Robinson; and the Executive Director of
Security Council Report, Ms. Karin Landgren, for their
respective contributions.
The fact that today we are discussing integrating
effective resilience-building in peace operations
for sustainable peace is because the directives
and implementation of the mandates conferred on
United Nations peacekeeping missions are clearly
lagging in terms of our expectations and the experience
of the peoples of the world who have been plagued

22-6723311/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

by insecurity and instability. We have been provided
today with the opportunity to take a frank look at our
peacebuilding tools and develop specific and realistic
recommendations for improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and ensuring that related
mandates are commensurate with their required
effectiveness on the ground.
The security dynamics of the international
community in dealing with new threats and challenges
to international peace and stability must take into
account the changing nature of crises and conflicts. We
must redress both structural and recurrent shortcomings
and promote the adjustment of the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations as a tool for
sustaining international peace and security in order to
ensure an adequate response to the many crises and
conflicts that are polarizing the world today.
Strengthening resilience within peacekeeping
operations calls for a multidimensional approach
supported by clearer and more realistic mandates
that incorporate the promotion of human rights due
diligence policies and the improved management and
training of the Blue Helmets. For Gabon, in addition
to those important issues, to which President Ali
Bongo Ondimba has unrelentingly committed himself,
making peacekeeping operations into instruments
to sustain peace that are adapted to contemporary
challenges depends on several essential factors, such
as strengthening cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and
improving coordination among United Nations country
teams, including in the context of transitions.
The role of the PBC as a bridge among the various
United Nations bodies and Member States, including
cross-cutting engagement with young people, women
and the most vulnerable populations, as well as its
role in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, have made it a major asset for sustaining
stabilization. Peacebuilding must be an integral
part of peacekeeping operations’ mandates, as the
reconstruction of countries emerging from crises very
often remains a delicate undertaking that requires the
meaningful commitment of the international community.
We must promote a culture of prevention of armed
conflict in order to effectively address the interrelated
security and development challenges faced by countries
plagued by chronic or cyclical crises. Sustaining the
international community’s efforts to achieve peace
12/33

03/11/2022

hinges on that key issue. To that end, we must strengthen
the means available to the United Nations to prevent
armed conflicts. We must adopt a comprehensive
strategy for the prevention of armed conflicts that
takes into account their root causes. In that regard,
strengthening and developing strategic partnerships,
including prevention mechanisms, is a must, as is the
allocation of resources to preventive diplomacy.
In Central Africa, we have established not only
channels for consultations in the framework of
confidence-building measures but also a subregional
mechanism for detecting the precursors of conflict,
known as the Central African Early Warning
Mechanism (MARAC), the headquarters of which
are located in my country, Gabon. We are convinced
that the more attuned we are to crisis prevention and
early warning, the better our collective response will
be for achieving peace. I would therefore like to take
this opportunity to call for strengthening the financial
and logistical capacities of MARAC in order to fully
operationalize the subregional initiative.
In conclusion, I reaffirm the importance of
configuring our paradigms for the promotion of a
culture of sustainable peace. The Council must be
able to restore peace wherever it has been breached,
maintain it where it is fragile and consolidate it where
it needs to be strengthened.
Mr. Byrne (Ireland): I thank you, Madam President,
for convening this timely debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his wise words, and
our briefers for their thought-provoking messages to
the Security Council. I am particularly proud to sit at
this table and listen to a former President of Ireland,
Ms. Mary Robinson.
It is critically important that the Council and the
wider United Nations system continue to work to
address the underlying causes and drivers of conflict.
The failure to do so would mean consigning ourselves
to addressing the same security challenges repeatedly.
The path to sustainable peace is not linear.
History has shown that hard-won gains can be fragile
and reversible. Ireland knows that at first-hand from
its own peace-process experience. That is why we
have prioritized the link between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding during our term on the Council.
United Nations peacekeeping is a remarkable example
of multilateralism and international solidarity. Across
the globe, women and men are working tirelessly, some
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

laying down their lives, to protect civilians and resolve
conflict. They are doing it to create the conditions
necessary for sustainable peace. I am particularly
proud of our Irish peacekeepers, who have worked
together with the nationals of other Member States and
served the United Nations with such distinction. We
know our peacekeeping operations are being deployed
to increasingly demanding and complex environments,
where military solutions alone will not suffice. Those
challenges require a holistic and coordinated response
across all the pillars of the work of the United Nations.
For peace to be resilient and sustainable, it must be
inclusive and locally owned. Resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted just over 22 years ago, gave us a path to
delivering peace and security more effectively. That is
why Ireland has made the women and peace and security
agenda such a key focus throughout its time on the
Council. The youth, peace and security agenda also has
the potential to be transformative. However, we must
invest properly to achieve that potential. Supporting
those efforts can help to address the underlying causes
of conflict situations. Creating an environment that
is protective and resilient requires the engagement
and input of local communities. That means putting
women and young people at the front and centre of
national and regional responses right at the start,
not as an afterthought. During its time as an elected
member of the Security Council, Ireland has worked to
recognize the importance of women and youth in the
Council’s peacekeeping and peacebuilding resolutions,
particularly peacekeeping mandates. We have taken
the same approach to human rights, by arguing
consistently that measures to combat traditional and
non-traditional security threats, including terrorism,
must comply with international law. I would like to
emphasize that that includes international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. By addressing
violations of human rights, we can help to mitigate
violence and insecurity, radicalization and the growth
of terrorism.
We must also be responsive to other drivers of
conflict, including climate-related security risks.
Many States Members of the United Nations, including
a majority of Council members, recognize the clear
link between climate change and instability. Some 113
Member States made their voices heard last year by
sponsoring a draft thematic resolution that set out those
links (S/2021/990). Despite its failure to adopt that
much-needed draft resolution, the Security Council

S/PV.9181

has increasingly incorporated climate-related security
risks into its peacekeeping mandates. It is important to
ensure that such work continues.
We have additional tools for peace at our disposal.
The Peacebuilding Commission is uniquely placed to
guide the collective efforts of diverse stakeholders.
Peacebuilding gains can be sustained only if we
continue to support peacebuilding programmes, and
that costs money. We must enhance efforts to ensure
adequate, predictable and sustained funding for
peacebuilding, including through the Peacebuilding
Fund. We must ensure that the quantum leap that the
Secretary-General has called for finally becomes
a reality. We also need predictable and sustainable
financing for United Nations-authorized, African
Union-led peace support operations. We hope that the
Secretary-General’s upcoming report on the issue will
prompt an open and frank discussion and provide a
window of opportunity for making concrete progress.
In conclusion, I will turn to the issue of transitions.
When peace operations leave or reconfigure their
strategy or footprint, it is vital for the United Nations
system to be ready to maintain and build on the peace
gains that have been made. To that end, Ireland led the
adoption of resolution 2594 (2021), the first Security
Council resolution on United Nations transitions. That
resolution seeks to ensure that peace is not perceived
as a moment. It is not the signature of a peace deal,
the conduct of an election or the departure of a
peacekeeping mission. It is a process. It takes time,
planning and resources.
It is imperative that we have a shared understanding
that as a conflict ends, our obligations remain. That is
particularly important when it comes to the protection
of civilians, who often face heightened risks, both
during and after transitions. That is why Ireland
has worked to incorporate transition planning into
peacekeeping mandates. The Council must continue to
work to ensure that we give our peace operations the
best possible chance of success. We owe that to our
peacekeepers, and even more so to all the people they
are sent to protect.
Mr. Kwatra (India): Let me begin by conveying my
best wishes and greetings to you, Madam President, on
Ghana’s presidency of the Security Council this month.
We also thank you for organizing today’s open debate
on the extremely important issue of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, especially in the context of

22-6723313/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

United Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope that
your initiative today will help us all better understand
the linkages between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and the role of related stakeholders. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres, for his insights, and the other
briefers for their useful and important statements.
United Nations peacekeeping operations commenced seven decades ago as relatively simple, largely
one-dimensional missions, designed to keep the peace
and to facilitate political processes aimed at finding
lasting solutions to conflicts. That context has changed
profoundly over the years. Today both the political and
security environments, as well as the nature of conflict,
have undergone paradigm shifts. Today’s environment
has become more complex, uncertain, volatile and ambiguous. Conflicts are far more fragmented, with the
participation of non-State actors, including armed militias, terrorists and organized criminal groups, in many
instances with political support. Technological advances have also contributed to the changing nature of such
conflict in many ways. Terrorist and radical extremist
groups have unprecedented access to various technological tools to incite, spread propaganda and undertake recruitment, as well as to purchase weapons and
conduct illegal money transfers. Theatres of conflict
are often characterized by breakdowns in the rule of
law, the absence of effective State institutions, the proliferation of illicit economic activities and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. Those factors are also
manipulated by terrorists and radical groups to serve
their nefarious objectives.
In such a complex setting, United Nations peace
operations are often burdened with objectives that
go beyond the traditional mandates of peacekeeping.
United Nations peace operations now handle
multidimensional tasks that include building the capacity
of host Governments in the security sector, providing
humanitarian assistance, monitoring human rights
violations and ensuring the inclusive participation of
women and marginalized sections in political processes.
That ever-expanding basket of responsibilities for many
United Nations peacekeeping missions often ignores the
underlying causes of conflict and insecurity. The need
of the hour is therefore a holistic approach, coordinated
action and a clear strategy that addresses the challenges
to peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding. In that
context, let me offer the following submissions for the
Council’s consideration.
14/33

03/11/2022

First, in contemporary conflicts, solutions often
lie in the political and social domains, not just on the
security front. As such, peace operations can create
the conditions for political and social processes to take
hold, but they cannot replace them.
Secondly, we believe that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are mutually exclusive. Attempts
to extend the role of peacekeeping missions to
peacebuilding tasks will strengthen neither and in
fact will weaken both. The military component of
peacekeeping can play only an enabling role but cannot
bring about peacebuilding on its own A realistic
assessment in that regard is the need of the hour.
Third, in relation to peacekeeping in Africa,
solutions anchored in African regional organizations
are given priority and are a good path to follow for the
resolution of many contemporary armed conflicts.
Fourth, India recognizes the primacy of national
Governments and authorities in identifying and
driving priorities, strategies and activities with regard
to sustaining peace. What is needed is to work with
Member States, in line with their national requirements
and needs, rather than to advocate prescriptions or
solutions from outside.
Fifth, as the world’s largest democracy, we are
convinced that representative and inclusive governance
structures will help to stabilize peace, safeguard
fundamental rights, protect the rule of law and make
governance representative, transparent, responsive and
people-centric. We must encourage nurturing such
governance structures in countries in conflict settings.
That also requires giving them both the time and the
space that they need to deliver efficiently.
Sixth, gender sensitivity and inclusivity in
governance and the security sector strengthen
nation-building. Similarly, creating an environment
that provides opportunities for young people to grow
out of conflict cannot be overstressed.
Seventh, there is an urgent need for predictable and
sustainable financing for peacebuilding efforts to be
more effective. Inadequate financing for peacebuilding
activities continues to remain a stumbling block.
Last, but not least, the threat posed by terrorism, as
also highlighted in the presidency’s concept note for this
open debate (see S/2022/799, annex), needs a unified
voice from the international community. We should
strengthen the capabilities of the security forces of host
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

States, join hands in preventing terrorist forces from
gaining access to financial resources and collectively
call out those who provide safe havens to terrorists, as
well as those who stand with them and come to their
defence, including in the context of Security Council
sanctions regimes.
In each of the areas that we have presented today,
India has made significant contributions. We have
been a bridge-builder and a facilitator of consensus
on many of the contentious files that the Council has
dealt with in the past two years. We have strongly
advocated for ensuring that peacekeeping mandates
remain objective, well-defined and focused. Nearly
5,800 Indian military and police personnel are today
deployed as peacekeepers in 9 out of 12 active United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We have also been an
active member of the Peacebuilding Commission since
its inception.
We have always played a constructive and
significant role in the context of peacebuilding through
our extensive development partnership with countries
of the global South, including in Africa. In the short
span of the past five years, the India-United Nations
Development Partnership Fund, which was established
in 2017, has grown to a portfolio of 66 development
projects in partnership with 51 developing countries,
including 17 Member States from Africa.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that India’s
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and our partnership with Africa are based on building
instruments of empowerment that would enable Africa
to find African solutions to African problems. India has
committed concessional loans of more than $12 billion
to various projects in Africa since 2015. India will
continue to be a force multiplier for all peacebuilding
efforts, particularly for our brothers in Africa. I thank
Ghana for its leadership on this subject.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I congratulate Your
Excellency, Madam Minister, on Ghana’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for November.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s remarks and those
of the former President of Ireland, now Chair of The
Elders, Her Excellency Ms. Mary Robinson. I thank
Ms. Martha Pobee and Ms. Karin Landgren for their
briefings. I also thank Ambassador Bankole Adeoye,
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security, for his insights. I congratulate him
and, through him, the African Union Commission on

S/PV.9181

its role in the cessation of hostilities in Ethiopia, agreed
under an AU-mediated negotiation.
Kenya pays tribute to United Nations peacekeeping
personnel and their efforts in safeguarding civilians,
peace and security. We mourn and honour those who
paid the ultimate price while carrying out their duty.
The Security Council sends men and women wearing
the famous blue helmet into harm’s way to implement
mandates that we negotiate and adopt. We owe a duty of
care to them and to the countries and communities into
which we dispatch them. The least that we can do is to
try our best to ensure that the mandates, equipment and
other enablers are fit for purpose.
To make that a reality, we must consistently and
professionally assess performance and ensure that there
is accountability throughout the peacekeeping process.
That is why Kenya fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping and Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiatives and all their provisions.
The job that we are sending them to do in regions
such as the Sahel increasingly pits them against
determined terrorist groups. Left to run their course,
groups in Africa that are affiliated with Al-Qaida and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham may cause State
collapse and the mass suffering of many millions.
Through multiple resolutions, the United Nations has
agreed, both in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly, to prioritize action against terrorist groups.
The need and the commitment align. We must now
make sure that peacekeeping mandates, operational
planning, the readiness of troop-contributing countries
and command and control are also aligned.
United Nations peacekeeping is an innovation
of the Security Council and the Organization that
was not contemplated when the Charter of the United
Nations was established. It must continue to innovate,
particularly in situations that require enforcement.
Otherwise, it will suffer the ignominy of irrelevance
and failure, ultimately leading to the delegitimization
of the United Nations. The Security Council cannot
afford to dissociate peace operations from counterterrorism, especially with regard to the protection of
civilians and the provision of a basic level of security in
countries in which they are deployed.
United Nations peacekeeping under Chapter VII
of the Charter is necessary, but insufficient. It must
be combined with other measures in a coordinated and

22-6723315/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/11/2022

sufficiently resourced manner for peace and security to
be achieved in a reasonable period of time.

misinformation and disinformation and further the
mission’s the operational aims.

Allow me to share four recommendations on how
the Security Council can strengthen peacekeeping
in response to the way in which Ghana has set out
today’s open debate. They are drawn from Kenya’s
long experience as a troop-contributing country to both
United Nations peacekeeping and African Union-led
peace operations.

Thirdly, great effort must be made to undertake
a credible and sustainable political process in order
to bring together disparate and conflicting actors. A
uniting, inclusive political agreement is a necessary
factor in delivering peace. The role of neighbours and
regional organizations is therefore key. The Security
Council should truly embrace Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, especially when dealing
with the African Union, which has a comprehensive
and engaged mediation and engagement architecture,
as we have recently seen.

Earlier, I thanked Ambassador Bankole Adeoye
for the result delivered in Pretoria yesterday. I also
thank him for the efforts of African Union-led peace
missions. We honour the lives lost and marred by
Al-Shabaab’s violence against the troops of the African
Union Mission in Somalia.
AU peace operations, such as the one in Somalia,
have the mandate of the Security Council. They are
fighting for international peace and security in line with
the United Nations Charter and the commitments from
Member States that it demands. They deserve equal
priority and resources. Tough experience has taught us
that voluntary and ad hoc arrangements hinder proper
planning and operations. It is time to move beyond
circuitous debates that lead us nowhere and embrace
United Nations assessed contributions to support AU
operations. That is the first recommendation directed
at the Council’s commitment to overcoming terrorist
groups and standing with Africa.
The second recommendation is that we must do
a better operational job of protecting civilians with
the peacekeepers and equipment that we have right
now. Troop-contributing countries must prepare their
personnel to raise their performance standards once
they are in the field. We strongly agree that the safety
of peacekeepers is critical, but so too are the protection
of civilians and the robust execution of the mandates
under which peacekeepers operate.
Also included in that recommendation is the need
for a deliberate, credible and continuous analysis of the
conflict environment. The conflict map should always
be up to date and ready for peacekeepers to have a clear
operational picture. Those peacekeepers should be
trained to operate in the prevailing conflict environment
and possess a mindset that is ready to adapt to changes
on the ground. In addition, strategic communication
should be treated as a core part of effective peacekeeping.
It should manage the public’s expectations, counter
16/33

Lastly, the important synergy and complementarity
between peacebuilding and peacekeeping calls for
enhanced collaboration between the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and the Security Council,
particularly during the consideration of mission
mandates and transition periods. Kenya welcomes
the written advisory from the PBC, particularly its
recommendations on how to better design and deploy
peacekeeping operations that prioritize the prevailing
dynamics of host countries in their pursuit of sustainable
political solutions.
Kenya’s support for peacekeeping operations
as a critical tool to maintain international peace and
security will remain strong.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes you to the Security Council,
Madam Minister, and welcomes Ghana’s convening of
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
other participants, whose briefings enrich this debate
and allow us to have a better perspective of the topic
under consideration today.
At the outset, I would like to highlight that peace
operations are a critical tool for multilateralism and
international solidarity. We see them as an essential
instrument to help States in conflict situations to create
mechanisms that provide them the necessary stability
to address the structural and underlying causes of the
violence they are facing and to advance peacebuilding.
But for that instrument to be effective, it is necessary to
take into account the evolving nature of conflicts. The
contexts in which peace operations operate today are
often characterized by asymmetric conflicts in which
weakened States are confronted by armed groups,
extremist organizations, climate crises or a combination
of those elements at the same time.
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In such circumstances, national strategies and
support from the international community must go
beyond a purely military response and incorporate
a human-security approach. As Her Excellency
Ms. Mary Robinson reminded us this morning and as
peacebuilding reviews have demonstrated, there can be
no development without peace and no peace without
development, and in order to address and prevent
conflicts, it is necessary to address their structural
causes, such as exclusion, poverty, discrimination,
inequality and corruption. That was our stance exactly
one year ago, when Mexico presided over the Council
(see S/PV.8900).
That can be accomplished, however, only by first
strengthening the rule of law and promoting sustainable
development and national reconciliation, including
by ensuring victims’ right to justice. Peacekeeping
operations must therefore work to realize the inclusion
of all sectors of society, particularly — as we heard
today — women and youth, in every step of peace
processes, from local dialogue to the rebuilding of
national institutions.
It is particularly important to follow those principles
in the transitional phases of peace operations. We have
witnessed that the way those transitions are organized
is a determining factor in whether they lead to stability
or relapse into violence. The case of Haiti is a clear and
regrettable example case in point.
It is therefore our responsibility to ensure that the
mandates of peace operations are sufficiently flexible
and that they cover all post-conflict phases so that
they can effectively contribute to sustainable peace.
That is where the coordinated work with regional
and subregional organizations plays a particularly
significant role.
We must continue strengthening the links between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and we must come
to understand them on an even deeper level. We must
bolster support for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes; security sector reforms;
transitional justice and health services, including mental
health services and psychosocial support for victims.
We believe that a peace operation can be considered
successful if, upon its departure, it leaves behind
sufficiently robust national structures to provide basic
services and guarantee the rights of the population.
Conflict prevention is at the core of the SecretaryGeneral’s Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) initiative

S/PV.9181

and has also been a priority for Mexico as a member
of the Security Council. We appreciate that this new
agenda promotes greater coordination among Resident
Coordinators, United Nations country teams, regional
offices and the other agencies in order to ensure the
success of peacebuilding strategies.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China commends Ghana’s initiative to hold this highlevel meeting and welcomes your presence in New York,
Madam Minister, to preside over it. I thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his statement. I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee, Commissioner Adeoye,
Ms. Robinson and Ms. Landgren for their briefings.
Peacekeeping is an important means for the United
Nations to maintain international peace and security,
and has evolved and progressed over the decades in
response to changing circumstances. Since the 1990s, the
Security Council has deployed a series of peacekeeping
missions, with extensive mandates in Africa, based
on its understanding of the drivers of conflict and the
changing needs of the countries concerned, thereby
playing an important role in addressing the root causes
of conflict, enhancing the resilience of the countries
concerned and achieving lasting peace. China supports
the continuous development of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and will make further efforts
to that end.
Allow me to make three observations.
First, we must focus on the core mandate of
peacekeeping operations, that is, resolving hotspot
issues to create peaceful space for resilience-building
in the countries concerned. No matter how wide-raging
the mandates of peacekeeping operations are becoming
to adapt to the changing circumstances on the ground,
resolving conflicts and achieving peace should be the
primary and most fundamental mandate. Peacekeeping
operations should strengthen their good offices and
mediation, actively cooperate with the United Nations
and regional organizations and actively push for the
political resolution of hotspot issues. Peacekeeping
operations should support the countries concerned
in their efforts at disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and in promoting social reconciliation
and tolerance and consolidating the basis for sustained
peace. Peacekeeping operations should also provide
training and technical support to police and other law
enforcement agencies to continuously improve their

22-6723317/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

ability to protect the safety of citizens and maintain law
and order.
Secondly, we should further integrate peacebuilding
efforts and make a positive contribution to the
development of the countries concerned. Development is
the cornerstone of peace and security. The international
community should assist African countries in their
efforts to develop their economies and improve people’s
livelihoods so as to build a solid foundation for peace.
Some peacekeeping missions, within their mandates
and in the peacebuilding framework, have provided
assistance to the countries concerned in the area of
peacebuilding, building up a number of successful
experiences. In the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the
Deputy Head of Mission is double-hatted as Resident
Coordinator. That can help facilitate United Nations
agencies integraing their work on security and
development to better assist the countries concerned
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The trust
fund for peace and security in Mali administered by
MINUSMA has implemented a number of projects
across the infrastructure, health and energy sectors,
meeting the pressing needs of many people in northern
and central Mali. Quick-impact projects implemented by
some peacekeeping operations on the ground have also
played an important role in improving local livelihoods.
The United Nations should draw on those experiences
and, in the light of the differing circumstances of each
mission, extend any good practice in a positive and
prudent manner. In addition, peacekeeping operations
should prioritize local recruitment and the procurement
of locally sourced supplies to help improve local
employment and increase local revenues.
Thirdly, we should strengthen coordination
across United Nations agencies and provide tailored
assistance to the countries concerned in response to
the challenges. In recent years, the security situation
in Africa has undergone profound changes as the
continent is more aware of the drivers of conflict and
African countries have more diversified needs for
peacekeeping operations. China supports peacekeeping
operations in Africa in acting within the parameters
of their existing mandates and resources and, at the
request of the countries concerned, fully leveraging
their respective strengths within an approach anchored
18/33

03/11/2022

in the nexus between peace and security, while
stepping up coordination and cooperation with other
United Nations agencies on the ground. That will create
synergies and better meet the needs of the African
countries concerned.
Peacekeeping operations can assist humanitarian
agencies in alleviating the plight of the affected
population by providing security guarantees for
humanitarian relief work. They can work with UNICEF
and other agencies to help the parties to a conflict
implement child-protection action plans and enhance
the capacity of the countries concerned to protect
children. They can also work with UN-Women and
others to assist the countries concerned advance the
women and peace and security agenda in line with the
realities on the ground.
In August, the Security Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2022/6, drafted by
China, which requested the Secretary-General to
submit a report by 31August 2023 to assess the
performance of peacekeeping operations and make
recommendations on how to adjust their mandates in
line with the changing dynamics. China, together with
other Council members, will actively participate in
the follow-up discussions and play our part in further
improving peacekeeping operations to better meet the
needs of the countries concerned.
China is an active participant in, and an important
contributor to, United Nations peacekeeping operations.
At present, nearly 2,000 Chinese peacekeeping soldiers
are on duty in Africa, serving with firm resolve and
diligent dedication to maintain peace and security and
promote development and progress in Africa. China
is a strong advocate for, and an active practitioner of,
cooperation with Africa. We have provided military
assistance to the African Union and relevant African
countries to enhance Africa’s capacity to fight terrorism
and maintain stability, so as to achieve the Silencing
the Guns in Africa initiative as soon as possible. We
calibrate China-Africa development cooperation by
focusing on what our African partners really need.
We have been working with African countries to
implement Belt and Road projects with high-quality
deliverables. Through the China-United Nations Peace
and Development Trust Fund, we are implementing a
great variety of projects in Africa, making a positive
contribution to eliminating the root causes of conflicts,
enhancing the resilience of the countries concerned and
achieving lasting peace.
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

October saw the triumphant conclusion of the
twentieth National Congress of the Communist
Party of China (CPC) in Beijing. His Excellency
Mr. Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the CPC Central
Committee and President of China, solemnly declared
in his report that China has always been committed to
its foreign policy goals of upholding world peace and
promoting common development. China is dedicated to
promoting a human community with a shared future.
Guided by the principles of sincerity, real results,
affinity and good faith, and with a commitment to the
greater good and shared interests, China endeavours
to strengthen solidarity and cooperation with other
developing countries, including African countries.
China firmly supports and assists developing countries
in accelerating development. China adheres to true
multilateralism, resolutely safeguards an international
system with the United Nations at its core and takes an
active part in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Together with the rest of the world, China stands ready
to make a greater contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
As others have done, I also thank than the SecretaryGeneral and our other thought-provoking briefers
this morning.
The United Kingdom is grateful to Ghana for
its long-standing role in tackling armed conflict
and its significant contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping. Ghana’s leadership has resulted in a safer
world for many. We deeply value our close partnership.
At the outset, I also want to congratulate the African
Union and African colleagues on the promising step
towards lasting peace in Ethiopia with the agreement
announced yesterday. We offer our continued support.
As we heard, conflicts are becoming increasingly
complex. For United Nations peace operations to operate
effectively in that environment, they need to adapt
and better coordinate with wider United Nations and
non-United Nations peacebuilding work. Specifically, I
would like to underline three points.
First, peace operations need the capabilities to
understand conflict drivers and feed that analysis into
the wider United Nations strategy and approach. The
United Kingdom is proud to support United Nations
peace and development advisers, whose expertise
could be used in mission settings to support greater

S/PV.9181

strategic and operational join-up across the work of the
United Nations.
Secondly, we need to incentivize and deliver a more
integrated United Nations system to enable a more
holistic approach, as others also said this morning.
Integration scorecards piloted in Haiti, Somalia and
the Sudan, with United Nations funding, have made
progress, but we need to scale that up. The Security
Council can also drive that commitment, both in the
mandates it sets and by encouraging the full use of
the United Nations strategic planning and operating
frameworks, as well as instruments such as the Global
Focal Point for the Rule of Law.
Thirdly, coordinated investment in peace is crucial.
The Peacebuilding Fund, which the United Kingdom
continues to support, is a key tool for bringing together
different parts of the United Nations system. But it also
needs strong leadership in missions that can encourage
the wider United Nations development system to step
up investment in peace, and that promotes partnerships
with regional and international financial institutions
as well. Both the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission can help to drive that.
The costs of conflict are self-evident. Investing in
prevention is essential, as is strengthening women’s
roles in conflict prevention and resolution in order to
achieve lasting peace and security. The United Kingdom
is also proud to support the African Union’s Network of
African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation.
A system-wide approach to sustaining peace
is critical. The United Kingdom thanks Ghana for
convening today’s open debate and remains committed
to realizing the promise of the twin resolutions of 2016.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank you, Madam President,
for convening today’s important debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their statements.
As the Secretary-General has confirmed in Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), investments in prevention,
resilience-building and preparedness pay for themselves
many times over. Making those investments in peace
operations is key to making them more effective in
responding to the changing security dynamics they
encounter both in Africa and globally.
Let me start by underlining the importance of
ensuring that support for political solutions is at the
centre of all peacekeeping. Lasting peace cannot be

22-6723319/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

achieved or sustained by military means alone. We here
in the Security Council must enhance the link between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding when we are planning
and mandating peace operations. The current efforts in
the Sahel illustrate the need for holistic solutions. We
must deal with growing insecurity while also addressing
the root causes of conflict. We need innovative thinking
and renewed partnerships that can bring out the best
of the United Nations, the African Union (AU) and
regional complementarity. That is why Norway strongly
and actively supports the Issoufou Independent Highlevel Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel,
initiated by the United Nations and the AU.
In order to achieve peace that is truly sustainable, this
Council must also ensure that peace operations facilitate
the participation of women. Local women, women’s
organizations and civil-society groups have unique
insights and intergenerational knowledge that should be
included at every stage of the development of preventive
policies, including early-warning mechanisms. The full,
equal and meaningful participation of women enables
policies to be more equitable and responsive to local
community needs, which is key to building resilience.
Moreover, the inclusion of young people is important,
and their innovative ideas and perspectives must be
heard. It is also critical that we address the drivers of
conflict, such as climate change, inequality, corruption,
unemployment and violent extremism. Without those
broader steps, the efforts of peacekeeping operations
are unlikely to be successful. A lack of protection of
civilians during conflicts also damages the prospects
for their resolution and for sustainable peace. That
protection must be an integral part of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding and is particularly important in
transition settings.
While the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, all the parts of the United Nations system
must work together to build resilience and prevent
conflict. There is no better way of preventing conflict
than protecting human rights. Greater interaction
between the Security Council and its peacekeeping
operations, together with the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, is
needed to facilitate early engagement and prevention.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is another
underutilized tool in our resilience-building toolbox.
Through its cross-pillar coordination mandate, the PBC
is well positioned to holistically address the drivers of
20/33

03/11/2022

conflict without the constraints limiting other United
Nations bodies. The Security Council should seek
and use the PBC’s advice more frequently and invite
its Chair to brief us in order to inform our decisions.
And we must increase financing for peacebuilding and
the prevention of conflict. The Peacebuilding Fund
is centrally placed in that regard. We continue to be
impressed by the Fund’s agility, efficiency and spirit of
innovation. We are and will remain a major donor to the
Fund and encourage other Member States to increase
their contributions.
We must be able to build resilience alongside
our work countering immediate security threats and
protecting civilians. In our efforts to achieve longlasting peace we cannot afford to overlook prevention,
resilience-building and preparedness.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank you, Madam
President, for organizing today’s debate and are
grateful to the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their thoughtful insights.
United Nations peace operations play a key role
in preserving peace and security, and ensuring that
they have the resilience to cope with their manifold
challenges is vital. That requires a continued, proactive
and comprehensive approach towards conflicts and
their changing nature, especially on the part of the
Security Council.
Building resilient peace means going beyond peace
agreements. It requires working for reconciliation and
ensuring social cohesion and development, as well as
building strong institutions based on respect for human
rights and the rule of law, two fundamental pillars for
building open societies. It also means dealing continually
and successfully with the underlying roots of conflict
such as climate change, food insecurity, inequality and
fragile governance. Ensuring an environment that is
conducive to peacebuilding requires work in all those
areas. Let me mention some key aspects from our point
of view.
First, it is important to adopt a comprehensive
approach, which means contributing to a sustainable
peace and the provision of security, primarily — but not
only — through promoting tools for conflict prevention.
Prevention has been and remains the weakest and
most frustrating point for the Council and the entire
Organization. We need to do more for the integration of
various dimensions, including on the political, security,
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9181

development, rule of law, human rights and humanitarian
fronts, in the core of United Nations missions.

table, are supporting and promoting as a member of the
Security Council.

Secondly, we need to focus on what works rather
than solely on divisive issues. That approach has proved
an effective way of getting people together across the
conflict divide. While interpretations and historical
narratives may differ significantly and the root causes
of conflicts may be contested and highly sensitive in
post-war settings, interlocutors seem ready and willing
to acknowledge their common strengths and assets as
the basis for tackling divisive issues.

In this context, I would like to mention a concrete
example from the Western Balkans, where I come
from: the Regional Youth Cooperation Office, which
is headquartered in Tirana, Albania. Youth from the
once-troubled region of the Western Balkans — from
different countries, with different backgrounds and
sometimes with different historical narratives — are now
getting together, not only to meet, talk and exchange,
but to work and implement projects and successfully
promote reconciliation. And it works: often, where
politicians stumble, youth, with their forward-looking
spirit and energy, may see a breakthrough. Successful
initiatives such as this may and should be replicated in
other parts of the world.

Thirdly, there is no doubt that local ownership is
crucial to the successful implementation of any effort to
integrate sustainable processes of change into peace and
development. Dialogue with all those interested parties,
including local communities, is therefore key to success
in peacebuilding actions. Showing understanding for
the concerns of the people involved in conflict should
be seen as an instrument for confidence-building,
which is an earlier stage of peacebuilding.
Fourthly,
strategic
communication
and
transparency of information are critical. Any distortion
of information may prove detrimental to peacekeeping
efforts, as we clearly see in some theatres, but also
for building an enduring peace in any conflict.
Unfortunately, we have seen the use of propaganda,
hate speech, disinformation in past conflicts, and we
continue to see them being used in current conflicts
to pursue narrow-scope political or nationalist agendas.
Let us also not forget the ever-evolving agility of
non-State actors and other violent groups for terrorist
actions and purposes. Albania fully supports the sixth
priority of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative,
on strategic communication, and believes that efforts
to ensure unbiased information as a useful tool for
peacebuilding will benefit therefrom.
Fifthly, advancing inclusive political solutions,
including the promotion of the women and peace and
security and youth and peace and security agendas, is
conducive to a smooth transition of a situation from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. A strong political
dimension in United Nations missions can have
positive impacts many times over on the future of a
conflict in transformation. A special role should be
attributed to women and youth as genuine promoters
of peace by empowering them with strong political
and social instruments for sustainable peace. This is
what we, together with many other States around this

Sixthly, ever-increasing climate vulnerability is an
important consideration, as rightly mentioned by some
speakers, including in particular President Robinson.
The converging crises of conflict and climate change
can be mutually reinforcing, with climate impacts
potentially exacerbating the conflict cycle and violence
weakening the governance structures and institutions
needed to build climate resilience. It requires addressing
the underlying causes of climate vulnerability, which in
fragile States can overlap with such drivers of conflict
as weak governance, inequality and poverty.
Failing to see a link between climate change
and security is sleepwalking towards the fire. A
resilience-based approach can enrich peacebuilding
strategies. It has also been shown to produce essential
inputs for a national peacebuilding dialogue. Building
peace needs sustained efforts, and it is imperative that
all of us do everything we can to never give up on trying
to reach that goal.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Ghana for hosting today’s meeting and for
its unfailing commitment to supporting United
Nations peacekeeping.
I would like to emphasize three points. First, with
respect to cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union, today’s meeting comes at a time when
both organizations have entrusted President Issoufou
with assessing the future of the security architecture in
the Sahel. France will continue to provide its support to
countries in the region that request it. We will continue
to support, both nationally and with the European
Union, the development of security forces capable

22-6723321/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of ensuring security on their territory, respectful of
constitutional order and human rights.
More international support is needed to support
African initiatives, in particular those of the African
Union. We hope that the draft presidential statement
proposed by Gabon on this subject be adopted soon.
France reiterates its support for the financing of
African peace operations through mandatory United
Nations contributions.
Secondly, it is imperative that the root causes
of conflicts be addressed. Military measures alone
cannot build a lasting peace. The entire United Nations
system must be mobilized, which means establishing
a virtuous circle between development and climate
change mitigation, supporting the deployment of the
State and public services, and reforming the security
sector. Strengthening the rule of law must enable
the building of effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions. This is also the spirit of the youth, peace
and security and women, peace and security agendas,
which must be implemented in a very concrete manner.
Controlling the exploitation of natural resources
and combating trafficking are issues of security and
economic growth. These issues must be more fully
integrated into the mandates of peace operations. In
Africa, as pressure on natural resources increases,
France continues to support the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and the African Legal Support
Facility. The informal mining sector also deserves
special attention.
There can be no peace without justice. Efforts
must be redoubled to ensure that everyone, without
discrimination, has access to quality justice. The fight
against impunity and respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law are also conditions for
peace. France will remain vigilant and committed to
ensuring that everyone’s freedoms are guaranteed.
Finally, we must strengthen the regional dimension
and the continuity of United Nations action. The
effectiveness of the fight against terrorism raises a
final fundamental question: where does United Nations
action end? First of all, I am thinking of geographical
limits. The fight against terrorism calls for action not
only in the country where operations are deployed, but
also with agencies, funds and programmes located in
the rest of the region. I am also thinking of the life cycle
of peace operations. In transitional contexts, there
must be continuity between peacekeeping operations
22/33

03/11/2022

and peacebuilding actors. This is the approach we
are currently pursuing in the Democratic Republic
of Congo.
The Peacebuilding Commission must also continue
to fulfil its role of coordination and exchange among
all partners. The Peacebuilding Fund must provide
financial support for transitions. The Fund will
continue to be supported by France, which is increasing
its contribution again this year to $7.5 million.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Through you,
Madam President, I thank Ghana for organizing this
very important and timely debate. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks, and I also thank our briefers
for their valuable contributions.
As Brazil has stated time and again in the Security
Council, peace and sustainable development are
interdependent and mutually reinforce one another.
Conflict destroys the necessary conditions for
economic activities that in turn provide the material
basis for the functioning of the State. Economic growth
and sustainable development are necessary to give
people hope and to help reduce the appeal of violent
ideologues. Strengthening international cooperation,
investing in productive capacities and combating
poverty and hunger are as essential to addressing
conflict as security considerations.
Building resilience in vulnerable countries is
necessary to prevent the onset of conflicts, as well as
to maintain the progress already achieved on the path
towards peace. However, achieving this goal must not
be a burden placed solely on peace operations, which
can certainly play a peacebuilding role, but it must
be balanced with the need to have realistic and clear
mandates. Excessively ambitious, vague and openended mandates can result in frustration among partners
and in the population of the host country. Excessively
ambitious, vague and open-ended mandates can result
in frustration among partners and the population of the
host country.
Instead, building resilience is a task for which the
United Nations must offer a system-wide approach.
It certainly involves the Security Council, as the
organ with the foremost responsibility on peace and
security matters, but it must also involve other bodies
and agencies.
I refer in particular to the Peacebuilding
Commission, which is well suited to working as a
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

platform for promoting greater coordination among
the relevant partners of a particular country at risk of
lapsing or relapsing into conflict. It can also mobilize
regional organizations and international financial
institutions and foster South-South and triangular
cooperation arrangements in support of international
peacebuilding initiatives. In addition, it can support
the implementation of peacebuilding activities by
peacekeeping operations and help mobilize political
support to promote reconciliation, institution-building
and other nationally defined peacebuilding priorities.
Focusing solely on the security dimension of
conflicts will lead to endlessly renewing peacekeeping
mandates without achieving the desired results. It will
also leave fragile countries chronically dependent on
humanitarian aid. Resilience-building, peacebuilding
and the promotion of sustainable development are
essential for addressing the root causes of conflict.
I once again thank the Ghanaian presidency for
helping bring focus to this important issue.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to welcome your
personal participation, Ms. Shirley Botchwey, in
today’s meeting. We greatly appreciate the contribution
of your country, a champion of pan-Africanism, to
United Nations peacekeeping efforts and defending
the interests of the African continent. We also wish
to thank the Secretary-General, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee and African Union Commissioner
Adeoye for their briefings. We listened very carefully
to the assessments of Ms. Robinson and Ms. Landgren.
At the outset, we would like to acknowledge
the noble mission carried out on a daily basis by
Blue Helmets in extremely difficult and dangerous
conditions in which they put their own lives at risk. We
pay tribute to all peacekeepers of the United Nations,
the African Union and other regional organizations,
who serve with honour, and we convey our condolences
to the Governments and the families of those who have
lost their lives in the line of duty.
United Nations peacekeeping operations remain
one of the main tools for maintaining international
peace and security. More important, however, is the fact
that millions of people continue to pin their hopes on
such operations to bring about a cessation of hostilities,
protect civilians, help national authorities gain control
over their territory and strengthen State institutions in

S/PV.9181

order to resume a peaceful life, provide social services
and thus create the conditions for economic recovery.
The changing nature and specifics of modern
conflicts, which are compounded by terrorist threats,
including cross-border threats, as well as difficult
humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions, pose a
challenge to the international community: how can
existing mechanisms be adadpted to modern realities,
and what new solutions can be offered? Discussing
options for optimizing efforts in the field of maintaining
peace and security is a very important and topical issue.
At the same time, we are convinced that all
discussions must be centred around the imperative
of finding political decisions based on a shared
understanding of the causes of conflicts. Without
defining the goal, it is difficult to choose the means of
attaining it.
Unfortunately, we are witnessing situations in
which opinions on those issues differ significantly
among the warring parties, the main actors in the
region or interested players outside it, and the Security
Council itself. Without a political solution, it is
impossible to agree on a clear and realistic mandate,
gain the confidence of the host State or ensure effective
support for regional efforts.
One of the consequences of such disagreements is
that, in various regions of the world, in the absence of
results achieved by a United Nations presence, regional
or other bilateral options are being sought. United
Nations peacekeeping operations have been present
in a number of countries for many years — in some
cases for decades. That can lead to the expansion of
a peacekeeping operation’s mandate to include various
secondary and non-core tasks related to human rights,
social affairs, gender-related issues and climate change.
Peacekeeping operations then risk being built into
the domestic political context and become part of the
conflict-management process rather than a tool for
its resolution.
As a result — and we have witnessed it more and
more often recently — public dissatisfaction with the
way peacekeepers carry out their mandate is on the rise.
However, the cause of those problems is the discrepancy
between the means and the established goal, and
therefore the unreasonably high expectations of the
population. Also, the multifaceted nature of modern
peacekeeping operations only makes it more difficult to

22-6723323/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/11/2022

focus on the main priorities. Even different units within
the same mission may view their tasks differently.

Nations assistance in those areas is absolutely justified
and is needed now more than ever before.

Unfortunately, in many country-specific situations,
we see a mentoring approach to solving purely
domestic political problems, and that only makes the
situation worse.

At the same time, we are convinced that it is
important to clearly understand which United Nations
institutions can be most effective in solving these
problems. United Nations peacekeeping operations can
provide targeted peacebuilding efforts in the framework
of their mandates — for example, in promoting security
sector reform; enabling disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; and increasing the training of
national personnel in the areas that the host country
deems important. However, they cannot fully cover
those needs. The main role in that regard should be
played by the relevant specialized United Nations
bodies and international financial institutions. We
also agree that the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
recommendations were submitted for this meeting,
should play the role of the connecting link where
security issues cross over into the area of socioeconomic
development. But in that regard as well we should be
guided by countries’ national priorities, the root causes
of conflicts and each country’s individual specifics.

Concerning the exacerbation of the terrorist threat
in many regions of the world, including in Africa, the
discussion of how to counter that scourge has recently
intensified. We do not believe we should be under any
illusions that United Nations peacekeeping operations
can take on that burden. It is a problem that requires a
military solution, inter alia, which can be provided only
through national efforts, if necessary with bilateral or
regional assistance.
As we have said on numerous occasions, there
have been examples of situations in Africa in which a
common sense of purpose and trust-based cooperation
have led to the achievement of meaningful results.
Nevertheless, that was possible only when all the
countries of the region affected by a given problem
agreed on how, when and with what means they could
push back the terrorists. In terms of the situation in
West Africa, in particular in the Sahel, where the issue
of terrorism is now particularly acute, we must not
forget that all countries must be united in their desire
to overcome it even if they have political differences.
The key to the success of regional efforts is a
common assessment by the countries of the region of the
existing threats and ways to overcome them, as well as
their willingness to bear the risks of responding to those
threats, to create a coherent and effective commandand-control system based on trust and cooperation. As
far as funding modalities are concerned, regardless of
what the situation requires, it is important that initiating
countries have the space to make their own political
decisions to counter threats, without those decisions
being dictated by external influences. We believe that
African States are justified in raising the issue of the
provision of financial assistance by the United Nations,
and we stand ready to discuss the matter.
In the concept note for this meeting (see S/2022/799),
Ghana is right to point out that a number of longstanding challenges hinder conflict prevention and
resolution, including the lack of social and economic
development and education, the growing percentage of
young people in the structure of society and the effects
of climate change, among other challenges. United
24/33

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to start by welcoming you, Madam President, and
thanking you for presiding over this important and
timely meeting. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his opening remarks and Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee, Commissioner Adeoye,
Former President of Ireland and Chair of The Elders
Ms. Robinson and Executive Director Landgren for
their briefings.
Given the multitude of varied threats to peace and
security and the rapid pace at which they evolve, peace
operations must be multifaceted and designed with the
core objective of building resilience to short- and longterm threats. The task before us is therefore a daunting
but vital one. While it is perhaps over-idealistic to expect
peace operations to comprehensively address every
threat to peace, we know that strengthened resilience
not only secures peace but also prevents the eruption
of conflict and relapses into it. Accordingly, I would
like to share the following three recommendations on
how peace operations can play a key role in building
resilient societies and sustainable peace.
First, tailored, clear and realistic transition
strategies require a thorough consideration of the local
and regional dynamics, as well as extensive coordination
with a variety of local actors, including women, young
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

people and religious and community leaders. Such
efforts are particularly relevant to ending violence by
armed groups and designing effective mechanisms
for the disarmament, reintegration and prevention of
the re-recruitment of former combatants. Transition
strategies can also help prevent a security vacuum as
well as effectively counter the narratives and drivers
that fuel extremism and terrorism. Ensuring that the
needs and priorities of local communities are taken into
account creates a solid basis for sustaining the national
ownership of peace and building back resilient, stable
and inclusive societies. In the words of the late former
Secretary-General and peacebuilding champion Kofi
Annan, “[W]e need to be closer to those whose peace it
is to make or to break”.
Secondly, peace operations can lead to improved,
lasting and positive outcomes, including by
building reliable infrastructure that can benefit host
communities after the drawdown of peace operations.
That is particularly relevant as unprecedented droughts,
heatwaves, floods and other extreme weather events
continue to exponentially increase. We commend the
efforts led by the Department of Operational Support to
increase the use of renewable energy in peace operations
and encourage the development of a comprehensive plan
to scale up their deployment. Emissions reduction will
not only enable the United Nations to lead by example in
mitigation efforts, but it will also leave behind the kind
of energy infrastructure that strengthens the resilience
of local communities. The United Arab Emirates,
together with Norway, has been at the forefront of
advocacy for such an increase in the use of renewables
in United Nations peace operations.
Thirdly, promoting sustainable and effective
peacebuilding requires a coordinated and integrated
multilateral response. That means coordinating
with all actors, including the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission and regional and
subregional organizations, to ensure targeted rather than
isolated efforts. That can also help to develop adequate,
sustainable and innovative methods and funding
mechanisms that collectively address traditional as
well as unconventional threats, from climate change
and food insecurity to global health crises, terrorism
and extremism.
In conclusion, peace operations can be enablers of
nationally and locally owned efforts to sustain peace.
Their legacy is not only what is accomplished when
they are present but what they leave behind when they

S/PV.9181

depart. The United Arab Emirates remains committed
to supporting local capabilities that can create the
conditions for lasting peace.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no longer than three
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of
the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): Against a
backdrop of the complex security challenges facing
peace operations, I would like to highlight the
following points.
First, cooperation with the local population,
while respecting its ownership and priorities, is a
prerequisite for building resilience in peace operations.
Engagements that focus on local capacity-building can
make the effects of peace operations more enduring
and consolidate trust between peacekeepers and host
communities. In that regard, the Korean peacekeepers
in South Sudan have been conducting civil-military
cooperation (CIMIC) activities, which include
vocational training in sectors such as agriculture,
carpentry, electricity and construction.
Secondly, the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus should be strengthened to address the root causes
of conflicts. Close coordination with the United Nations
country teams and regional organizations is necessary.
We continue to support cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU),
including through our contribution of $16.4 million
to AU peace and security activities since 2016. In
line with its humanitarian-development-peace nexus
implementation strategy adopted last year, the Republic
of Korea is partnering with UNICEF in South Sudan
to enhance water supplies and access to education and
medical services, creating synergy with the CIMIC
activities conducted by the Korean contingent in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
Thirdly, mission mandates should point in the
direction of sustaining peace throughout the life cycle
of peace operations. Early engagement in peacebuilding
can facilitate a smooth transition and lasting peace.
In particular, we should counter violent extremism
and terrorism, and in doing that it is crucial to enlist

22-6723325/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the capabilities of women and young people. In that
regard, we encourage the Security Council to consult
actively with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in
drafting and adapting mandates and coming up with
political guidelines.
Lastly, all of these efforts require sustained
financing. It is important to make use of flexible
mechanisms such as the Multi-Year Appeal of the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and extrabudgetary funds for the Department of Peace
Operations, the Department of Operational Support
and the Peacebuilding Fund. The Republic of Korea
will continue to contribute to those funds.
As the host country of the 2021 Seoul United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial and a long-standing member
of the PBC, the Republic of Korea reaffirms its support
for building and sustaining peace in all phases of the
peace continuum.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union and thanks the presidency of Ghana
for organizing this timely debate. I would like to stress
three main lines of action to make peace operations
more resilient and sustainable.
First, we need to embrace and enforce the strategic
transition of peacekeeping operations. Today’s conflict
environments are often marked by geopolitical
tensions, the proliferation of armed groups, exclusion,
inequalities, social and political marginalization,
climate insecurity, violent extremism, terrorism, the
spread of misinformation and disinformation, and food
insecurity. Those are all factors that, inter alia, often
transform local conflicts into regional crises. There is no
standard solution for challenges of that kind. Addressing
them requires a shift from the traditional peacekeeping
paradigm to the implementation of the key measures
identified in the Action for Peacekeeping and Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiatives — collective coherence in
support of the political strategy, as reflected in clear and
achievable mandates by the Security Council that are
matched with the appropriate resources; strategic and
operational integration; well-trained and well-equipped
peacekeepers; close cooperation with the host country
or countries; the meaningful participation of women
in all stages of the peace process; effective strategic
26/33

03/11/2022

communications; and an innovative data-driven and
technology-enabled approach.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations should be
considered not only as stand-alone initiatives but also
as essential components of the peace process. While
they cannot address all the factors leading to a conflict,
history demonstrates that peacekeeping operations
can make a difference, either by paving the way for
long-standing peace or, unfortunately, by exacerbating
tensions. Therefore, they must be designed to achieve
sustainable political solutions, promote the conditions
for durable peace and reflect the drivers of conflicts.
Thirdly, we should consider peacebuilding and
peacekeeping to be complementary. Peace processes
do not end when the last soldier leaves the ground.
Before, during and after a peacekeeping mission, we
must take full advantage of our peace toolbox, such
as smaller civilian-only peacebuilding missions,
police-focused rule-of-law missions, special political
missions designed to support political processes and
region-based special envoys.
We must recognize the centrality of peacebuilding to
break the vicious cycles of underdevelopment and, even
worse, unfair politics and the militarization of political
systems. We need more ambitious and structured
collaboration between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council, as the Commission is ideally
placed to raise the Security Council’s awareness of
regional efforts, local communities’ understanding and
expertise and the cross-border dimensions of conflicts.
We need more coordination between the United Nations
and relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, including the African Union and the
European Union, while recognizing their added value
in the cross-border dimensions of conflicts.
Making peace sustainable over time is our greatest
challenge. It requires political solutions, inclusive peace
processes, conflict prevention, robust post-conflict
peacebuilding and a strong belief in multilateralism. As
the first contributor of Blue Helmets to United Nations
peacekeeping among Western countries, Italy will
continue to do its part to address the whole set of
challenges posed by today’s conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

President, on your brotherly country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
thank you for convening today’s important discussion
and wish you every success in the Council’s tasks.
I also thank all briefers for sharing their valuable
visions with us today.
Egypt gives high priority to building resilience
through the establishment of effective national
institutions that are responsible for, and capable of,
protecting peoples’ capabilities and strengthening
national ownership over peacebuilding efforts,
as well as laying the foundation for stability and
sustainable development.
Egypt effectively contributes at the African and
international levels to promoting capacity-building
in national institutions, as they ensure that complex
challenges are addressed. In that context, Egypt
launched the Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace and
Development, which is convened annually to hold
consultations and follow up efforts to establish peace
and development in Africa. President Abdel Fattah Al
Sisi of the Arab Republic of Egypt manages the African
Union’s reconstruction and development dossier,
the so-called United Nations peacebuilding dossier.
Cairo also hosts the African Centre for reconstruction
and development.
Egypt was at the forefront of countries that
supported the concept of the peace continuum and called
for the strengthening of the impact of peacekeeping
operations on peacebuilding and sustainable peace.
We proposed presidential statement S/PRST/2017/27,
which was adopted by the Security Council in that
context. The issue of building national institutions was
one of the priorities of the Egyptian chairmanship of
the Peacebuilding Commission last year.
I would like to make the following points.
First, while establishing and reviewing the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, the Council
should pay greater attention to the peacebuilding
component by conducting a needs-based assessment
in each setting in order to determine the resources
that will be required. We now see little interest in
peacebuilding, and fewer resources being earmarked
for it; as a result, the minimum resources needed for
building resilience in countries hosting peacebuilding
operations are not provided.

S/PV.9181

Secondly, we call on the Council to pay the
necessary attention to adopting a holistic approach to
peacebuilding, which should take into account regional
dimensions and cross-border challenges, support
local capacity and provide basic services to people in
remote and cross-border areas in order to enhance the
sovereignty of States.
Thirdly, we call on the Council to take greater
advantage of the important advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission when reviewing the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. The Commission
has vast and varied experience and can address the
root causes of conflicts and peacebuilding in Africa.
It is also a forum for sharing expertise, lessons learned
and solutions.
Fourthly, the nature of current challenges means
that the United Nations must deepen its partnership
with regional and subregional organizations, based on
the comparative advantage of each of them to achieve
the required integration. The partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union is pivotal to
addressing challenges that are not within the competence
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, such as
combating terrorism.
Egypt underscores the importance of considering
other options for the United Nations to fund African
peace operations through assessed contributions from
the United Nations budget. I also note that the current
global geopolitical conditions should not diminish the
interest of the international community in Africa.
Fifthly, the primary challenge to the achievement
of sustainable peace remains the provision of
adequate, sustainable and predictable funding for
building the resilience of countries emerging from
conflicts. Egypt therefore calls on Member States to
enable peacebuilding efforts to benefit from assessed
contributions from the United Nations budget, including
the Peacebuilding Fund.
In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to you, Madam
President, for convening today’s important meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): First, allow me to
congratulate Ghana on its presidency of the Security
Council. I wish it every success in its presidency
this month. I also thank you, Madam President,
for organizing today’s debate on integrating

22-6723327/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

effective resilience-building in peace operations for
sustainable peace.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be made
on behalf of the European Union and wishes to add
some remarks in its national capacity.
Today, as multilateralism is being tested by evermultiplying crises, United Nations peace operations
serve as a reminder of our collective commitments
to international solidarity, to which we subscribed
77 years ago. United Nations peace operations are
an essential instrument in supporting countries and
societies that have been distressed by conflict in their
search for lasting and sustainable peace and prosperity.
Regrettably, as a result of the new complexities of
crises, the growing number of multipliers and drivers
of conflict worldwide, including climate change and
water stress, violent extremism and inequalities, we
have witnessed far too many societies relapsing into
the vicious cycle of hate and violence. Therefore, an
innovative and more integrated approach to peace
operations is needed to effectively address the root
causes of conflict and build resilient societies from
the very early stages of peacebuilding. Only resilient
communities will be able to fully implement the
transition to lasting peace and a more prosperous future.
Slovenia actively participates in efforts to identify
new approaches to promoting collective responses
and solutions in order to minimize the risk of future
conflicts. We have supported innovative approaches to
modernize United Nations peace operations, as well as
the Peacebuilding Fund, through our extrabudgetary
contributions. We actively participate in United Nations
and other peacekeeping and stabilization efforts with
military, police and civilian personnel in Africa, the
Middle East and Europe.
It is our firm belief that international peace and
security depend on the security of all its global partners.
Cooperation and partnership with regional, national
and local efforts and ensuring national ownership are
essential to our efforts to build trust and resilience.
However, that requires more than a military response
to immediate threats and should also include capacitybuilding, promoting and protecting human rights, access
to health services and education and socioeconomic
development, as well as establishing effective earlywarning and early-response mechanisms.
28/33

03/11/2022

Through the humanitarian organization ITF
Enhancing Human Security, Slovenia supports efforts
to build resilient communities by reducing risks to
peace and security. Among such efforts is ITF’s active
engagement in the implementation of the Early Warning
and Response Partnership with the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in States members of ECOWAS, aimed at
strengthening the capacity to identify, respond to and
prevent crises more effectively.
Women and young people have an essential role
in the pursuit of lasting peace and resilient societies.
They must become equal partners in all peace-related
activities. The women and peace and security and youth
and peace and security lenses should be applied in
supporting regional, national and local efforts for lasting
peace. The women and peace and security agenda was
integrated into Slovenia’s education system and training
programmes for experts in peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 76/305, on financing for peacebuilding,
and we stress that sustainability and predictability
in the funding of peace operations are key to
effective peacebuilding.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Slovenia’s
strong commitment to multilateralism. As a candidate
for non-permanent membership in the Security Council
for the period from 2024 to 2025, we will continue
to contribute towards our shared goal of securing a
peaceful future for us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I warmly thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this open debate. Allow me to congratulate
Ghana on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council again. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and all the other briefers for their
valuable briefings.
Fauziya Abdi Ali, Chair of a network of Kenyan
organizations dedicated to the prevention of violent
extremism, recently defined resilience as “learning how
to change so as not to be changed by external threats”.
Resilience can be achieved only if the population is
involved in that change. The peacekeeping mechanism
must therefore be equipped with tools that are efficient,
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9181

inclusive and adapted to the reality on the ground. We
would like to highlight three aspects of that challenge.

that long-term perspective that my country intends
to engage.

First, peacekeeping missions can promote
prevention that addresses the root causes of violence.
The affected population, in particular women, who
are too often left out, must be able to engage in a
substantive and relevant dialogue with local authorities
on good governance, human rights and the rule of law,
as well as the security challenges of climate change. In
that regard, we are very grateful to Ghana for hosting
the first Regional Course on the Prevention of Violent
Extremism in West Africa last year, which Switzerland
had the honour of organizing with the African Union.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.

Secondly, coherent action by the United Nations
system is of great importance, and the effective
integration of actors becomes crucial during the
transition of peacekeeping operations. Close
cooperation between the Resident Coordinator Office
and the mission leadership is a key aspect of that, as is
coordination with the various donors and international
financial institutions, such as the Global Community
Engagement and Resilience Fund. We also encourage
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund to fully play its
role as a convener within the United Nations system.
We commend its written recommendations for this
open debate, which warrant our close attention.

First, in order to achieve resilient, effective and
sustainable peace and stability in the many conflictaffected areas, close dialogue and engagement with
the affected countries and region are crucial. The
concerns of the affected countries matter. The views
of their neighbours matter. And the voice of the region
matters. That is because regarding matters affecting
regional peace and stability and ways to address them,
the affected region knows best. Likewise, regarding
matters affecting Africa and the way forward, Africa
knows best.

Finally, the local population must be committed to
the objectives of peacekeeping missions, with the equal
and meaningful participation of women. Good strategic
communication, as well as an effective response to the
expectations of the civilian population, is the basis
for that acceptance. Projects that link the security,
humanitarian and development pillars can provide
opportunities, particularly for young people, to become
peacebuilders.
What is the role of the Security Council? First,
it must encourage joint action by multiple actors, for
example by systematically seeking support from the
Peacebuilding Commission. Secondly, it needs to
speak out, including on the predictable and sustainable
funding of United Nations missions and regional
organizations. Above all, it needs to shape mandates
that take into account the many challenges and enable
missions to act directly and interact effectively with
other actors in combating the root causes of violence.
Resilience must, in turn, be encouraged and
supported, but it cannot be demanded without collective
action against violence. It is in that regard and with

Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Thailand wishes
to thank Ghana for organizing this timely open debate,
focusing on enhancing resilience-building in peace
operations for sustainable peace. We also thank you,
Madam Minister, for presiding over this meeting.
We are grateful to all the briefers for their important
contributions. I wish to make the following four points
on the topic under consideration.

To that end, Thailand supports inclusive
consultations among the Security Council, the host
country, troop- and police-contributing countries and
other relevant stakeholders. The key is to ensure a clear
mandate for peace operations to support the priorities
of host countries and affected parties. In addition,
adequate and timely resources must be made available
at United Nations Headquarters and in missions in
order to support such efforts.
Secondly, regional-global partnerships are relevant.
Countries of the region, particularly those directly
affected by peace and security challenges, are best
placed to help to identify and create pathways forward
for sustainable peace through sustainable peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. But the international community’s
role is no less important by providing best practices,
catalysing initiatives and mobilizing resources.
Africa provides a good example of regional
initiatives and partnerships with the United Nations.
The pivotal leadership of the African Union (AU) and
the contributions of subregional organizations have
been crucial in addressing peace and security, as well
as other challenges on the continent. We also heard
other proposals from the African Union Commissioner

22-6723329/33

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9181

03/11/2022

Nations-AU

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.

For its part, the Security Council should continue
its important role in supporting region-led initiatives
to promote sustainable peace, while helping to ensure
greater coordination with the Economic and Social
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
General Assembly, among other bodies.

Mr. Marschik (Austria): Let me first congratulate
you, Madam President, and Ghana for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council during this
month. Let me also congratulate you for organizing
this discussion so early on in your presidency, which
enables the wider membership to participate.

Thirdly, the link between peace and development
is clear, as underscored by you, Madam President, this
morning. Thailand echoes that view. Sustainable peace
and sustainable development must go hand in hand.
They are essentially two sides of the same coin, with
one side reinforcing the other.

In an increasingly challenging geopolitical context,
you have chosen a topic that touches upon the core of
the future of United Nations peace operations. It is not
enough to build peace in the strictest sense of the word,
meaning the absence of armed hostilities. What we
need is long-term sustainable peace, and that requires
building resilience in societies, especially in conflict
and post-conflict settings, and we need to address the
underlying drivers of conflict with the instruments,
frameworks and mechanisms needed to advance
our objectives.

this morning, such
transitions facility.

as

the

United

It is with that in mind that Thai peacekeepers
continue to contribute to host countries’ early
peacebuilding efforts through capacity-building.
For example, through the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, Thai peacekeepers engage with South
Sudanese local communities in capacity development
in sustainable agriculture, water and land management.
The local priorities are our priorities.
Fourthly and lastly, inclusiveness is integral to
addressing the root causes of conflict and achieving
lasting peace. Resilience-building, including through
peace operations, must therefore target and benefit
all people, especially those in need and most at
risk, including women and girls — a point that was
emphasized by Mary Robinson and a number of other
speakers earlier.
In conclusion Thailand stands ready to continue to
play its part in United Nations and other international
efforts to support peace operations as a means of helping
to attain sustainable peace because the price of not
attaining sustainable peace is high. Only yesterday, the
Security Council was informed by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in a meeting of just
one of the high costs of conflict and strife, namely,
about 103 million displaced persons worldwide (see
S/PV.9178). Let us therefore reinvigorate our collective
efforts to promote sustainable peace, sustainable
development and human security for all. Let us support
resilient peace operations based on the right balance
between addressing security aspects and underlying
causes, including development challenges as one of the
important means to help obtain that goal.
30/33

In order for the United Nations peace and security
pillar to become better at integrating effective
resilience-building, actions are needed at all levels of
engagement — global, regional and local.
First of all, on a global level, we need systemwide coherence. In your concept note (S/2022/799,
annex), Madam President, you rightly identified
climate change, the lack of sustainable institutions
and socioeconomic factors as such potential drivers
of conflict. The Security Council can address those
by fostering its links with other parts of the United
Nations, particularly the Peacebuilding Commission.
The peace and security system should also draw on the
vast expertise of the United Nations system for early
warning and prevention on the interconnectedness of
climate and security, poverty, human rights, as well as
development and peace.
Secondly, the United Nations must increase
its capacities to build regional and comprehensive
prevention strategies and foster even stronger
partnerships with regional organizations, such as
the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and the European Union (EU).
Based on the Action for Peacekeeping and Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiatives, the Secretary-General’s
New Agenda for Peace will be a key opportunity to
take those partnerships to the next level. Sustainable
funding for African-led peace support operations is one
important area to which the EU is providing substantial
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

assistance through the European Peace Facility. Austria
is committed to actively contributing to the discussion
on how to specifically enhance those partnerships over
the next years.
Finally, on a local level, United Nations peace
operations need to contribute to building resilient
communities. Quick-impact projects that address the
priority needs of the local population help foster trust.
They have proven to be successful, and Austria will
continue to implement such locally rooted activities
in areas of deployment. Particular attention must be
paid to building inclusive and resilient institutions and
procedures based on the rule of law. And it is of the
utmost importance to recognize that all members of
society have a vital part in building resilient societies.
I highlight here the fundamental role of women and
young people in conflict prevention, peace processes
and strengthening resilience.
Austria remains committed to supporting all efforts
to build resilience in and through United Nations peace
operations. We have strongly supported initiatives to
strengthen the rule of law, protect civilians in armed
conflict and promote the women and peace and security
agenda, and will continue to do so. And we stand ready
to do more. With the intention of gradually increasing
our contributions to the Organization’s peace efforts,
we will step up our training and capacity-building
activities over the next years. We are convinced that
the more we invest in those areas, the better we can
support local ownership and the resilience of States
against threats to peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Ghana for organizing
this ministerial open debate on the resilience of peace
operations. Resilience is what allows us to adapt to a
fast-changing security landscape and is what is needed
throughout the United Nations system in order to be
able to face emerging threats.

S/PV.9181

that more needs to be done to ensure that we establish
sustainable peace with all the necessary foundations
to counter the resurgence of conflict in Member
States where peacekeeping operations are deployed.
Peacekeeping mandates also need to include a clear
vision of how the mission in question will empower
local societies and create resilient communities
and institutions.
This approach also includes the utilization of
other important agendas, such as the women and peace
and security agenda. By ensuring the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women, we will also be
contributing to the formation of resilient institutions
and an inclusive society and decision-making processes.
Young people also have a fundamental role to play. Such
measures are essential in order to facilitate a transition
from a situation of conflict to one of peace.
Climate change, the use of new and emerging
technologies and violent extremism are other realities
that the Security Council needs to contend with. That
rings true in Africa and in other regions around the
globe. The way that destabilizing forces have changed
in the world we live in has already pushed us to rethink
peacekeeping mandates throughout the years. That
process needs to continue, and we need to refine our
approach and equip peacekeeping missions with the
tools to meet new and hybrid threats effectively.
Identifying and addressing the root causes of
conflict is not easy, but the United Nations system has
the necessary institutional knowledge and experience
to refine its vision of how peacekeeping operations
can bridge the gaps and establish sustainable peace.
The Security Council has to maximize that potential
and contemplate how to deploy future missions that
are ready to focus on building resilience and make use
of new interventions that go beyond the traditional
military role we ascribe to those types of deployments.

Peacekeeping remains one of the most fundamental
tools at the Organization’s disposal. The Security
Council has a special dual responsibility of ensuring
that it deploys peacekeeping operations to uphold peace
and security and that peacekeeping mandates reflect
the realities of the day.

We believe that it is clear that the Security Council
needs to continue its work on rethinking peacekeeping
mandates, make them future-proof and conceptualize
all the interventions necessary for creating sustainable
peace. Only a concerted effort by the international
community can ensure that peacekeeping remains an
effective tool in the face of new asymmetric threats.

We must also continuously review and examine
our maxims and practices. Evidence strongly suggests

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

22-6723331/33

S/PV.9181

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish you every success, Madam President, as you
assume the presidency of the Security Council, and
I thank you for convening this debate and for having
broadly included in the Council’s agenda for the month
of November the consideration of peacebuilding. We
also thank the briefers for their important contributions
at the beginning of this meeting.
Ecuador supports the prevention approach as the
best way to consolidate peace. Prevention requires
considering the needs of all sectors of the population,
which includes activities aimed at preventing the
outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of
conflicts by addressing their root causes.
A social fabric weakened by various deficiencies
is more prone to violence. Dialogue is indispensable if
we are to avoid or stop war and, once established, is
necessary in order to continue strengthening the rule of
law, promoting economic growth, eradicating poverty,
reducing inequalities and bolstering democracy — all
within the framework of respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

03/11/2022

teams, other United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, the host State and other national actors.
We also reiterate the value of strategic
communications to counter misinformation and build
confidence in the countries in which they operate,
through consultation processes with civil society.
Finally, Ecuador urges the Security Council to
strengthen the mandates of peacekeeping operations to
support joint efforts towards better conflict prevention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I have the pleasure to
submit this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.
The entire United Nations system must be geared
up to tackle the global challenges of today. Violent
conflicts are growing in number, and they are becoming
more protracted. Conflict dynamics are exacerbated by
increasing inequalities, humanitarian and food crises,
complex security threats and climate change.

In post-conflict contexts, sustainable peace has
its foundations in the reconciliation process, which is
forged through transitional justice and reparations to
victims, as well as the demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants.

Holistic and integrated approaches are necessary
to face these challenges. The same applies to United
Nations peace operations, which need robust and flexible
mandates that are adequately resourced, in order to
empower them to respond to changing dynamics.

In line with the outcome of the 2020 peacebuilding
architecture review, the Security Council should equip
United Nations peace missions with the necessary tools
to continue to strengthen long-term actions.

Prevention, resilience and peacebuilding should
make up integral parts of peace operations. This
requires thorough conflict analysis, identifying the
root causes of conflict and fragility and sources of
resilience. Complementarity with other actors such
as United Nations agencies, regional entities and
international and local civil society organizations
across the humanitarian, development and peace nexus
is an essential part of this approach.

One of these tools is the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. Women must
participate in all mechanisms of negotiation and
implementation of peace agreements, as established in
paragraph 8 (b) of resolution 1325 (2000).
On 8 September 2021, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 76/305 by consensus, which reaffirms
the importance of ensuring adequate, predictable and
sustained funding for peacebuilding, not only through
voluntary contributions and other sources of financing,
but also through assessed contributions.
We underscore the need to strengthen the synergies
of peace operations, at the earliest possible stage of the
integrated planning and coordination of transitions,
with resident coordinators, United Nations country
32/33

The Nordic countries would like to highlight four
key points.
First, with respect to broad-based national ownership
and the active engagement of actors at all levels of
society, peace operations cannot replace the need for
the political will of conflict parties to pursue peace,
nor the host State’s sovereign responsibilities. In this
regard, we stress that protection of civilians, including
children, must be a main priority. We encourage greater
integration of police and law enforcement perspectives
in peace operations. An effective police force, judiciary
22-67233

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

system and corrections service, with human rights and
the rule of law at their heart, are a prerequisite for
peace. Civil society inclusion and the empowerment
of vulnerable communities is vital and can prevent
the acceleration of conflict dynamics. The woman and
peace and security agenda must guide United Nations
peace operations to enhance the full, effective, equal
and meaningful participation of women. Similarly,
the role of youth in the prevention and resolution of
conflict is a key aspect, as is the inclusion of persons
with disabilities.
Secondly, on partnerships, regional organizations
such as the European Union and the African Union
should be actively engaged in political processes
and security efforts in United Nations peace
operation settings to enhance strategic coherence and
complementarity in efforts. We furthermore encourage
cohesion with peacekeeping efforts under African
subregional organizations, including the Economic
Community of West African States, and initiatives such
as the Accra Initiative, in line with commitments made
under the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Coherent and complementary approaches within
the United Nations are equally important. The
Peacebuilding Commission, with its convening and
bridging mandate, plays an important role in promoting
coherence. Stronger linkages between the Commission

S/PV.9181

and the Security Council can help to ensure that national
peacebuilding priorities are brought to the Council’s
attention at an early stage and should be promoted.
Thirdly, building peace requires adequate
resources. Nordic countries are among the key
contributors to the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
and are jointly responsible for over 30 per cent of its
funding. The resolution on financing for peacebuilding
(resolution 76/305), adopted by consensus by the General
Assembly, stresses the importance of sufficient funding
to support the peacebuilding activities of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions throughout
their life cycle and in their transition phases.
Lastly, climate change and climate-related security
risks must be an integral part of peace operations, as
it adversely affects already vulnerable populations. We
encourage more countries to support the United Nations
climate security mechanism, which, among other things,
has provided advisors to United Nations missions.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on the list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

22-6723333/33
