S/2018/771

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 August 2018
Original: English

Developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2404
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until 28 February 2019, and
requested that I report every six months on the situation in Guinea -Bissau and on
progress made in the implementation of the resolution and the mandate of
UNIOGBIS. The report also provides an update on key political, security, human
rights, socioeconomic and humanitarian developments in Guinea -Bissau since my
report of 9 February 2018 (S/2018/110).
2.
On 4 May, I announced the appointment of José Viegas Filho of Brazil as my
new Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau and Head of UNIOGBIS, to succeed
Modibo Touré of Mali, who completed his assignment on 6 May. My new Special
Representative took up his functions in Bissau on 28 May.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
3.
Since my previous report, there have been some encouraging signs of progress
towards the resolution of the political impasse in Guinea -Bissau and the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of the ECOWAS
Road Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Following local
facilitation efforts led by national religious figures, and acceding to pressure from
leaders of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), President
José Mário Vaz finally appointed Aristides Gomes as Prime Minister of consensus,
which led to the formation of an inclusive Government and the reconvening of the
National Assembly in plenary session. Moreover, President Vaz formally set
18 November 2018 as the date of legislative elections. Notwithstanding those positive
developments, the consensus among political actors remains fragile, and the process
of organizing legislative elections in 2018 is facing serious techni cal and financial
challenges. Since taking office in May, the inclusive Government of Prime Minister

18-13161 (E)

200818

*1813161*

S/2018/771

Gomes has delayed making important decisions on voter registration modalities,
which has had repercussions for the timely procurement of biometric equipmen t to
capture voter data. The indecisiveness of the new Government has cast doubt on its
resolve to respect the timetable for the legislative elections to be held in November.
4.
The ECOWAS decision, on 4 February, to impose sanctions on 19 BissauGuineans for impeding the implementation of the Conakry Agreement of 14 October
2016 faced limited public opposition, except from those concerned. On 13 February,
the previous Government issued a statement describing the sanctions as “abusive”, in
conflict with the governing principles of ECOWAS and detrimental to the
Constitution and laws of Guinea-Bissau. The statement further declared that the
Government would call for an extraordinary session of the ECOWAS Authority of
Heads of State and Government to review the Conakry Agreement and to seek the
appointment of a “new, independent and impartial mediator” interested in assisting
Guinea-Bissau in overcoming the political stalemate.
5.
On 20 February, a lawyer representing the 19 individuals on the ECOWAS
sanctions list submitted a petition to the Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority,
President Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé of Togo, requesting the suspension of
sanctions on procedural and substantive grounds. The petition cited lack of clarity
and consistency in the application of sanctions and argued that the individuals
sanctioned could not be held accountable for the non-implementation of the Conakry
Agreement.
6.
On 28 February, the Security Council adopted resolution 2404 (2018), by which
it extended the mandate of UNIOGBIS for another year, from 1 March 2018 to
28 February 2019. In the resolution, the Council’s identified three priorities for
UNIOGBIS support, namely, the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement, the
electoral process to ensure legislative elections in 2018, and the review of the
Constitution of Guinea-Bissau. In an important departure from previous resolutions,
the Council dropped all rule-of-law and security institutions tasks from the mandate
of UNIOGBIS. The Council acknowledged the ECOWAS Authority’s directive to the
President of the ECOWAS Commission to implement sanctions against any person or
organization impeding the process to end the crisis in Guinea -Bissau and noted the
Authority’s strong appeal to the African Union, the Community of Portuguese speaking Countries, the European Union and the United Nations to support ECOWAS
in the effective implementation of the sanctions.
7.
On 4 March, members of the Movement of Conscientious and Non -Conformist
Citizens (Movimento dos Cidadãos Conscientes e Inconformados) held a peaceful
march towards the ECOWAS mission in Bissau, calling for the full application of
sanctions against individuals obstructing the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement. The organizers handed a petition to the ECOWAS representative
requesting that President Vaz be added to the sanctions list.
8.
During the reporting period, the organization of legislative and presidential
elections became the most challenging and pressing task for the Government. On
26 February, the acting president of the National Electoral Commission, José Pedro
Sambú, advised President Vaz that it would not be technically feasible to hold
elections in May, at the end of the four-year legislative term, as required by the
Constitution. On 27 February, Mr. Sambú announced a revised timeline for the
legislative elections, postponing the polls until 18 November. According to the
National Electoral Commission, the new date was more realistic in view of the
technical hurdles to be overcome and the short lead time available to complete a voter
registration update.
9.
Under the Constitution and the national electoral law, the President is required
to set the date of presidential and legislative elections by decree, following
2/17

18-13161

S/2018/771

consultations with the Government, political parties and the National Electoral
Commission. To that end, on 28 February and 1 March, President Vaz met with
representatives of 40 of the country’s registered political parties to agree on a possible
date. In the meetings, the leaders of the two largest parties, the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (Partido Africano para a Independência da
Guiné e Cabo Verde — PAIGC) and the Party of Social Renewal (Partido da
Renovação Social — PRS), demanded that elections be held in 2018 in accordance
with the relevant constitutional provisions and electoral laws. There was widespread
speculation that the ulterior motive of President Vaz was to hold legislative and
presidential elections simultaneously in 2019, as he had announced to his peers at the
ordinary session of the ECOWAS Authority on 16 December 2017. In that context,
the leader of the United People’s Assembly — Democratic Party of Guinea-Bissau
(Assembleia do Povo Unido — Partido Democrático da Guiné-Bissau), Nuno
Nabiam, denounced the lengthy consultative process as a deliberate manoeuvre by
the President to delay the electoral process.
10. On 9 March, the Government and the United Nations signed onto a joint project,
to be managed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) through a
basket fund established for donor contributions, to support the national authorities in
organizing the legislative elections. Developed by UNDP over six months in close
consultation with the Government and the European Union, the budget of the project
is $7.7 million. At the signing ceremony, the Government confirmed its contribution
of $1 million, an unprecedented investment of State funds in elections. The
Government later announced a further $800,000 to supplement its initial contribution.
11. As the then Prime Minister Artur Da Silva struggled to form an inclusive
Government, President Vaz convened a meeting on 14 March to hold consultations
with key political actors, civil society organizations and the group of five
international partners represented in Guinea-Bissau — the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the European Union and
the United Nations. The President reiterated his commitment to and support fo r
legislative elections in 2018 and regretted the lack of progress in finding a solution
to the political and institutional stalemate. Absent from the session were PAIGC and
its ally, the Collective of Democratic Political Parties United against the Dictat orship
(Coletivo de Partidos Políticos Democráticos Unidos Contra a Ditadura ), which held
a joint press conference on the same day denouncing any attempt by President Vaz to
work outside the framework of the Conakry Agreement to overcome the impasse. The
President of the National Assembly also declined to participate in the meeting.
12. On 29 March, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union issued a
communiqué emphasizing that the Conakry Agreement remained the primary
framework for the resolution of the political impasse in Guinea-Bissau and calling
upon national actors to abide by their commitments and to ensure the full
implementation of the ECOWAS road map and the Conakry Agreement. The Council
stressed that the sanctions imposed by ECOWAS should remain in force until the full
implementation of the Agreement, and requested ECOWAS to develop a mechanism
to ensure that the sanctions worked effectively. The Council also called upon the
Bissau-Guinean authorities to respect the Constitution with regard to the legislative
and presidential elections scheduled for 2018 and 2019. Finally, the Council appealed
to international partners to provide the financial support necessary to enable the
extension of the mandate of the ECOWAS mission in Guinea -Bissau (ECOMIB).
13. Meanwhile, in Bissau, intense consultations facilitated by traditional and
religious leaders in March and April, under the aegis of the Catholic bishop of Bissau,
resulted in a rapprochement between PAIGC and PRS. On the basis of an agreement
on principles, the two parties agreed on the naming of a Prime Minister of consensus
and pledged to participate in an extraordinary session of the National Assembly to
18-13161

3/17

S/2018/771

elect the new members of the National Electoral Commission and to extend the
current legislature until the November elections. On 9 April, in a meeting with the
group of five international partners in Bissau, the President of the National Assembly
indicated that he could only consider a request for the body to reconvene if the terms
of the Conakry Agreement were fulfilled, starting with the appointment of a Prime
Minister of consensus.
14. An ECOWAS ministerial delegation dispatched to Bissau on 11 April, led by the
President of the ECOWAS Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Togo, Robert Dussey, noted the rapprochement between PAIGC and PRS. In a
communiqué issued at the end of the visit, the delegation welcomed the willingness
of the two main political parties to work together to find a solution to the political
impasse.
15. On 14 April, at its summit in Lomé, the ECOWAS Authority took positive note
of the decisions by President Vaz to appoint a Prime Minister of consensus and to
announce a date for legislative elections. The Authority also noted the decision by the
Bissau-Guinean political actors to hold an extraordinary session of the National
Assembly to elect the members of the National Electoral Commission and to extend
the current legislature. The Authority further authorized the extension of the ECOMIB
presence until 30 June.
16. On 16 April, upon his return to Bissau from an extraordinary summit of Heads
of State and Government of ECOWAS, President Vaz issued decrees to dismiss Prime
Minister Da Silva and appoint Aristides Gomes as Prime Minister of consensus, and
to set 18 November 2018 as the date for legislative elections. Prime Minister Gomes
was sworn in on the same day. In reaction to those developments, a group of 15
parliamentarians that had been expelled from PAIGC called for the lifting of the
ECOWAS sanctions.
17. On 19 April, the National Assembly met in a plenary session for the first time
since December 2015. José Pedro Sambú, who had been serving as acting president
of the National Electoral Commission, was elected to the post with 93 votes in favour,
1 abstention and 8 absentees. The National Assembly also adopted a bill to amend the
Constitution, exceptionally extending the legislature beyond its four-year mandate,
until November 2018. The following day, the Bissau-Guinean League of Human
Rights (Liga Guineense dos Direitos Humanos) denounced the extension of the
current legislature as unconstitutional.
18. An ECOWAS ministerial-level delegation, comprising the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Togo and the Minister of State and Secretary-General of the Presidency of
Guinea, visited Bissau on 24 April to follow up on the formation of an inclusive
Government. The delegation met with President Vaz, Prime Minister Gomes, the
leaders of PAIGC and PRS, the Catholic bishop of Bissau and representatives of the
group of five international partners in Bissau.
19. On 25 April, President Vaz issued a decree appointing the 26 members of the
new Government, which comprised representatives of the political parties with seats
in the National Assembly, the group of 15 parliamentarians that had been expelled
from PAIGC and members of the Office of the President. In his statement at the
swearing-in ceremony the next day, the President emphasized that the Prime
Minister’s main responsibility was to prepare for the holding of l egislative elections
on 18 November. Prime Minister Gomes remarked that his Government would strive
to fully implement the Conakry Agreement and ensure that legislative elections were
held on time. On 30 April, President Vaz appointed the former Minister o f Interior,
Botche Candé, who is featured on the list of individuals sanctioned by ECOWAS, as
Minister of State and Adviser to the President on Defence, Internal and External
Security Affairs.
4/17

18-13161

S/2018/771

20. On 6 June, Prime Minister Gomes presented a draft stability pact to the
representatives of the group of five international partners in Bissau. He announced
that the draft would be circulated to political parties for consultation. According to
the Prime Minister, the stability pact would serve as the basis for the work of the
inclusive Government in the period leading to the elections. To date, political parties
have not officially reacted to the draft stability pact, which has yet to be submitted to
a national round-table dialogue, as prescribed in the Conakry Agreement. Youth
groups and the Council of Women have expressed concern over the lack of broader
consultations.
21. The National Assembly adopted a new government programme and a State
budget on 19 and 21 June, respectively. The budget was the first to be ado pted since
the dismissal of Prime Minister Domingos Simões Pereira in August 2015. It was set
at $381 million, with a projected deficit of $78 million. The government programme
focuses on electoral preparations.
22. Despite those positive developments, political rivalries between PAIGC and
PRS re-surfaced. On 2 May, the Minister of Territorial Administration, Ester
Fernandes, announced the suspension of eight regional governors, all of whom were
perceived as being aligned with PRS. The PRS parliamentary lea der denounced the
measure as a violation of the agreement on principles reached between the two parties
in March and April under the aegis of the Catholic bishop of Bissau. After weeks of
consultations facilitated by ECOWAS, PRS recognized the prerogative of the PAIGC
Minister to nominate regional governors. On 5 June, eight new regional governors
and the mayor of Bissau, all close to PAIGC, were appointed.
23. Since June, the Government of Prime Minister Gomes has struggled to reach
consensus on the modalities for the holding of elections. One particular stumbling
block has been the procedure for the voter registration update, a prerequisite that
should have begun in July, or 90 days before the November elections. The Prime
Minister repeatedly invited political parties represented in the National Assembly to
technical-level meetings to deliberate on options for the printing of voter registration
cards, which resulted in politicized discussions on whether cards were to be printed
at the site of registration, at a central printing location in Bissau, or abroad. UNDP
electoral experts advised the Government against on-site printing owing to
anticipated logistical hurdles associated with the transport of printing equipment
across the country during the rainy season. Nevertheless, PRS continued to insist on
the on-site printing option, while other parties showed flexibility towards the option
of printing cards in Bissau and in the regional offices of the National Electoral
Commission.
24. On 4 July, Braima Camará, the coordinator of the group of 15 parliamentarians
that had been expelled from PAIGC, resigned from Parliament and broke away from
PAIGC in anticipation of the formal establishment of his Movement for Democratic
Alternation (Movimento de Alternância Democrática) as a new political party.
25. On 18 July, in the final declaration at their conference held at Santa Maria, Cabo
Verde, the Heads of State and Government of the Community of Portuguese -speaking
Countries affirmed their readiness to provide elector al assistance and called upon
international partners to materialize the financial pledges already made.
26. On 20 July, the Government issued a press release setting 23 August to
23 September as the period for voter registration and indicating that voter registration
cards would be printed by the Technical Support Office for the Electoral Process in
Bissau and the regional offices of the National Electoral Commission. The
Government also reaffirmed its determination to hold legislative elections on
18 November.

18-13161

5/17

S/2018/771

27. On 31 July, in the final communiqué of its summit held in Lomé, the ECOWAS
Authority urged Bissau-Guinean political stakeholders and civil society to continue
to demonstrate their commitment to adhering to the date of 18 November 2018 for
the holding of legislative elections; expressed its concern over the slow pace of
implementation of the timetable for legislative elections; and appealed to the
international community to support Guinea-Bissau. It noted a financial contribution
of $1 million by the West African Economic and Monetary Union for the electoral
preparations and decided to contribute $2 million. The Authority welcomed the
progress made since the ECOWAS summit of 14 April and also decided to lift the
targeted sanctions imposed on 4 February against 19 stakeholders.

B.

Security situation
28. Overall, the security situation in Guinea-Bissau has remained calm. Street
protests have decreased since the appointment of the new Government. However,
common crime, notably robberies and theft, reportedly increased. Reports also
indicate an increase in illicit cross-border activities, especially along the northern
frontier with Senegal.
29. During the reporting period, the armed forces remained neutral, under strong
leadership, and continued to refrain from interfering in political affairs.

C.

Human rights situation
30. The human rights situation remained largely unchanged. The respect, protection
and fulfilment of human rights have been hampered by weak State institutions and
continued political instability. The country has yet to take additional steps to establish
an independent national human rights commission, in line with the principles relating
to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of huma n rights
(Paris Principles), and the current national human rights mechanism continues to
work under State supervision and guidance.
31. No significant progress was made to investigate human rights violations,
especially those associated with past military coups and associated violence. On
20 March, a group of barristers denounced cases of arbitrary detention and corruption,
allegedly perpetrated by prosecutors, and announced the creation of an association to
fight corruption and human rights violations in the justice system. On 23 April, the
ECOWAS Court of Justice held a hearing in Bamako in relation to allegations, lodged
on 5 December 2016, of excessive use of force and suppression of the right to peaceful
demonstration in Guinea-Bissau; the final decision is due on 16 October 2018.
32. A reversal of the previously reported tendency to restrict political participation
and the right of peaceful assembly was registered during the reporting period. Civil
society organizations held a series of peaceful marche s and vigils in Bissau without
reported incidents. Strikes also occurred without significant disturbances. Workers
assigned to the Judiciary Police went on strike in February, and the National Union
of Workers of Guinea-Bissau (União Nacional dos Trabalhadores da Guiné-Bissau)
declared general strikes by public workers from 7 to 9 May, 12 to 14 June and 26 to
28 June, claiming salary arrears and readjustments, along with pensions for public
servants.

6/17

18-13161

S/2018/771

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
33. The economic growth rate for Guinea-Bissau in 2018 is expected to reach 5.3
per cent, representing a generally positive outlook, albeit with lower growth than in
2016 or 2017. On 1 June, the International Monetary Fund approved a one -year
extension of its extended credit facility to sustain macroeconomic stability during the
upcoming election period and to support reforms focused on mobilizing revenue and
addressing gaps in essential infrastructure. The extension released an additional
$4.3 million, bringing the total amount disbursed under the extended credit facility to
$24.2 million. Various international financial institutions and development banks,
including the World Bank, have indicated that they are considering re -initiating
budget support should the holding of legislative elections be successful and should a
new Government be appointed.
34. There is growing concern that the 2018 cashew harvest, the country’s single
most important revenue earner, may decrease by up to 20 per cent compared to 2017,
which recorded a harvest of approximately 200,000 metric tons. The anticipated
poorer harvest is being attributed to adverse weather conditions and to fungal blight
in some areas. In March, President Vaz set an inordinately high reference price for
cashews, at 1,000 CFA francs (approximately $1.75) per kilogram, almost double the
market price in the region. Farmers have since been reluctant to sell their product
below the reference price and have been inclined to withhold it. While it is too early
to predict the total volume of cashew exports for the year, there is concern that small scale producers may face challenging economic times ahead.
35. A poorer cashew harvest and a lower volume of exports may also worsen the
level of food insecurity in the next few mo nths. Between February and May,
approximately 210,000 people were forecast to become food insecure, including more
than 25,000 who would require immediate food assistance. The country is likely to
remain vulnerable to food insecurity, in particular in rura l areas, if it remains exposed
to political instability, the absence of effective food security policies, and a lack of
diversification of subsistence and income-generating agriculture.
36. The provision of basic public services deteriorated in the reporti ng period, with
national energy production capacity reduced by one third owing to the lack of sound
management of the public utility company and financial difficulties on the part of the
national treasury. The population of Bissau faced longer periods of e lectricity and
water shortages. Energy supplies outside Bissau are among the lowest in West Africa,
reaching only 4 per cent of rural towns. In addition, strike actions related to the
inability of the Government to fulfil promises to meet demands for an in crease in
public sector wages have seriously affected the provision of schooling and medical
services nationwide.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
A.

Implementation of the Conakry Agreement, the ECOWAS road
map, political dialogue and a national reconciliation process, and
the strengthening of democratic governance, including through
urgent reforms
37. In response to a significantly-revised mandate, UNIOGBIS prioritized
engagement with national stakeholders to foster solutions to implement the Conakry

18-13161

7/17

S/2018/771

Agreement. My Special Representative maintained frequent contact with the
President, the Prime Minister and his Cabinet, the President of the National Assembly,
the President of the Supreme Court and the Chief of General Staff of the Armed
Forces. He also liaised with leaders of political parties and civil society
representatives, including women and youth groups.
38. My Special Representative continued to coordinate the group of five
international partners in Bissau to help to address the political stalemate. In the month
preceding the extraordinary summit of the ECOWAS Authority on 14 April, the group
held consultations with key political actors, including the President on 16 March and
the President of the National Assembly on 9 April, to stress that the Conakry
Agreement remained the primary framework for resolving the political stalemate.
39. UNIOGBIS reinforced its cooperation with ECOWAS in support of the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, including by providing technical
assistance in preparation for the extraordinary summit of 14 April. To ensure a
coordinated approach, my Special Representative maintained regular contact with the
Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority, President Gnassingbé of Togo, and the
ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Condé of Guinea.
40. To garner international support for the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, my Special Representative held bilateral consultations in Brussels,
Lisbon and Paris from 26 February to 2 March, engaged with the International
Organization of la Francophonie during an official visit to Bissau on 21 May, and
participated in a summit of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries held in
Santa Maria, Cabo Verde, on 17 and 18 July.
41. UNIOGBIS also provided strategic and technical advice and support, as well as
financial assistance from the Peacebuilding Fund, to the organizing commission of a
national conference towards the consolidation of peace and development in Guinea Bissau. In May, the commission held a series of meetings with key national
stakeholders, including President Vaz and the President of the National Assembly, t o
formally present its report, entitled “In the Name of Peace” (Em Nome da Paz). The
report presents the main findings and recommendations from nationwide
consultations with more than 3,000 persons between 2009 and 2017 on the causes of
conflict and instability in Guinea-Bissau. The presentations made to authorities at the
meetings helped to reignite interest in the work of the commission and focused
attention on the need for national reconciliation.

B.

Timely conduct of legislative elections in 2018
42. My Special Representative, in close coordination with international partners,
prioritized his good offices engagement with national actors with a view to making
progress in preparing for the holding of legislative elections on 18 November. He
consulted regularly with the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly,
leaders of political parties and the president of the National Electoral Commission on
the status of preparations for elections and associated challenges, including voter
registration.
43. Meanwhile, UNIOGBIS and UNDP, in coordination with international partners,
also emphasized the provision of support to the Government in making technical
preparations and mobilizing resources for the elections. The electoral support project
developed by UNDP and the European Union is strengthening the capacity of the
National Electoral Commission and the Technical Support Office for the Electoral
Process (in the Ministry of Territorial Administration) to update the voter registry,
carry out a civic education campaign for voters and complete the remaining technical
requirements for the opening of the polls. UNIOGBIS and the National Electoral

8/17

18-13161

S/2018/771

Commission have co-chaired regular meetings to brief the Government, political
parties and international partners on the status of electoral preparations, including
related resource requirements.
44. On 28 February, UNDP and the Technical Support Office for the Electoral
Process delivered a training session in Bissau on voter registration to 267 people,
including 40 women, who work for the voter registration regional commissions. The
training strengthened the capacity of participants in the use of data collection
techniques and tools and enhanced their understanding of the legal framework for
nationwide voter registration.
45. In May, UNDP, with support from the European Union, assisted the Technical
Support Office for the Electoral Process in defining the voter registration
methodology and designing technical specifications for the voter registration
equipment. UNDP is finalizing the procurement of voter registration equipment to
support national authorities in preparing for the elections.
46. From 18 to 29 June, and from 9 to 28 July, UNIOGBIS facilitated the delivery
of courses on electoral security and the prevention of violence, in Bissau, with support
from the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre and sponsorship by
Germany. A total of 95 members of Bissau-Guinean public security, law enforcement
and defence institutions, including 17 women, participated in the training, which
focused on early-warning mechanisms and nationwide joint command arrangements.

C.

Review of the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau
47. Despite the formation of an inclusive Government and the resumption of the full
functioning of the National Assembly, national stakeholders have displayed
reluctance to take action on critical reform issues, including the review of the
Constitution, before the holding of legislative elections.
48. In April, UNIOGBIS resumed engagement with the National Assembly’s ad hoc
commission on constitutional reform and is currently developing a plan to support the
commission in implementing priority actions required for expediting the review of
the Constitution. UNIOGBIS is also providing technical and financial support, with
resources from the Peacebuilding Fund, to enhance the capacity of civil society
organizations to contribute to consultations on the draft proposal for the revised
Constitution to be prepared by the ad hoc commission.

D.

Strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing the capacity
of State organs
49. Between 9 May and 21 June, UNIOGBIS delivered five seminars on military
leadership to more than 200 officers in the armed forces, 10 members of the National
Defence Institute and 40 officers in the National Guard, including 20 women, to
enhance their performance in command positions and raise awareness of the
importance of respect by the military for constitutional prerogatives and the rule of
law. On 1 June, UNIOGBIS replicated the seminars in a training session sponsored
by the General Staff of the Armed Forces for 48 officers who expected to assume
positions as political advisers to senior military commanders.
50. In support of a joint programme on police, justice and correction s under the
United Nations global focal point arrangement, UNIOGBIS continued to co -locate
personnel in justice and security institutions to enhance efficiency in the
implementation of national strategies on public security, law enforcement and

18-13161

9/17

S/2018/771

judiciary and penitentiary management. Under a related access to justice project,
UNDP handed over a new court house to authorities in Mansoa, in the Oio region.

E.

Promotion and protection of human rights
51. UNIOGBIS continued to assist national authorities in the promotion and
protection of human rights, by providing strategic advice, technical and financial
support and by undertaking advocacy, capacity-building, awareness-raising and
training activities. Assistance included the provision of technical advice to the
Secretariat of State for Planning and Regional Integration in the mainstreaming of
human rights into the ongoing alignment and integration of the country ’s strategic
and operational plan, “Terra Ranka”, with global development frameworks, including
the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063.
52. UNIOGBIS continued to assist the National Network of Human Rights
Defenders by providing training in monitoring and protecting human rights, in
particular during the electoral process. On 20 and 21 April, UNIOGBIS supp orted a
retreat for Network members that focused on the establishment of early -warning and
protection mechanisms. Improved capacity in those areas will enhance engagement
between the Network and international human rights mechanisms, including the
universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council and others.
53. On 7 April, UNIOGBIS contributed to a training session organized by the
Bissau-Guinean League of Human Rights on freedom of assembly and peaceful
demonstration. Thirty law enforcement officials, including 5 women, from the Rapid
Intervention Police, the Public Order Police and the National Guard participated in
the training. From 27 April to 1 May, UNIOGBIS organized a five -day human rights
campaign involving hundreds of young people from Bissau and the Biombo, Cacheu
and Gabu regions in the context of a citizenship-building initiative.
54. Since April, UNIOGBIS has been raising awareness among electoral
stakeholders, including the staff of the regional offices of National Electoral
Commission and the Technical Support Office for the Electoral Process,
representatives of civil society organizations, local and religious leaders, persons with
disabilities, media practitioners and technicians on their roles and responsibilities
with respect to the promotion and protection of human rights in the electoral
processes. Multi-stakeholder workshops on human rights in electoral processes were
jointly organized by UNIOGBIS, UNDP, the National Electoral Commission and the
Technical Support Office for the Electoral Process for a total of 245 participants,
including 85 women, from Bissau and the Bolama, Cacheu, Oio and Quinara regions.
55. Assessments in Bafatá from 17 to 19 April, in Gabu from 23 to 26 April, and in
Quinara from 8 to 10 May, showed that extreme poverty, unequal access to education,
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination affecting women and girls, as well
as harmful traditional practices, including early and forced marriage, all limited the
rights of women and youth to participate in eco nomic life, which had a detrimental
impact on their enjoyment of the right to participate in the public and political
spheres.
56. On 5 July, UNIOGBIS initiated a series of briefings on human rights -related
issues in the area of transitional justice and reconciliation with members of the
organizing commission for the national conference towards the consolidation of peace
and development in Guinea-Bissau. The briefings aimed to strengthen the capacity of
members to understand the human rights implications of the various proposals for
national reconciliation outlined by the organizing commission in its 2017 report.

10/17

18-13161

S/2018/771

F.

Combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
57. Since my previous report, there have been modest signs of progress towards a
national commitment to countering drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. On 4 April, a joint airport interdiction task force became operational at
Bissau’s international airport, in the framework of the Airport Communication Project
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the World Customs Organization.
The Government assigned 15 officers from the Judicial Police, Customs, the National
Guard, the Public Order Police and the National Central Bureau at INTERPOL to this
nationally owned interservice structure. During UNODC-led on-the-job mentoring in
profiling and targeting techniques, task force members arrested seven drug couriers
and seized 6.9 kilograms of cocaine along the São Paulo -Lisbon-Bissau air route,
which demonstrated the continued use of Guinea-Bissau as a transit country for
cocaine trafficking from South America.
58. As part of the joint programme on police, justice and corrections, UNIOGBIS
and UNODC provided training to the Judicial Police, the Public Order Police, the
National Guard, the Financial Intelligence Unit, the Transnational Crime Unit and the
joint airport interdiction task force, contributing to an increase in the number of
meetings among those entities, improved planning of joint operations and increase d
sharing of timely information.
59. During the reporting period and pursuant to Security Council resolution 2404
(2018), UNODC increased its activities in Guinea-Bissau and, along with
UNIOGBIS, supported the Government in expanding its capacity to operate in the
regions through the establishment of Judicial Police outposts in Catió, in the Tombali
region, and in the Bubaque islands, in the Bijagós archipelago of the Bolama region.
The archipelago, with its 88 islands, exposes the country to criminal activities owing
to the difficulties of controlling its vast territorial waters. In April, UNODC launched
a new project in Guinea-Bissau aimed at enhancing national capacities and fostering
stronger regional cooperation to detect and investigate cross-border organized crime
in the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal. In May, UNODC and France also
conducted a joint assessment of how to enhance maritime security and the rule of law
through a sustainable development perspective. In May, UNODC deployed to Bissau
a senior law enforcement expert on trafficking in persons.
60. UNIOGBIS and UNODC also supported the reactivation of the Transnational
Crime Unit, which had not been operational since February 2017. The Unit
recommenced operations after the appointment, on 14 May, of a new director of the
Judiciary Police, who prioritized the reassignment of Judiciary Police members to the
Unit, who now constitute half the Unit’s capacity. UNIOGBIS co-located police
advisers to mentor their counterparts in the Transnational Crime Unit.
61. UNIOGBIS provided technical and financial support for the organizing of the
second General Congress of Public Prosecutors, held on 23 and 24 May in Bissau.
Discussions and recommendations focused on the role of magistrates and public
prosecutors in the fight against corruption and impunity, notably with respect to drug
trafficking and organized crime, and strategies to resist undue politic al and military
influence. UNODC is also leading the finalization of an inter-agency strategy to take
a cross-pillar approach to address the drug problem. That will encourage joint
programming between entities to support national and regional authorities in the
implementation of more balanced and people-centred policies that promote human
rights, health and social rehabilitation alongside law enforcement efforts.
62. In a meeting with my Senior Adviser on Policy, Ana Maria Menéndez Pérez,
held in Bissau on 25 May, President Vaz requested increased support fro m the

18-13161

11/17

S/2018/771

international community to combat transnational organized crime, including drug and
human trafficking. The President noted that illicit activities, including the
involvement of elements of the armed forces, were affecting stability and democratic
governance. In a meeting with UNODC and UNIOGBIS, on 4 June, the President
reiterated those concerns and called upon UNODC to support the design and
implementation of a national plan to tackle serious transnational organized crime, in
cooperation with UNIOGBIS. The President indicated that he would quickly
formalize his request for assistance in a letter to be sent to the Executive Director of
UNODC. To date, UNODC has not yet received that letter.
63. On 9 July, UNIOGBIS launched a pilot community protection programme in
Buba in Quinara region to improve prevention and to combat drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime by fostering partnerships between State institutions and
the population.
64. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS and UNODC also pro vided training to
23 law enforcement officers on border control and mentored law enforcement
counterparts in conducting human trafficking investigations. UNIOGBIS and the
African Union provided technical support and mentoring in the installation and use
of the Mobile INTERPOL Network Database at the border posts of Djegue (North),
Pirada (Northeast) and Cuntabane (South), which resulted in enhanced border control.

G.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding
65. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS provided strategic and technical advice
and support in the process leading to the creation, on 5 April, of the Bissau -Guinean
Women’s Council, an inclusive group of women aiming to promote women ’s
participation in national peacebuilding, reconciliation and political processes.
Composed of 25 women representing civil society, political parties and the private
sector from Bissau and the regions, the Council emanated from the former Women ’s
Facilitation Group, which had succeeded in facilitating dir ect dialogue between
protagonists to the political impasse in July 2017.
66. On 25 May, the Women’s Council, with technical and financial support from
UNIOGBIS through the Peacebuilding Fund, organized the first National Forum of
Women and Girls for Peace in Bissau. The event brought together approximately 800
women to make concrete recommendations to political stakeholders on issues
affecting efforts to sustain peace in Guinea-Bissau. In preparation for the National
Forum, the Women’s Council held a series of smaller conferences in all regions,
which served to disseminate messages about the need for social cohesion and to gather
the views of women and youth on the impact of the political impasse on their lives.
67. The views were presented at the National Forum to representatives of the
Government, international partners and the United Nations, including my Senior
Adviser on Policy. The process of consultations and preparations for the event helped
to legitimize the Women’s Council as a nationally grown peacebuilding network and
to bring the voices of women and youth from across the country to decision -makers
in the capital.
68. On 7 June, with continued support from UNIOGBIS, the Women’s Council
adopted the outcome document of the regional conferences an d the National Forum.
The document captures the Women’s Council’s agreed modalities of engagement in
both a national round table, to be organized by the Government to produce an
inclusive stability pact, and in the promotion of women ’s participation in the
upcoming legislative elections.

12/17

18-13161

S/2018/771

69. From May to July, UNIOGBIS, in collaboration with the United Nations country
team and its gender theme group led by UN-Women, provided support to a women’s
political platform to revive efforts to adopt a law on gender p arity quotas for
legislative and administrative elections. In that regard, UNIOGBIS provided technical
advice in the creation of an advocacy committee consisting of representatives of
women’s groups that is reviewing an existing draft proposal for submissi on to the
National Assembly before the next legislative elections.

H.

Mobilization, harmonization and coordination of
international assistance
70. On 19 and 20 March, and on 9 and 10 July, UNIOGBIS, UNDP and the European
Union undertook joint missions to Dakar to mobilize resources for the legislative
elections. In separate consultations with non-resident embassies accredited to GuineaBissau and at round-table consultations with bilateral partners, UNIOGBIS and the
European Union underscored the urgency of securing resources to enable the electoral
cartography and voter registration updates.
71. While the Government and UNDP have provided an initial contribution of
$1.8 million and $200,000, respectively, towards the $7.7 million needed for the
elections support project agreed between the previous Government and the United
Nations, a funding gap of $5.7 million remains. Even taking into account the
additional commitments made by the European Union (€2.5 million), Japan
($1 million), Italy (€100.000) and the Government ($500,000), there would still be an
outstanding gap of $1.2 million. Moreover, the amounts committed may not be
available before September, and the currently available funds are sufficient only to
purchase voter registration equipment and software, but not to fund the entire
operation. The Government has requested UNDP to proceed with the procurement of
voter registration equipment, and has made parallel equipment loan requests to
Angola, Nigeria, Portugal and Timor-Leste to enable the immediate start of voter
registration. Those demarches have so far not been successful.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
72. The Mission and the United Nations country team worked with Government
counterparts to complete and endorse the 2016 and 2017 progress reports with respect
to the United Nations Peacebuilding Assistance Framework (2016–2020) and to
prepare joint workplans for 2018. UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team
produced a partnership and resource mobilization strategy, with a view to engaging
in strategic and coherent fundraising to cover the remaining 65 per cent funding gap
in the Framework’s budget.
73. The human rights working group established under the United Nations
Peacebuilding Assistance Framework was reactivated during the reporting period.
The group serves as a platform for sharing information on key human rights policies
with the United Nations country team and national partners.
74. UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team continued to implement six
projects funded by the Peacebuilding Fund, to advance efforts to promote political
dialogue and national reconciliation, to strengthen the media and the justice sectors,
to enhance the participation of women and youth in the politica l life of the country
and to strengthen the leadership skills of rural youth groups to act as peacebuilders.

18-13161

13/17

S/2018/771

B.

Strategic communication and public information
75. UNIOGBIS continued to raise awareness on aspects of the work and mandate
of the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau, including the good offices of my Special
Representative and the activities of the United Nations country team, through a
variety of media, including press releases, articles, social media posts, radio
programmes and an external newsletter.
76. From 15 April to 22 June, UNIOGBIS held the third edition of its community
outreach programme on citizenship. The programme, which consisted of community
discussions and film screenings, raised awareness among more than 6,000 persons,
including 2,000 women, in 40 locations across the country on issues relating to the
implementation of the UNIOGBIS mandate. The events also served as an opportunity
to distribute more than 4,000 copies of an illustrated handbook on citizens ’
constitutional rights.
77. UNIOGBIS, with support from the Peacebuilding Fund, intensified efforts to
promote the independence of the media by strengthening the capacity of journalists
and media professionals and associations with a view to the upcoming elections. In
that regard, UNIOGBIS provided training on the ethical coverage of elections to a
total of 100 journalists, including 10 women, on 19 and 20 March and from 10 to
12 May. The Mission also provided technical support towards strengthening the
governance organs of media associations, including in the revision of relevant
statutes, and is contributing to a revision of the legal framework for the media sector.

C.

Staff safety and security
78. The overall security situation for United Nations personnel in Guinea -Bissau
remained stable. Despite a reported increase in common crime, security and criminal
incidents rarely affected United Nations personnel.

V. Temporary internal recalibration of the Mission
79. UNIOGBIS is in the process of realigning its work in accordance with its revised
mandate under Security Council resolution 2404 (2018). The Mission’s temporary
recalibration conforms to the recommendations of a technical assessment mission led
by the Department of Political Affairs in late March for that purpose, and also reflects
the recommendations of the strategic review mission of December 2016. Following
the abrogation by the Security Council of the core tasks of UNIOGBIS in the field of
rule of law and security institutions, the Mission temporarily reconfigured staffing
arrangements to focus on delivery under its three mandated priorities. Staff from the
former rule of law and security institutions section are working in three clusters for
the remainder of 2018: (a) political affairs and good offices; (b) human rights and
gender; and (c) combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. Their
temporary reassignment was warranted by the increased responsibilities of the
political affairs component of the Mission engendered by the electoral process, and
the need to strengthen the Mission’s regional offices in that regard and to handle
related demands.
80. Pursuant to resolution 2404 (2018), the Mission retained the mandated task of
providing strategic and technical advice and support to the Government of Guinea Bissau to combat drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, in close
cooperation with UNODC. UNIOGBIS temporarily formed a dedicated unit for
combatting drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, drawing from existing
resources in its current budget. The unit has continued existing Mission activities to
14/17

18-13161

S/2018/771

provide strategic and technical support to State institutions in combating drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime.
81. The Secretariat will be proposing a revised budget for UNIOGBIS for 2019, to
be considered by the General Assembly during its seventy-third session, that closely
reflects the revised mandate under resolution 2404 (2018). The temporary
recalibration of the Mission and its budget proposal for 2019 were undertaken without
prejudice to recommendations arising from the planned strategic assessme nt of the
Mission. The latter will include options for a possible reconfiguration of the United
Nations presence in the country and the reprioritization of tasks, which I will submit
to the Security Council in November, and on which the Council is expected to
pronounce itself in February 2019, when the renewal of the mandate of UNIOGBIS
will be under consideration.

VI. Observations
82. I remain concerned about the situation in Guinea-Bissau, despite the
encouraging progress achieved earlier in 2018 towards a solution to the country’s
longstanding political and institutional stalemate. The appointment of a Prime
Minister of consensus, the formation of an inclusive Government and the resumption
of the full functioning of the National Assembly have provide d reason for new resolve
after three years of gridlock. Those developments also represent the fulfilment of
three key steps towards the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement. I laud in
particular the efforts undertaken by religious leaders and civil society organizations
to facilitate a rapprochement between the national political actors. All national
stakeholders, including political parties, the President, the Prime Minister, the
President of the National Assembly and the leaders of PAIGC and PRS, need to
continue constructive dialogue to resolve their differences and move forward with the
full implementation of the ECOWAS road map and the Conakry Agreement. I reiterate
the commitment of the United Nations to support their efforts in that regard.
83. The sustained efforts by ECOWAS to mediate a solution to the political
stalemate and to support national actors in fully implementing the Conakry
Agreement have remained indispensable. I encourage the monitoring committee
comprising the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, President Condé of Guinea,
the new Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority, President Muhammadu Buhari of
Nigeria, and the President of the ECOWAS Commission, Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, to
continue to support Bissau-Guineans in fully implementing the Agreement and the
ECOWAS road map. The United Nations supports the efforts of ECOWAS, in close
cooperation with the African Union, the Community of Portuguese -speaking
Countries and European Union partners.
84. Most concerning are the increasing delays and the persistent lack of clarity and
accountability in the preparations for the holding of legislative elections in 2018. As
the focus of national politics is now on the legislative and presidential elections, their
timely and credible conduct in 2018 and 2019, respectively, is the crucial next step
towards a resumption of sustainable peacebuilding. The elections must be held in
accordance with the Constitution and national laws and commitments. I call upon the
Prime Minister and national authorities to provide firm political direction for the
electoral process, to expedite the required technical preparations and to empower the
electoral management bodies to implement the soundest solutions for the holding of
timely and credible elections. The United Nations will continue to assist wherever
possible to support the resolve of national partners, including with respect to technical
preparations and the mobilization of the required resources.

18-13161

15/17

S/2018/771

85. With respect to the mobilization of the resources required for the timely holding
of legislative elections, I strongly encourage donors to help to fill the financial gap in
the electoral assistance project. The national stakeholders in Guinea -Bissau have
already disbursed an unprecedented $1.8 million towards the elections, and have
pledged an additional $500,000.
86. Constitutional review remains an important avenue to preventing a recurrence
of political and institutional stalemate after the elections. The electoral challenges are
indeed testimony to the limited sustainability of the current inclusive Government
and its institutional framework. The holding of legislative elections must therefore
have the highest priority, as little progress on the peacebuilding priorities of Guinea Bissau can be expected prior to a new political dispensation being put into place.
Nevertheless, I call upon all national stakeholders to simultaneously gauge their
availability to expedite and complete the review of the country’s Constitution at the
earliest convenience, in respect for full national ownership. The time between
legislative elections in 2018 and presidential polls in 2019 could offer an opportunity
to expedite the review of the Constitution, provided that legislative elections are held
in a timely manner and a sense of urgency for constitutional reform can be instilled
among the political actors in Guinea-Bissau.
87. Against that backdrop, UNIOGBIS has swiftly moved to focus its activities on
its revised mandate, in particular with respect to supporting the electoral process to
ensure the holding of legislative elections in 2018. I commend the Mission ’s efforts
to temporarily realign its staff and to make effective and efficient use of its existing
resources to ensure mandate delivery in this key moment for the political proce ss in
the country. I count on the support of Security Council members and other
international partners as I prepare my upcoming strategic assessment, which will
inform the options I provide to the Security Council in November with respect to a
possible reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in Guinea -Bissau and a
reprioritization of tasks.
88. National authorities have taken some steps towards ensuring greater respect for
the right of freedom of assembly. However, many obstacles remain to ensuring that
all members of society, especially women and youth, can fully exercise their right to
political participation. I call upon the State to take immediate measures to address the
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination in the country. With speci fic regard
to the upcoming legislative and presidential elections, the authorities should make it
a priority to take any measures that promote the active participation of women as
voters and candidates in both polls.
89. Respect for human rights is an essential prerequisite for stability, peace and
sustainable development in Guinea-Bissau. The formalization of the National
Network of Human Rights Defenders is a positive step, and I invite the international
community to support the Network. The establishment of an independent national
human rights institution, in compliance with the Paris Principles, and an effective
interministerial commission on human rights to follow up on and implement
recommendations from regional and international human rights mechanism s, should
remain a central goal for Guinea-Bissau.
90. I take note of the professionalism displayed by the armed forces through their
continued non-interference in national politics and judicial affairs, and their discharge
of duties in accordance with their constitutionally mandated role. In the electoral
context, the extension of ECOMIB remains an important factor in ensuring stability,
and Member States should be encouraged to provide the financial and military support
required for its continued operation.
91. Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime are threats to peace and
stability in Guinea-Bissau, the subregion and beyond. Addressing those challenges
16/17

18-13161

S/2018/771

requires multifaceted and cross-sectoral approaches at the national and regional
levels. I call upon Member States to provide the resources necessary to enable
UNODC to enhance its presence in the country and support the authorities in
implementing comprehensive and people-centred responses to drug and human
trafficking and transnational organized crime.
92. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative,
José Viegas Filho, the Mission staff and the United Nations country team for their
dedication. I am also grateful to my former Special Representative, Modibo Touré,
for his able and dedicated leadership, and for the accomplishments of the Mission
during his tenure at UNIOGBIS.

18-13161

17/17
