III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

weapon States in general have come to regard the achievement of a comprehensive test ban as a litmus test of the
determination of the nuclear-weapon States to halt the arms
race, adding that verification of compliance no longer seems
to be an obstacle to reaching agreement,
Taking into account that the three nuclear-weapon States
which act as depositaries of the Treaty Banning Nuclear
Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under
Water9 undertook in that Treaty, almost twenty years ago,
to seek the achievement of the discontinuance of all test
explosions of nuclear weapons for all time and that such an
undertaking was explicitly reiterated in 1968 in the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, JO
Recalling that in its resolution 35/145 A of 1_2 Decem~r
1980 it urged all States members of the Committee on Dtsannament to support the establishment by the Committee,
from the beginning of its session in 1981, of an ad hoe
working group which should start the multilateral negotiations of a treaty for the prohibition of all nuclear-weapon
tests,
Deploring that the Committee on Disarmament, as stated
in paragraph 44 of its report to the Assembly, 11 was prevented from responding to that exhortation owing to the
negative attitude of two nuclear-weapon States,
l. Reiterates once again its grave concern that nuclearweapon testing continues unabated against the wishes of the
overwhelming majority of Member States;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty to achieve the
prohibition of all ~uclear-weapon-test _explosio~s . by all
States for all time is a matter of the highest pnonty and
constitutes a vital element for the success of efforts to prevent both vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear
weapons and a contribution to nuclear disarmament;
3. Urges all States that have not yet done so to adhere
without further delay to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water
and, meanwhile, to refrain from testing in the environments
covered by that Treaty;
4. Urges likewise all States members of the Committee
on Disarmament:
(a) To bear in mind that the consensus rule should not
be used in such a manner as to prevent the establishment
of subsidiary bodies for the effective discharge of the functions of the Committee;
(b) To support the establishment by the Committee,
from the beginning of its session in 1982, of an ad hoe
working group which should start the multilateral negotiations of a treaty for the prohibition of all nuclear-weapon
tests;
(c) To exert their best endeavours in order that the Committee may transmit the multilaterally negotiated text of
such a treaty to the General Assembly at its second special
session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to
9 July 1982;
5. Calls upon the States depositaries of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, by virtue of their special responsibilities under those two treaties and as a provisional
measure, to bring to a halt without delay all nuclear-test
explosions, either through a trilaterally agreed moratorium
or through three unilateral moratoria;

• United Nations. Treaty Series, vol. 480. No. 6964, p. 43.
10
Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/36/27).

55

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled •'Cessation of all test
explosions of nuclear weapons''.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December I 98 I

36/85.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution
35/145 B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on a comprehensive
nuclear-test ban, in particular resolution 32/78 of 12 December 1977, paragraph 51 of resolution S-10/2 of 30 June
1978, resolution 33/60 of 14 December 1978, section IV
of resolution 33/71 H of 14 December 1978, resolution
34/73 of 11 December 1979 and resolution 35/145 B of 12
December 1980,
Reaffirming its conviction that it is in the interest of all
people that nuclear-weapon testing by all States in all environments should cease, as this would be a major step
towards ending the qualitative improvement, development
and proliferation of nuclear weapons, a means of relieving
the deep apprehension concerning the harmful consequences
of radioactive contamination for the health of present and
future generations and a measure of the utmost importance
in bringing the nuclear-arms race to an end,
Recalling that the parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear
Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under
Water 12 and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 13 expressed their determination in those treaties
to continue negotiations to achieve the discontinuance of
all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time,
Expressing the belief that, to be effective and capable of
attracting the widest possible adherence, a treaty prohibiting
nuclear testing should include provision for an effective
verification system,
Recognizing, accordingly, the importance to such a treaty
of the work assigned by the Committee on Disannament to
the Ad Hoe Group of Scientific Experts to Consider International Co-operative Measures to Detect and Identify
Seismic Events on a global network of stations for the
exchange of seismological data,
Deeply concerned about the fact that thP- three negotiating
nuclear-weapon States have not resumed their negotiations
on a treaty prohibiting nuclear-test explosions in all environments and its protocol covering nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes,
Emphasizing the urgent need for a complete cessation of
the testing of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the indispensable role of the Committee on
Disarmament in the negotiation of a comprehensive test-ban
treaty capable of attracting the widest possible international
support and adherence.
Expressing regret that it did not prove possible for the
Committee on Disarmament to commence negotiations on
such a treaty,
Convinced that the proceedings of the second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, to
be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982, would benefit substantially from positive progress towards the conclusion of such
a treaty,
I. Reiterates its grave concern that, despite the express
wishes of the overwhelming majority of Member States.
nuclear-weapon testing continues unabated;

" United Nations. Treatv Series. vol. 480. No. 6964. p. 43.
Resolution 2373 (XXII). annex.

1.1

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

56

2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty to achieve the
prohibition of all nuclear-weapon-test explosions by all
States for all time is a matter of the greatest urgency and
highest priority;
3. Expresses the conviction that such a treaty constitutes
a vital element for the success of efforts to halt and reverse
the nuclear-arms race and the qll1llitative improvement of
nuclear weapons and to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries;
4. Calls upon the three negotiating nuclear-weapon
States to resume their negotiations and to exert their best
efforts to bring them to an early successful conclusion and
invites them to prepare a report on the state of negotiations
in good time for submission to the General Assembly at its
second special session devoted to disarmament;
5. Reiterates its conviction that the Committee on Disarmament has an indispensable role in the negotiation of a
treaty prohibiting nuclear testing;
6. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to take the
necessary steps, including the establishment of a working
group, to initiate substantive negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban treaty as a matter of the highest priority at the
beginning of its session in 1982;
7. Also requests the Committee on Disarmament to determine, in the context of its negotiations on such a treaty,
the institutional and administrative arrangements necessary
for establishing, testing and operating an international
seismic monitoring network and an effective verification
system;
8. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament to
exert all efforts in order that the draft of such a treaty may
be submitted to the General Assembly at the earliest possible
date;
9. Urges all members of the Committee on Disarmament, in particular the nuclear-weapon States, to co-operate
with the Committee in fulfilling its mandate;
10. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament to report
on progress to the General AssemblY. at its second special
session devoted to disarmament and at its thirty-seventh
session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item relating to the implementation
of the present resolution.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/86. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
NUCLEAR CAPABILITY OF SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/76 B of 11 December 1979
and 35/146 A of 12 December 1980,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa14 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first
ordinary session, which was held at Cairo from 17 to 21
July 1964,
Recalling that, in its resolution 33/63 of 14 December
1978, it vigorously condemned any attempt by South Africa
to introduce in any way whatsoever nuclear weapons into
the continent and demanded that South Africa refrain forth74 Official Records of the General Assembly,

nexes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.

Twentieth Session, An-

with from conducting any nuclear explosion in the continent
of Africa or elsewhere,
Alarmed by the content and growing sophistication of
South Africa's military and nuclear programme,
Alarmed also at the fact that South Africa's nuclear programme has enabled it to acquire nuclear-weapon capability
enhanced by the continued support and collaboration which
certain Western countries and Israel have given to it,
Noting with grave concern that South Africa's capacity
to produce nuclear weapons has been established, inter alia,
by the content of its nuclear programme, as well as by the
report of the Secretary-General on South Africa's plan and
capability in the nuclear field 15 following the reported detonation by that country of a nuclear device on 22 September
1979, and that it might indeed have acquired nuclear
weapons,
Taking note of the report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa on ways and means of making the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more effective, 16 as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 4 73 ( 1980), 17
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
9 September 1980, 15 as well as his report of 3 September
1981, 18 submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
35/146 A on the nuclear capability of South Africa,
Noting with concern that South Africa has persistently
refused to conclude adequate and comprehensive safeguards
agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency
with a view to preventing the diversion of nuclear materials
from peaceful uses to the manufacture of nuclear weapons
and other nuclear explosive devices.
Gravely concerned that South Africa, in flagrant violation
of the principles of international law and the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, has continued
its military attacks against independent States of southern
Africa, in particular Angola, and has increased its acts of
subversion aimed at destabilizing those States,
Equally concerned that the acquisition of military equipment and nuclear-weapon capability by the racist regime of
South Africa, with its abhorrent system of apartheid and
its record of violence and aggression, poses a serious danger
to international peace and security,
Recalling its decision taken at the tenth special session,
devoted to disarmament, that the Security Council should
take appropriate effective steps to prevent the frustration of
the decision of the Organization of African Unity for the
denuclearization of Africa, 19
Expressing its indignation at the fact that some Western
countries, by a ready recourse to the use of the veto, have
continually frustrated every effort at the United Nations to
deal with the question of South Africa,
1. Deplores the massive build-up of South Africa's
military machine, including its frenzied acquisition of a
nuclear-weapon capability for repressive and aggressive
purposes and as an instrument of blackmail;
2. Reaffirms that the racist regime's plans and capability
in the nuclear field constitute a very grave danger to international peace and security and, in particular, jeopardize
the security of African States and increase the danger of the
proliferation of nuclear weapons;

" A/35/402 and Corr. I.
16
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1980, document S/14179.
17
Ibid .. document S/14167.
1
• A/36/430.
19
Resolution S-1012, para. 63 (c),
