S/2001/550

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 June 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 23 May 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to article 12, paragraph 3, of the Statute of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994, which reads as follows:
“In the event of a vacancy in the Chambers among the judges elected or
appointed in accordance with this article, after consultation with the Presidents
of the Security Council and of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General
shall appoint a person meeting the qualifications of paragraph 1 above, for the
remainder of the term of office concerned.”
In this connection, I regret to inform you that Judge Laïty Kama, a national of
Senegal, died on 6 May 2001.
The Government of Senegal has presented the candidacy of Andrésia Vaz, a
national of Senegal, to replace Judge Kama. The curriculum vitae of Ms. Vaz is
contained in the annex to the present letter.
It is my view that Ms. Vaz meets the qualifications which are prescribed in
paragraph 1 of article 12 of the Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. I also consider that the appointment of Ms. Vaz would be well calculated to
ensure adequate representation on the Tribunal of the principal legal systems of the
world, as contemplated in paragraph 2 (c) of article 12 of the Tribunal’s Statute.
I should therefore like to proceed to consultation with you on the appointment
of Ms. Vaz, in accordance with article 12, paragraph 3, of the Statute of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. I look forward to receiving your views
on the matter.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-39809 (E) 050601

*0139809*

S/2001/550

Annex
Curriculum vitae of Andrésia Vaz (Senegal)
[Original: French]
Date and place of birth: 4 February 1944, Dakar.
Profession and rank
Non-ranking judge.
First President of the Court of Cassation of Senegal.
Qualifications
Diploma of the National Centre for Judicial Studies (France), 1969.
Degree in Private Law, 1967.
Baccalaureate (philosophy track), 1962.
Positions occupied since 1969
Examining magistrate of the Court of First Instance of Dakar.
Magistrate of the Court of First Instance of Dakar.
Magistrate of the primary examining chamber and President of the Labour Tribunal
of Saint-Louis.
Dean of the Examining Magistrates of Dakar.
Vice-President of the Court of First Instance of Dakar.
Counsel for the Court of Appeal of Dakar.
Counsel for the Supreme Court of Dakar.
First President of the Court of Appeal of Dakar (June 1992).
President of the National Vote-tallying Commission of Senegal (1993).
President of the High Court of Justice of Senegal.
First President of the Court of Cassation (February 1997).
Other activities
Observer of the elections in Mali, Togo, Côte d’Ivoire and Benin as Joint Head of
Mission.
Participation in a number of international conferences, including meetings of the
International Union of Judges, the International Federation of Women in Legal
Careers, the Federation of African Jurists and the World Peace Through Law Centre,
the International Commission of Jurists, the Conference of Chief Judges of the
Commonwealth and Judges of the Courts of Appeal.
Course supervisor at the National School of Administration and Magistrature, until
1991.
Former Secretary-General of the Senegalese Jurists Club.

2

S/2001/550

Former Secretary-General of the Federation of African Jurists.
Secretary-General of the Senegalese Association for Legal Studies and Research,
and associate member of the International Commission of Jurists.
Member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration.
Knowledge of languages
French: fluent.
English.
Spanish.
Portuguese: reading knowledge.
Decorations
Officer of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Senegal.
Grand Officer of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Senegal.
Chevalier of the National Order of the Lion.

3
