S/PV.7422

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7422nd meeting

Monday, 30 March 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Mrs. Adnin
Ms. Hill
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

15-09007 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1509007*

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.
As we near the end of the French presidency of the
Security Council, it is useful to pause for a moment to
take a step back and assess what we have achieved. As
members know, this month has been particularly busy
and intense. In March, we held 28 meetings, adopted
9 resolutions and issued 3 presidential statements and
8 press statements. To better understand these statistics,
we can simply say that they are comparable, given the
Council’s absence from New York for one week, to the
month of March of last year, which, as members will
recall, established a new record in terms of workload.
Today, no one can deny that the Council, as the saying
goes, is actively seized of the matters on its agenda.
We established three main focuses for our
presidency: the Middle East, children and armed
conflict, and Africa. Allow me to broadly state what
we have accomplished together. On the Middle East,
the high-level debate (see S/PV.7419) presided by the
Minister Laurent Fabius and devoted to the victims of
attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious grounds in
the Middle East was a key moment in mobilizing the
international community. The powerful statements
delivered by the participants and the statement of the
Secretary-General allowed that first meeting on this
topic to alert and mobilize the United Nations as a whole
and above all to start planning a response. Minister
Laurent Fabius and the Secretary-General also outlined
the prospect of plan of action to be developed by a panel
of experts. As Mr. Fabius stated, France is ready to host
an international conference that would be devoted to
the presentation of the findings of the panel of experts.
We will ensure the follow-up to this initiative so that
this important political dynamic is translated into
tangible action on this critical topic to enable the return
of threatened populations.

2/20

30/03/2015

On
Libya,
the
Council
adopted
three
resolutions — resolutions 2208 (2015), 2213 (2015)
and 2214 (2015) — this month focusing on the political
and security aspects of the crisis and underscored the
importance of United Nations mediation. Faced with
the crisis in Yemen, the Council held an emergency
meeting (see S/PV.7411) on Sunday, 22 March,
and adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2015/8
renewing its support for the legitimate President and
the efforts undertaken by the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on Yemen. Naturally, given the
acceleration of events, the Council should remain
mobilized to encourage and support any viable solution
to the crisis. We also adopted resolution 2209 (2015) on
the use of chemical weapons in Syria, which warns that
any future non-compliance will be subject to measures
under Chapter VII. We hope that the investigations
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons will be concluded as soon as possible.
Finally, let me turn to the peace process. The
Council held a very enriching meeting (see S/PV.7417)
with Special Coordinator Robert Serry, dwelling on
his legacy on that dossier, which he had handled for
seven years. Consensus remains within the Council that
the two-State solution should more than ever remain
the point of reference of our action. France sees that
consensus as momentum for resuming discussions
in the Council on a draft resolution to set the broad
parametres of a solution, which are well known, while
also relaunching negotiations in which the international
community will spare no effort. As Minister Laurent
Fabius announced, we intend to move make progress
soon.
Finally, the Council adopted an important
presidential statement on Lebanon, which covers
all dimensions of the situation of the country and
underscore the unified support within the Council for
Lebanon.
Now I turn to the second focus of the our presidency:
the protection of children in armed conflict, which
has long been a high priority for France. In close
collaboration with Malaysia, we prepared for the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
by holding an open debate on child victims of non-State
armed groups (see S/PV.7414). The debate heard speeches
by the Secretary-General, the Special Representative of
UNICEF, and the harrowing testimonies of Julie Bodin
and, in particular, of Junior Nzita, former child soldier
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He truly

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

taught us a life lesson by contributing an incomparably
poignant human story to our discussion.
I also want to highlight that the French presidency
sought to innovate in terms of Council working
methods for this debate. Instead of voting on a
previously negotiated text, then listening to speeches
by participating States, we decided to reverse the
order — first we listened, then we acted. We thank the
more than 80 participants for their numerous and rich
contributions. France will synthesize these soon, which
I will duly issue to all Members of our Organization.
It will be a useful contribution to the discussions and
negotiations that Malaysia will host between now and
the summer, following on from our efforts, for which I
thank them.
I was impressed by the teamwork between our
two delegations, which will continue, as well as with
UNICEF, with which we have worked to promote,
since their adoption in 2007, the Paris Commitments to
protect children against their unlawful recruitment or
use by armed forces or armed groups.
Finally, the third and final focus of our presidency
was on the crises in Africa. First, I will refer to the
important mission of the Council to Africa, starting in
the Central African Republic, then to the African Union
and Burundi, which I had the honour and pleasure to
lead with my Angolan colleague, and for the Bujumbura
stage, with my American colleague. I will not dwell on
this because we have had the opportunity to report on
it, but the negotiations of major significance this month
focused on the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
mandate that we adopted last Thursday in resolution
2211 (2015) establishes of a regular and structured
dialogue with the Congolese Government on the future
of the Mission. With appropriate staffing, the Mission
will have to concentrate on a reduced number of tasks,
primarily the protection of civilians.
The same day, the Council increased the force
strength of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic at the request of the Secretary-General. I
would also like to mention, and highlight, the vote on
the first Council resolution (resolution 2206 (2015)
setting up a sanctions regime in South Sudan, which
was followed by the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/9 following the failure of the Addis Ababa
talks.

S/PV.7422

Last but not least, it was under the French
presidency that the Council held its first public meeting
on Boko Haram (see S/PV.7421), and that negotiations
began towards a vote on a draft resolution to support the
efforts under way in the form of a joint multinational
force comprising soldiers of countries of the region
against this barbaric group.
Finally, I must add that our presidency allowed
us to foster dialogue between the Council and
regional organizations, in the spirit of Chapter VIII
of our Charter. Indeed, we have received for the
first time the High Representative of the European
Union, Ms. Mogherini. We met in Addis Ababa with
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
And I have received, in my capacity President of the
Council, Mrs. Michaëlle Jean, Secretary General of the
International Organization of the Francophonie.
I could also mention the important meetings we
held on Ukraine, Haiti, relations between Sudan and
South Sudan, Darfur, Afghanistan, the humanitarian
dimensions of the situation in Syria and yet many other
subjects.
I conclude by thanking all Council members for
their cooperation thought this particularly dense and
productive month. I would like to make special and
extremely grateful mention for the Council Secretariat
teams, the conference and security services, the sound
engineers and our invaluable interpreters.
I wish Jordan every success in the month of April
and I, for one, am confident that the Council will be in
good hands with Dina and her team.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I give the floor to the other members of the
Council.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Steady hands and a cool head;
these are two requirements of a captain navigating
a ship in turbulent waters. During the past month,
you, Sir, have exhibited in both characteristics of a
competent, experienced and knowledgeable captain.
You have steered the ship of the Council over the past
month with steady hands and a very cool head. My
delegation therefore wishes to thank you enormously
for your efforts and your leadership. We also thank you
for having organized today’s wrap-up session, which
provides us with an opportunity to assess the work of
the Council in the month of March.

15-090073/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

There can be no doubt that it has been a very busy
month, during which the Council addressed a wide
range of issues. Before going into those, I would like
to commend your delegation, Sir, for inviting your
Foreign Minister all the way from Paris, disengaging
him from his very busy schedule, to attend the crucial
meeting on the situation of minorities in the Middle
East (see S/PV.7419). We also think other members
whose ministers attended that meeting.
First, the briefing on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
(see S/PV.7402) underscored the important role of the
European Union as a key partner of the United Nations
and various regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We see that
partnership is exemplary and encourage both sides to
continue to strengthen it.
The Security Council mission to Central African
Republic, Ethiopia and Burundi was very significant. In
Addis Ababa, the Council held its annual consultative
meeting with the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council. The consultations covered a wide range of
issues, including the enhancement of the collaboration
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council on conflict prevention in
Africa. We are pleased that the AU Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council partnership has
facilitated effective exchange of information and
analysis on conflict prevention. This has allowed for
improved coordination and better understanding of
their respective roles in managing peace processes. We
commend you, Sir, for your joint leadership of the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council
meeting at the AU headquarters.
The debates on Afghanistan and Haiti allowed
the Council to assess the situation in those countries.
Nigeria is pleased to note the progress they have made
politically, economically and socially. It is important
that efforts be made to consolidate the gains recorded
to date in those two countries. We are aware that
challenges remain, and that international support will
be vital in meeting them. We therefore urge donors and
development partners to continue to support those two
countries.
During the past month, the Council adopted
resolutions on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and Libya. Resolution
2211 (2015), on the Democratic Republic of the

4/20

30/03/2015

Congo, extended the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), including its
Force Intervention Brigade, for an additional year,
while resolution 2212 (2015) authorized an increase in
military, police and corrections personnel for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Both resolutions demonstrated the Council’s firm
commitment to stabilizing the two countries. We have
acknowledged the critical role of MONUSCO in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of MINUSCA
in the Central African Republic, and we pay tribute to
the leadership and staff of both missions for the effort
they are putting into the achievement of their mandates.
Resolution 2213 (2015) underlines the importance
of the principle of national ownership in seeking a
solution to the conflict in Libya. It rightly identifies
a national unity Government and an agreement on
interim security arrangements as necessary for the
stabilization of the country. Resolution 2214 (2015) is
an indication of the Security Council’s determination
to address the issue of terrorism in Libya, which has
become more urgent with the expansion of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant to Libya. The presence
and activities of terrorists in Libya represent a grave
threat to international peace and security, particularly
in the Sahel region, where Al-Qaida and other terrorist
groups are already active. There is clearly an urgent
need to address that situation in a holistic manner.
To conclude, we would like to conclude by thanking
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for the astute
manner in which you have presided over the Council
this month. We extend our best wishes to the delegation
of Jordan, the incoming presidency, and assure it of
our support and cooperation during that country’s
presidency of the Council in the month of April.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my thanks and appreciation
to you and your team, Sir, for your excellent stewardship
of the work of the Council this month. There have
been many developments in the international arena
on issues related to the work of the Council. Our work
culminated at the end of last week in the adoption of the
two important resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2214 (2015)
on the situation in Libya. In that regard, I commend
your very effective and productive management of the
affairs of the Council this month.

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

I also welcome the French initiative in organizing
the open debate on the protection of minorities in
the Middle East (see S/PV.7419). The meeting was an
important opportunity to highlight the magnitude of
the internal difficulties in the Middle East as a result of
terrorism, which deliberately and systematically targets
religious and ethnic minorities in Syria and Iraq with
the aim of eliminating them. At the same time, I would
like to stress that security, peace and stability will
come to the Middle East only when efforts to confront
terrorism and extremism are coupled with a serious
and comprehensive attempt to address the root causes
that underlie such acts. The main challenges facing the
Middle East, in particular the Israeli-Arab conflict and
the crisis in Syria, are at the heart of instability in the
region and must be taken into account.
To conclude, Jordan looks forward to cooperating
with Member States next month and hopes that our
delegation will do as well as the March presidency.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
begin by congratulating you personally, Mr. President,
and your delegation for your efficient guidance of the
Council’s work and for the productive month of March
under your presidency.
One of the highlights of the monthly programme
was the Security Council’s mission to Africa — which
I was very proud to lead with you, Sir — including the
Central African Republic, Burundi and Addis Ababa
for the ninth joint session aimed at enhancing the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations in matters relating to peace and security in
Africa.
In the Central African Republic, we witnessed a
very dire situation in absolute need of the assistance
of the international community in order to overcome
the tragic realities its population is facing. Our mission
conveyed to the transitional authorities and other
interlocutors the importance of moving ahead with the
transitional process, in particular the implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and the effective rebuilding of State
institutions. Based on the continuing instability and
sectarian tensions in the country, the Security Council
decided by resolution 2212 (2015) to authorize an
effective increase in the military, police and correction
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.

S/PV.7422

The Security Council mission was able to observe
the significant progress achieved in Burundi since the
end of the civil war. However, it is obvious that peace
remains fragile. Therefore, taking into account the fact
that elections will soon be held, the main objective of
the mission was to encourage the holding of a peaceful,
inclusive, fair and transparent electoral process in
accordance with the Arusha Accords, the Constitution
and the road map for the election signed by the political
parties. It is our hope that all political stakeholders will
avoid aggressive rhetoric and that they will focus on
constructive debate of the real problems facing their
country.
The meeting with the African Union Peace and
Security Council consisted of an exchange of views on
the situations in the Great Lakes region, the Central
African Republic, Mali and the Sahel, Libya, Somalia,
South Sudan and Darfur, a strategy for fighting the
terrorist group Boko Haram and, in more general terms,
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union. The consultations on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the renewal of
its mandate mobilized the attention of Security Council
members and of the international community.
From the briefing provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General (see S/PV.7410)
and the discussions that followed, it is obvious that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a crossroads.
Remarkable progress has been achieved in recent years;
however, a lot remains to be done in crucial aspects of
the peace consolidation process, in which the dialogue
with the United Nations on enhancing the effectiveness
of MONUSCO has a very crucial role to play.
Positive developments, of which the Security
Council took good note, arose with respect to the
situation in Liberia and the evolution concerning the
Ebola virus. The apparent end of the epidemic enabled
the return of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
to Liberia and the pursuit of the peacebuilding and
State-building process.
The issue of Boko Haram was also at the centre
of the Security Council’s concerns. The discussions on
the draft resolution on the fight against the terrorists
was the subject of a number of discussions at different
levels. Finally, today the issue was discussed in
consultations of the Security Council, and it is our
hope that this marks the beginning of the consolidation

15-090075/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

process leading to the stepping up of the international
efforts in the fight against Boko Haram terrorists. The
two open debates held in the course of the month (see
S/PV.7414 and S/PV.7419) were the expression of the
Security Council’s great concern over the plight of
civilians caught in the middle of conflicts, and reflect
the importance attached to their protection. I thank you,
Mr. President, for that useful way of dealing with the
situation of civilians, especially children and women.
Children in armed conflicts have become a
central issue in the Council’s work and a new trend in
the Middle East, where communities that have lived
together in harmony for centuries have been shattered
by this new brand of terrorists who aim at building socalled States based on intolerance and the elimination of
any religious, ethnic or racial differences. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s announcement that the United
Nations is developing an action plan on preventing
violent extremism, to be launched in September, with
a view to strengthening efforts to protect diversity
in the Middle East, and of his intention to form an
advisory group of religious, civil, cultural, academic
and business leaders to offer insight on the sectarian
dynamics.
The Middle East, with the escalation of conflicts
there, has been the focus of the Council’s deliberations.
The inability of the Council to agree on the elements
of a political solution in Syria is exacerbating the
catastrophic humanitarian situation there, with
unforeseeable consequences. Accordingly, countries
with the influence over the parties at war should adopt
a more pragmatic and realistic approach to the conflict
if they are to make any meaningful contribution to the
cessation of hostilities. Yemen, with the collapse of
the United Nations-mediated talks, the rapid offensive
of the Houthis, taking over the State and marching
towards Aden, and the dramatic changes in the strategic
situation have created a scenario of outright war and
all-out foreign intervention, with unforeseen outcomes.
The United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, one of the last conventional United Nations
peacekeeping missions and interposition force to
maintain a truce between two symmetric forces, is in
danger from the Syrian conflict, which adds disturbing
elements to its mission. Equally, the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and Lebanon itself are
suffering heavily from the consequences of the Syrian
conflict.

6/20

30/03/2015

The situation in Libya was also the object
of consideration, without much progress in the
normalization of political life and the mounting dangers
of terrorism for the whole region. It is our expectation
that the Security Council’s adoption of pertinent
resolutions might encourage the Libyan stakeholders to
reach the necessary understanding in order to push the
political process forward.
Regarding the situation in Palestine and Israel, it
is increasingly evident that drastic changes must take
place in its approach if the international community is
to maintain the commitment to the two-State solution
for Israel and Palestine. We fully support the initiative
of France to hold an international conference in Paris
over this serious issue, since the actions of Israel seem
to be poised to undermine the two-State framework
definitively, and we took note of the candid briefing
on the Middle East (see S/PV.7417) by Mr. Robert
Serry, urging the Council to present a framework for
negotiations and show firm leadership on the matter.
Haiti remains at the centre of the concerns and the
object of the continuous commitments to its process of
peaceful State-building. Ukraine was for the first time
the object of a Security Council resolution (resolution
2202 (2015)) endorsing the framework for a ceasefire
and peace. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union was discussed in depth, as were the
intermingled conflicts in the Sudan and South Sudan.
To conclude, we want to reiterate our willingness
to work with our international partners on devising
new strategies for dealing with the violent extremism
that is affecting the very roots of civilization, innocent
civilians, including women and children, and religious
and ethnic minorities around the world. These strategies
should include an energetic ideological response to
terrorism at all levels and the use of all means available
to isolate the terrorists and degrade their capacity to
mobilize young people for their sinister objectives.
The promotion of tolerance and the inclusion of youth
in all aspects of policy-making are another particular
important feature in preventing radical groups from
exploiting the idealism of youth for their purposes.
I would like to conclude by extending our best
wishes to our good friends from Jordan, and hope that
next month we will continue with the productive work
that was ushered in by France.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We congratulate you, Mr. President, and your team

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

for your balanced and firm conduct of the work of
the Security Council this month. We welcome the
convening of this public wrap-up session, which we
consider to be an indispensable tool of the Security
Council that must be maintained. We also commend
the initiative of your presidency, Sir, for suggesting the
field visit to the Central African Republic and Burundi,
which was a useful exercise to observe realities in the
field, as well as to Addis Ababa to exchange ideas and
opinions on the main issues of shared concern to the
Council and the African Union.
With respect to Yemen, the developments of
recent weeks have brought the worst-case scenario to
reality. Obviously, the action of the Security Council
has not been effective, since we have used the various
tools available to this organ without achieving the
desired effects. On the contrary, it would appear that
the influence that can be exercised over the parties
to the conflict has diminished rather than grown. We
believe that the Council should work harder to better
understand the situation, avoiding the repetition of
solutions or ideas that may be counterproductive. The
conflict must be ended now to benefit the civilian
population of Yemen.
This month, the Council has held consultations on
the situations in Darfur, South Sudan and between the
Sudan and South Sudan. No progress has been made in
reducing tensions in any of those crises, or in achieving
an agreement that would address the root causes of
those conflict situations. Furthermore, the security
conditions and humanitarian situation appear to have
deteriorated.
We thank the French presidency for conducting
inclusive negotiations on renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
The adoption by consensus of resolution 2211 (2015)
will, we hope, accelerate the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
and assist in achieving lasting peace in the country.
We underscore the agreement reached during the
negotiations on the resolution to request the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to inform the Council
of MONUSCO’s operations in monthly meetings at
the expert level, pursuant to the proposal of the New
Zealand delegation. We also appreciate the fact that, in
accordance with Chile’s request, it has been agreed to
include troop-contributing countries in those meetings.

S/PV.7422

We hope that those countries will be informed in
a timely manner regarding the first meeting to be
convened on Friday, 3 April.
The 25 March open debate on children and armed
conflict (see S/PV.7414), focused on non-State armed
groups that perpetrate the worst crimes against girls
and boys, including kidnapping by terrorist groups,
will no doubt contribute to lay the groundwork for
the next debate, which we hope will take place under
the Malaysian presidency in the context of the tenth
anniversary of the adoption resolution 1612 (2005).
During the open debate, cross-cutting support was
expressed for dealing with child abduction in the
near future, and for strengthening mechanisms to
ensure children’s right to education, in accordance
with resolution 2143 (2014), including appropriate
support to protect girls’ educational facilities through,
among others, the Lucens Guidelines. We welcome the
participation of civil society in such debates. At the
same time, we call for the depoliticization of the agenda
so as to ensure that debates will focus first and foremost
on safeguarding the higher interests of children, inter
alia by promoting best practices and specific initiatives
to that end, such as the aforementioned Guidelines.
Chile thanks France for convening an open debate
on victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious
grounds in the Middle East (see S/PV.7419). We are
especially pleased that many delegations responded
in their statements to Chile’s proposal that religious
freedom be fully guaranteed and respected, as it is
derived from people’s fundamental right to hold or
to not hold a religious belief and to not convert or be
converted to another.
Finally, we appreciate the discussion on the draft
resolution against Boko Haram and the consultations
concerning the threat to international peace and security
posed by that terrorist group. We take this opportunity
to express our political support for the decision of the
States members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
and the Republic of Benin to establish a multinational
joint task force against Boko Haram, under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, as necessary.
We believe that the affected countries of the region
must find a consensus solution on the draft resolution,
without losing sight of the need for coordinated action
in the fight against Boko Haram.
Ms. Hill (New Zealand): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this wrap-up session and for your

15-090077/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

revealing overview of this record-breaking month.
We thank you and your colleagues for managing the
extraordinary workload with considerable flare and
efficiency. I will focus on three points that have struck
our delegation in carrying out its work.
First, New Zealand continues to support wrapup sessions as tools with the potential to increase the
Council’s transparency to the broader United Nations
membership, on whose behalf we act. We thank the
presidency for scheduling this opportunity for the
Council to live up to its obligation to meet the needs of
the broader membership. Given the frenetic pace of the
Council’s work, wrap-up sessions can also provide an
opportunity to reflect on cross-cutting items, but they
are not the only opportunity for transparency provided
by the presidency. The open debate on children and
armed conflict (see S/PV.7414) was a great such
example. It allowed all Members of the United Nations
to contribute views as a basis for future action, and
gave momentum to an important item on the Council’s
agenda.
Secondly, the Council’s visiting mission to Burundi
and the Central African Republic — its first — and to
Addis Ababa to meet with our partners in the African
Union Peace and Security Council was one of the
highlights of the month. The three legs of the visit were
important opportunities for engaging with people on the
ground and getting a real-life perspective on the issues
on our agenda today. Significantly, the visit fulfilled an
important political function in visibly demonstrating
that the Security Council is maintaining its engagement
in those countries.
The visit to the Central African Republic was
particularly timely, given the Council’s scheduled
renewal of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic next month, under Jordan’s presidency. The
visit to Addis Ababa and the broad subject matter
discussed with our partners on the Peace and Security
Council underscored the importance we attach to
building that partnership. While such engagement is
useful, it is no replacement for continuous engagement
between the two Councils, which is something that
New Zealand is committed to continuing to strengthen
at the practical level. We extend our thanks to Angola,
which, together with the Council presidency, led the
visiting mission, and to the United States, which co-led
the Burundi section.

8/20

30/03/2015

Thirdly, allow me to again congratulate you, Sir,
once again on the outstanding way in which you and your
delegation have led the Council’s work in March, under
particularly demanding circumstances. We consider
that it is the manner in which the closed consultations
are chaired and your decisive and responsive approach
to the consultations and to members’ requests over
the month that can truly make a positive improvement
in the working methods. We also commend the
your commitment to engaging with the media after
consultations so to increase the transparency of the
Council’s work. Furthermore, we welcome the growing
number of texts being initiated and developed by
elected members of the Council and the functioning of
the Council as a body made up of the 15.
We wish Jordan every success during its April
presidency and stand ready to support it in every effort,
as we continue our work across the Council’s agenda.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join other Council
members in warmly congratulating you, Mr. President,
on leading the Council through an extremely busy and
challenging month and programme of work. We highly
appreciate the steady and efficient manner in which you
have guided the Council and its work.
Malaysia reaffirms its support for the wrap-up
session, as it provides the Council with an opportunity
to collectively reflect on its work over the past month.
At the same time, it allows us to exchange views on the
possibility of moving forward certain issues or agendas
in the coming month.
I wish first to commend France for leading,
and Angola and the United States for co-leading the
Council’s mission to Africa earlier this month. For my
delegation, the mission provided valuable insights and
first-hand experience of the situations and challenges
faced on the ground in Burundi and the Central African
Republic. The interaction during the ninth annual joint
consultative meeting between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council was also fruitful and, we believe,
paved the way for closer cooperation and coordination
between the two bodies. In that regard, we welcome the
joint communiqué issued following the conclusion, on
12 March, of the joint consultative meeting in Addis
Ababa.
The statistics for March that you just detailed,
Mr. President, reaffirm that the Council not only
continues to be engaged but has also actively pronounced

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

and acted on the various issues on its agenda. It
has taken a number of important and, in our view,
meaningful decisions on a number of key issues related
to the situations in Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lebanon,
Libya, South Sudan and Yemen, among others.
On the whole, and over the past month, we believe
that the Council has remained united on a wide and
diverse range of issues and situations. Such unity
of both intent and purpose is important and must be
maintained if the Council is to continue effectively and
efficiently discharging its responsibilities mandated
under the Charter of the United Nations. It is, however,
unfortunate that on certain issues that are in equally if
not more pressing need of the Council’s effective and
resolute response, such unity appears to remain elusive.
In that connection, I would like to reaffirm Malaysia’s
commitment to continuing to work constructively to
ensure that the Council acts concertedly and collectively
on all issues and situations in its purview, including, in
fact especially, on those that are more difficult.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to France
for organizing last week’s two thematic open debates
on children and armed conflict (see S/PV.7414) and
the situation of minorities (see S/PV.7419). Moving
forward, we believe that the rich discussion engaged
during both debates could better inform not only the
Council but also all interested partners and stakeholders
in framing possible next steps or courses of action. We
also believe that holding such debates helps to focus the
Council’s discussion on, among other things, certain
underlying themes, which include the threat posed by
terrorism, violent extremism and the perpetrators of
related heinous acts. On that note, we would like to
recall the Council’s most recent press statement on
the terrorist attacks in Mogadishu this past weekend
(SC/11844), which resulted in the death of one of our
colleagues, Ambassador Yusuf Mohammed Ismail
Bari-Bari, the Permanent Representative of Somalia to
the United Nations in Geneva, along with other victims.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of the attack and
stress that the perpetrators must be held to account.
With regard to the issue of children and armed
conflict, we appreciate the novel approach that France
has introduced on how it might be further taken forward
by the Council. We look forward to continuing the
momentum and excellent cooperation and partnership

S/PV.7422

on the issue with France and all Council members
between now and June, and beyond.
In March we also received a final briefing from
Mr. Robert Serry, the outgoing Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process (see S/PV.7417). We
greatly value Mr. Serry’s efforts and contributions to
the work of the Council and the United Nations system
as a whole, and we would like to express our deep
appreciation for his commitment and professionalism
in that regard. Malaysia would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Nigeria on the successful
holding of presidential elections this past weekend. We
believe that a strong and united Nigeria is also in the
interests of partners and stakeholders at the regional
and international levels, including in the context of the
ongoing efforts to combat the threat posed by Boko
Haram in the region.
In conclusion, we would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Jordan on its incoming presidency of
the Council for April. We reaffirm our commitment to
working closely and constructively with Jordan and all
Council members in the month of April, which promises
to be as busy and challenging as March has been.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania) (spoke in French): We
would like to personally express our delegation’s
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and your team for your
presidency of the Council this month.
(spoke in English)
There has hardly been a day under the French
presidency without a public meeting of the Council,
and barely a day has passed without a briefing from
the presidency at the stakeout. The French delegation
has been superb in managing numerous emergencies,
including on Yemen, Boko Haram and Ukraine. We
also thank the presidency for focusing the Council’s
attention on the issues of child recruitment and the dire
future of minority communities in the greater Middle
East.
Statistics do not lie. The Council’s workload has
grown by leaps and bounds. Lately, the programme
of work barely leaves a window for the Security
Council Sanctions Committees and working groups to
do their work. With the establishment in March of a
sanctions committee for South Sudan under resolution
2206 (2015), the United Nations is managing a record
number of sanctions regimes. There are more informal
meetings, more complex negotiations and more

15-090079/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

products. More demands are placed on Secretariat
bodies and interpreters. At some point, we will need
to review some of the Council’s working methods and
the cycles in which items appear on its agenda, and to
consider keeping open at least a minimum number of
windows every month for the work of the subsidiary
bodies that operationalize the Council’s decisions. The
ambit of the Council’s work continues to expand. There
are ever more conflicts on a growing geographical map:
Ukraine, the Lake Chad region, Yemen, South Sudan,
Libya, Syria and Iraq, to mention just a few.
Despite strong early warnings, United Nations
mediation efforts, and political pressure from the
international community, Yemen stands perilously close
to a civil war. The relevant Council resolutions and the
presidential statement adopted the Sunday before last
(S/PRST/2015/7) emphasize the political unity of the
international community. Yet the Council’s decisions
have not made a meaningful impact on the ground.
The Houthis have advanced to Sana’a, to Taiz, to Lahej
province and to the Al-Anad air base. The emerging
sectarian strife and disintegration of this country will
benefit only Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and their coterie.
The gruesome attacks on two mosques on 20 March are
a testament to that.
The Council has not been able to bring pressure
to bear on actors in Yemen, largely because we were
not doing enough. According to the Panel of Experts
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), former President Saleh amassed up to
$60 billion, assets that have been used to undermine the
legitimate Government. The Houthi military venture is
no coincidence. Ali Abdullah Saleh was designated for
sanctions, yet the Council has been slow to identify and
freeze assets controlled through his family members
and entourage. We have listened carefully to the Panel’s
call for new measures to be considered to restrict
the flow of arms into Yemen. Over the past 50 years
military actions have never proved a lasting solution
in Yemen. Only negotiations with all stakeholders will
lead to a sustainable solution.
When 29 students died in a Boko Haram attack on
a school in Buni Yadi in February 2014, the Council
received an early warning. The first Council reaction
followed in April. A year later, Boko Haram remains
a growing threat to peace and security in the region
of Lake Chad and beyond. A week ago, 500 children
went missing from Damasak in Nigeria. Kidnappings,

10/20

30/03/2015

killings, pillaging, sexual enslavement and pure terror
perpetrated by Boko Haram have engulfed north-eastern
Nigeria and its neighbours. We welcome the steps that
have been taken to operationalize a multinational joint
task force. Military operations against Boko Haram
should be conducted in accordance with international
humanitarian law and human-rights law. In the Council,
Lithuania will support regional efforts.
Last Friday, the Council extended the arms embargo
on Libya, among other measures, one more time. As
Mr. Bernardino León, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, mediates between the parties to
form a Government of national unity, the fundamental
challenge remains. Libya is awash in weapons,
thousands upon thousands of miles of borders remain
mere markings on the maps, and terrorists, fighters
and smugglers operate in that back country at will.
Pouring more weapons into the region adds fuel to the
fire. Resolution 2213 (2015), adopted recently, again
calls upon Libya and international partners to address
the illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons
(SALW), manage stockpiles and destroy surplus or
illegal weapons. More transfers, in particular of small
arms and light weapons and ammunition, into Libya
will end up with armed groups. Increasingly, small
arms from Libya have seeped in substantial quantities
into sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and even
farther afield.
The failure to address systematically the
implementation of the embargoes and small arms
controls through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform in many of the
conflicts has led to recurring cycles of costly violence.
How many of the 26 arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council to date have achieved the objective of
restoring peace and security? We think that the Council
needs to seriously address the management of arms
embargoes by strengthening their design, particularly
in addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and ammunition, and by providing more
uniform support to States on its agenda. The Council
lacks the structural ability to identify, formulate and
follow up SALW embargoes in a systematic way across
the sanctions committees, peacekeeping operations and
relevant political missions. Lithuania looks forward
to receiving the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral on how to address the implementation of the
relevant resolution 2117 (2013) in the forthcoming report
on small arms and light weapons. We look forward to

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7422

applying those recommendations, and we hope Council
members will support that effort.

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Finally, let me conclude by wishing the best success
to the Jordanian presidency during the month of April.
The delegation may count on our support.

The meeting on 4 March on the situation in Libya
(see S/PV.7398) gave us an opportunity to reflect on the
gravity of the political, institutional and humanitarian
crisis in that country. Its two parallel Governments,
extremist armed groups and a growing terrorist network
point to a country profoundly affected by sectarian
violence. The Libyan people and other peoples of the
Middle East are today victims of the breakdown of
the State and its institutions, which are the result of
unilateral actions that have triggered a severe process of
political instability in the region. We are concerned by
and warn against the increased illicit arms trafficking
that has provided tremendous military capacity to
the terrorist groups in that region today. We reiterate
our strongest condemnation of the killing in Libya of
21 Coptic Christians from Egypt, as well as of other
atrocities committed by terrorists in the region.

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, allow me to
congratulate you and your team, Mr. President, on the
effective leadership with which your delegation has
conducted the work of the Security Council throughout
this month. You have done excellent work.
We appreciate the convening of these wrap-up
sessions on the work carried out by this organ. We
believe that the Council’s work should be conducted in
a broad and transparent way. In the spirit and purpose
of Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations, we
encourage the strengthening of relations between the
Council and the rest of the United Nations membership,
recognizing that issues related to international peace
and security concern all Member States.
It has certainly been a busy month. We would like
to highlight some aspects of particular importance to
my delegation.
In regard to Yemen, of particular importance and
urgency was the Council’s emergency meeting held on
the situation in that country (see S/PV.7411). Yemen
has plunged into violence as the result of ongoing
political instability in the form of armed clashes
between various factions. We are alarmed to observe
that the deterioration of the conflict is being exploited
by Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), among others, to promote their criminal
agenda, inspired by hatred and violence, with a view to
promoting chaos and the fragmentation of the country.
We call for the maintenance of the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen.
Venezuela reiterates its full support for the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal
Benomar. At the same time, we believe that the solution
to the crisis in Yemen must come from the Yemenis
themselves and not be imposed from outside. No
military solution is possible. It is necessary to insist on
a peaceful political settlement of the conflict. We urge
the parties and Member States to refrain from adopting
measures that could undermine the achievement of
peace and stability in Yemen, consistent with the

The meeting on 24 March (see S/PV.7412) on the
topic of Iran gave us the opportunity to express our
satisfaction with the progress achieved regarding the
joint action plan and the talks under way in Switzerland
between the P5+1 and Iran to peacefully resolve
the issue of its nuclear programme. The process of
negotiations under way is extremely important and
should lead to the final lifting of the sanctions regime
imposed by the Security Council on that brother
country. Sustained cooperation between that nation
and the International Atomic Energy Agency is a very
positive aspect of the process. We also reaffirm the
sovereign right of all developing countries, including
the Islamic Republic of Iran, to use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes, pursuant to article IV of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We hope that the non-proliferation talks will culminate
successfully and that the countries involved will not
yield to the blackmail of war and hatred.
Venezuela attaches particular importance to
discussions on the Palestinian issue. The Security
Council has an historic debt to the Palestinian people,
dating back more than 50 years. We hope that the
international community will express its position
through this organ as soon as possible with a view to
ensuring the right of the Palestinian people to fully
exercise its right to self-determination, including its
admission as a Member State of the United Nations.

15-0900711/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The Security Council must retake the initiative and
fully assume its Charter responsibility for international
peace and security by adopting as soon as possible a
decision demanding an end to the Israeli occupation
of the territories of the State of Palestine, which has
continued illegally for more than 40 years. Israel’s
occupation of those territories and settlement-building
exercise are significant causes of gross violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. We
support an end to impunity; those responsible for war
crimes must be brought to justice. Finally, we express
our hope for the renewal of negotiations between the
parties within the framework of a solution involving
two States, Israel and Palestine.
No less important is the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, where war and the activities of terrorist
groups have fed an increasingly violent situation with
severe humanitarian implications. Venezuela calls for
a ceasefire and supports a political solution, with the
active participation of the Syrian people without foreign
intervention. We are concerned about the dismal human
rights situation. It is a true tragedy that should be the
focus of our attention in the future. We are in favour
of a political solution to the conflict that includes all
parties, respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria, and puts an end to the supply of arms and
equipment and the training of terrorist organizations,
such as ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front.
The Security Council’s visit to Africa between
10 and 13 March was an excellent opportunity to
support the efforts of the authorities of the Central
African Republic and to better understand the situation
in that country. It was also an opportunity to monitor
and evaluate the work carried out by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic in fulfilling its mandate,
including the protection of civilians.
We also welcome the holding of the annual
consultation between the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and the United Nations Security
Council, as well as the joint communiqué that was
issued. We would like to make particular mention of the
visit to Burundi in support of the process of presidential
and legislative elections of May and June 2014.
Regarding Darfur, we regret that the situation
on the ground has not improved, as we had hoped it
would. We call on the parties to renew dialogue and
request those countries that have maintained unilateral

12/20

30/03/2015

sanctions against the Sudanese Government to lift
them, including debt relief to Sudan. We stated as much
at the meeting held on 17 March (see S/PV.7405).
On the issue of open debates, we believe that the
debate on children in armed conflict (see S/PV.7414)
was of particular importance. The high number of
participants in that debate clearly reflects the importance
of the issue and the need to step up international
cooperation efforts to ensure the protection of this
vulnerable group, which is the target of the most terrible
atrocities. It is important that a growing number of
countries consider it essential to adopt a comprehensive
approach to the issue through dealing with the deeprooted causes of conflict, without disregarding shortor medium-term efforts. We firmly reject all practices
such as the abduction of children, their enslavement
and the violation of their human rights. Such offences
should be considered crimes against humanity, and
those responsible should be brought before international
criminal justice.
We also demand the release of 300 Palestinian
children who continue to be detained in Israeli jails. We
express our support for Malaysia’s efforts as Chair of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We welcome the fact that the issue of children will
be one of the most important issues during the month
of June, when it will be presiding over the Security
Council.
The open debate held on 27 March (see S/PV.7419)
on the victims of attacks and abuses on religious and
ethnic grounds in the Middle East, presided over by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Laurent
Fabius, was an opportunity to firmly reject all acts
of intolerance, intimidation, aggression or violence
committed against any religious or ethnic community by
extremist organizations, particularly those committed
by terrorist groups, which have proliferated in recent
years in the Middle East.
How is it possible that a region that has been the
cradle of civilization, a region where for thousands
of years diverse ethnic and religious groups have
coexisted peacefully, could have fallen prey to barbaric
terrorism? It is imperative to increase efforts aimed at
strengthening agreed measures to prevent and cut off
external support to such groups, in particular their
funding and their sources of modern weapons.
By the same token, we reiterate that it is essential
to condemn, along with such atrocities, the dismantling

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

of the institutional capacity of States. We also stress
the need to strengthen the bans on sources of funding
and logistical and military equipment for such terrorist
organizations.
Finally, we welcome the briefing today (see
S/PV.7421) on the terrorist threat to international peace
and security posed by Boko Haram in the countries of
the Lake Chad Basin and in the rest of the region. We
reiterate our condemnation of the criminal actions of
that terrorist organization, which that has sown death
and destruction in that area through the kidnapping
and murder of children and women, who are the main
victims of attacks.
Venezuela is ready to support a resolution of the
Security Council that provides political support to
the countries of the region that bear the main military
burden in dealing with this threat. Such a resolution
should be based on agreement among all the countries
affected, in particular Nigeria.
Finally, we congratulate Nigeria for holding
elections as a key factor for security and stability in
the country. We are certain that during the month of
April, the Security Council will maintain its dynamic
pace of work and continue to debate vital issues under
the presidency of Jordan, which can count on our full
support.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The agenda of the Security Council for the
month of March was a very busy one, and we would like
to thank the French team for the very skilful manner in
which it conducted the work of the Council and the trip
to Africa.
I should like to touch on a number of key issues.
We are grateful to the delegation of France for having
convened a meeting on the issue of ethnic and religious
minorities in the Middle East (see S/PV.7419). This
situation has deteriorated significantly in recent years,
but the preconditions for the emergence on the territory
of a number of States of the region of organizations
using Islam as a pretext for spreading terrorism, which
has nothing to do with that peaceful religion, are not
new. The spread of this malignant phenomenon is the
result of the political vacuum that has emerged in a
number of countries.
Russia has always been in favour of resolving crisis
situations in the region through gradual reforms based
on national dialogue, without external interference, on

S/PV.7422

the basis of peace and harmony among all religious
groups, including the various sects of Islam and
Christianity.
Countering the increase of religious extremism
will be successful only if a universal approach is
taken, without any double standards. A clear example
of the fact that there is no alternative to this kind of
approach is the deteriorating situation in Libya. We
are particularly concerned by the increase in terrorism
there; the Islamic State is increasingly entrenched in
that State. Clearly counter-terrorism actions should
be taken in parallel with political measures. The two
resolutions adopted on Libya this month — resolutions
2213 (2015) and 2214 (2015) — will contribute to
dealing with these fundamental issues. We should not
drag our feet on implementing them. That would be
dangerous, especially given the legitimate concerns of
Libya’s neighbours.
We hope that the presidential statement on
Lebanon put forward by France will make an important
contribution to stabilizing the situation in the country.
The situation in Yemen has worsened significantly
this month, and we express our serious concern at
the situation there. We have always supported the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that
country. We deem it extremely important for all parties
to the Yemeni conflict and their external allies to
immediately end all forms of military activity. We are
convinced that the deep-rooted sources of conflict there
can be dealt with only on the basis of a broad national
dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations.
Russia, in its contacts with all of the parties to the
Yemeni conflict, will continue to step up its efforts,
including within the United Nations, to find a rapid and
peaceful solution to the armed conflict in Yemen. We
need to get the parties back to the negotiating table.
Russia is also actively involved in resolving the
Syrian conflict, including through the holding of
intra-Syrian contacts in Moscow. It is no secret that the
current problems facing the area are largely fuelled by
the fact that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been
unresolved for several decades. Today the two sides are
entering a critical phase in which they need to reconfirm
once and for all their strategic choice in favour of a twoState solution based on agreed international legality.
During the past month we focused in particular on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

15-0900713/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

We believe that the re-establishment of cooperation
between the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is in the interests of both sides. In that context,
we stress that it is unacceptable to extend the robust
mandate of the Force Intervention Brigade to the
Mission as a whole. The task of ensuring law and order
and eliminating armed groups on its territory lies solely
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
The Council has also focused attention on the
tragic situation in Ukraine. I would like to underscore
that the 12 February package of measures confirmed by
resolution 2202 (2015) remains the cornerstone of the
resolution of the Ukrainian conflict, and must be fully
and thoroughly implemented.
In conclusion, we wish every success to the
delegation of Jordan, which will preside over the
Council in April. I assure it of our full support.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in French):
I believe that the message is very simple: bravo France.
(spoke in Spanish)
I congratulate France because its entire delegation
has done splendid work. If this wrap-up session is
intended to give us the opportunity to evaluate or
criticize the work done during the month of March, I do
not believe our assessment could be higher or the level
of criticism any lower. That is simply because France
has worked at all times to promote and strengthen all
instruments of preventive diplomacy.
This month, the international community and the
members of the Council have had to respond to the
very diffuse threat of terrorism and non-State actors.
There have been few instances when we have dedicated
so much time to addressing the terrible threat of
terrorism. That is why I wish to highlight the debates
organized by France, in particular the wonderful debate
on minorities in the Middle East (see S/PV.7419). As
mentioned earlier by the representative of Chile, France
has also used all the tools at the Council’s disposal to
be effective. I would like to highlight in particular the
splendid mission organized to Africa, as well as the
Arria Formula meetings, which are a fundamental
instrument for learning first-hand about what is
happening in the field and for giving non-members of

14/20

30/03/2015

the Security Council direct access to the work of the
Council.
Also under France’s skilful leadership, we made
the most of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. I am specifically referring to the intervention
of the High Representative of the European Union,
which was truly important for Spain as a member of the
Union (see S/PV.7402), and to the visit to Africa, thanks
to which the Security Council has been able to deepen
its ties with the African Union. That is a critical aspect
of our work.
With regard to Friday’s meeting, presided by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France (see S/PV.7419),
it was particularly moving to hear the testimony of the
member of the Iraqi Parliament, which made all of us
aware of the gravity and tragedy of the situation faced
by many people outside of this magnificent Chamber.
With regard to working methods, I have listened
attentively to all statements, but particularly to that
made by the representative of Lithuania, who provided
an interesting self-assessment on the work of the
Security Council. I think he put his finger on it when he
said that we have to improve the degree of effectinvess
of the Security Council in the field. In other words, we
must increase the impact of Security Council decisions
on the ground; we sometimes get the impression that
the presidential statements or the press statements
remain somewhat intangible, with no direct impact on
the life of individuals.
Lastly, March has been a special month for Spain,
because it was the first time our Minister for Foreign
Affairs participated in an open debate (see S/PV.7419)
and because we undertook the great responsibility
of being a penholder. A penholder may seem like
a somewhat remote figure to non-members of the
Council, and it is difficult to ascertain just what the
penholder’s responsibility consists of. We have learned
that penholders have a great responsibility. We enjoyed
success with the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, but that was due to the flexibility and
goodwill of all members of the Security Council.
To sum up, I would simply like to praise the
work that France has done over the past month. And,
because hardly anyone has noted it, I would also like
to highlight the splendid work done by the Secretariat,
which tirelessly supports the work of the presidency
and the Member States. I would also like to thank our
interpreters for their tireless work every day.

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting. China highly commends
France, as President of the Council for the month of
March, for guiding the Council’s work to a successful
conclusion.
The Council has had a busy schedule this month;
it adopted nine resolutions, including resolution 2206
(2015) on the reports of the Secretary-General on the
Sudan and South Sudan, and issued eight presidential
statements, including those on the situation in the
Middle East (see S/PRST/2015/7 and S/PRST/2015/8).
I would like to focus on three points pertaining to the
work of the Council this month.
First, the situation in the Sudan and South Sudan
has been a priority issue on the Council’s agenda for
the month of March. With regard to South Sudan, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
has made the decision to establish a new mechanism for
consultations and to push for a new round of political
negotiations between the parties to the conflict. We call
on the international community to remain firm, resolute
and patient and to continue to push for the effective
ceasefire and cessation of violence between the
parties to the conflict, who must work rapidly, through
negotiations, towards consensus on such important
issues as the structure of the transitional Government,
and cooperate actively with the mediation efforts of
IGAD and others. The international community should
also attach importance to easing the humanitarian
situation in South Sudan.
At the same time, maintaining the overall stability
of the relationship between the Sudan and South
Sudan is in the common interest of the Sudan, South
Sudan, and the countries of the region. China urges
the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to
comply with the relevant agreements and Security
Council resolutions, avoid unilateral actions that may
exacerbate conflict, and jointly maintain the overall
stability of the region. We commend the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel on the Sudan for its
continued mediation efforts and good offices; we hope
that it will pursue such efforts.
Secondly, with regard to the issue of Afghanistan,
this month the Security Council adopted resolution
2210 (2015), extending the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
China commends the facilitator of that resolution,

S/PV.7422

Spain, for its efforts in that regard. China notes that
the Government of Afghanistan anticipates assuming
greater responsibility in its national reconstruction and
economic and social development. That is in conformity
with the fundamental principle of Afghan leadership
and ownership of the resolution of the issue. The
international community should proactively adapt to
that new normal, wherein the Afghan Government and
people will play a leading role in their own economic
and social development. China supports that active role
that the United Nations continues to play in the Afghan
issue, and UNAMA’s efforts to resolve the issue. At the
same time, China believes that the UNAMA mandate
should be further improved and refined in light of
the needs of the transition process taking place in
Afghanistan, thereby ensuring that UNAMA can better
support and coordinate with the Afghan Government in
its efforts to achieve national reconciliation and rebuild
the State.
Thirdly, with regard to cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, this month the Security Council
mission successfully visited Central African Republic
and Burundi. The Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council held their ninth
annual consultation at African Union headquarters
in Ethiopia, and issued a joint communiqué. China
commends France for its coordination in that regard.
China encourages the Security Council to continue
to play the role required of it, and to facilitate a
smooth election in countries such as Central African
Republic and Burundi within the year. China hopes
that the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council will further strengthen their
cooperation in a joint effort to maintain peace and
stability in Africa.
Lastly, I wish Jordan success in the presidency of
the Security Council in the month of April.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): Several
notable issues captured our attention in the Security
Council this month. Africa was naturally a major
focus, including the Council’s first trip to the Central
African Republic. In the Middle East, we continued to
concentrate on Yemen, Libya and Syria. This month
also marked one year since Russia used its military to
forcibly seize and occupy Crimea. I would like to touch
on these issues here this afternoon.

15-0900715/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Much of our time this month was spent addressing
security challenges in Africa. The Council trip to the
Central African Republic, Addis Ababa and Burundi was
instructive and useful. In the Central African Republic,
the armed groups are still armed, and disarmament
needs to be a priority. Massive displacement has not
been addressed. Nearly 1 million people out of a total
population of 4.5 million have been displaced. Of the
436 mosques in the country, 417 have been destroyed,
and some international forces were recently closed or are
drawing down. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic is approaching its full strength, but we must
be wary of losing capability just as stability emerges.
In Burundi, the Council witnessed a worrying
situation. The country’s leader is at a crossroads.
Opposition parties, civil society and human rights
activists have all warned of a potential for violence if
the president seeks a third term. The Council delivered
a unified message on the centrality of the Arusha
Accords, and we reiterate the calls to respect the letter
and spirit of the Agreements and for more inclusive
political space.
South Sudan also remains central to our work.
Some 2.5 million people are in urgent need of food
assistance, and more than 2 million have been displaced.
The United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) is providing shelter to more than
100,000 internally displaced people seeking refuge
from violence perpetrated by both the Government and
armed groups that oppose it. To address this situation,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2206 (2015),
which establishes a framework for targeted sanctions in
the form of travel bans and asset freezes on individuals
and entities that undermine the country’s political
stability or perpetrate human rights abuses. The United
States has supported the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the region in their
efforts to facilitate talks to reach a comprehensive and
inclusive peace agreement and to establish a transitional
Government. We hope that this resolution will enhance
IGAD’s leverage and improve its chances of success.
As has been noted, the situations in the Middle East
and North Africa have caused us concern this month.
It is essential that the next phase of Libya’s transition,
the formation of a national unity Government, take hold
before the entire country is lost to violent extremists.
Through United Nations-facilitated talks in Libya,
particularly since the start of the year, the parties have

16/20

30/03/2015

made progress towards bridging the political divisions
that have prevented the country from providing for
its people and impeded efforts to counter terrorist
and criminal groups. Libyan parties must fully invest
in these talks, and we maintain our complete support
for Special Representative León and his efforts. The
United States will continue to engage with its Council
colleagues in looking how the existing sanctions
regime can best address concerns over the illicit flow
of weapons into and out of the country.
On Syria, just a few days ago, we heard from UnderSecretary-General Valerie Amos (see S/PV.7418). Her
briefing drove home the grave decline in humanitarian,
economic and social conditions for Syrians inside of
Syria and in neighbouring countries, as well as the
Al-Assad regime’s significant failure to the Council’s
resolutions. Humanitarian actors, including the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations, must be able to deliver all necessary
humanitarian aid, not just food, to Syrians in need.
We remain particularly concerned about the regime’s
consistent removal of medical and surgical supplies
from United Nations convoys prior to reaching their
intended destinations despite explicit authorization
to deliver medical and surgical supplies through
resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
This was, of course, also an especially challenging
month with respect to Yemen. Houthi actions
undermined the efforts to achieve a political resolution
by continuing to take unilateral actions that are not
conducive to achieving a political solution. The United
States, alongside the broader international community,
hopes that the insurgents will stop their unilateral
actions and participate in the United Nations-led effort
to try to resolve the differences of all the parties there.
Just 10 days ago, we were all shocked and saddened by
the attacks on mosques in Sana’a that killed scores of
worshippers. In fact, it is heartbreaking that we cannot
get through a month without confronting such tragic
and despicable terrorist acts.
In addition to Yemen, we saw attacks this month
in Tunisia, where gunmen killed 19 people and
wounded more than 20 others, and the attack in March
in Mali, where five civilians, including personnel
from UNMISS, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
European Union, were killed in Bamako. The United
States condemns this violence in the strongest possible
terms.

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

March marked the one-year anniversary of Russia’s
forcible seizure and occupation of Crimea and staging
of an illegal referendum. Over the past year, the human
rights situation in Crimea has deteriorated. Members
of Crimea’s ethnic minorities, human rights activists
and those who oppose the annexation have suffered
systematic human rights abuses. Local residents
have been detained, interrogated and disappeared.
Non-governmental organizations and independent
media have been driven out. We continue to call for an
immediate end to the Russian occupation of Crimea,
which comes against a backdrop of continuing Russian
interference in eastern Ukraine. We continue to believe
that compliance with the September Minsk agreements
and the February implementation package provides a
road map to peace in Ukraine.
Finally, we welcomed Friday’s Council open debate
on protecting ethnic and religious minorities in the
Middle East, presided over by French Foreign Minister
Fabius (see S/PV.7419). Promoting religious freedom
is a priority for the United States and it remains a
core value that influences United States diplomatic
engagement worldwide. In recent days and months, the
brutal persecution of religious minorities has shocked
us all. Together, we condemn the targeting of civilians
of any religious affiliation for any kind of violence and
likewise condemn the destruction of religious sites
and property. There must be accountability for the
individuals responsible for these despicable acts.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the entire
French delegation for its excellent and patient
stewardship of the Council during the month of March.
To our colleagues from Jordan, we assure them of our
cooperation and support in the month to come.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having brilliantly led the Council’s
work under your presidency. Your success, Sir, would
not have been possible without your entire mission’s
great contribution throughout the month of March.
As many delegations have noted before me, Security
Council meetings held in March covered practically all
the crises that are unfolding in different parts of the
world. I will address several of them.
Upon France’s initiative, the Council undertook
a visit to the Central African Republic, Ethiopia and
Burundi from 9 to 13 March 2015. In the Central
African Republic, our visit allowed us to immerse

S/PV.7422

ourselves in the reality on the ground and to see the
United Nations many contributions through the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and other
international forces, in particular Operation Sangaris
and the Central African Republic’s armed forces.
Their presence allowed for substantial progress to be
made, despite the difficulties encountered in fostering
an inclusive political dialogue and in organizing
democratic, transparent, credible and peaceful elections
in the Central African Republic.
It is worth noting that, despite the beginning of the
stabilization process in that country, in particular in
Bangui, the situation in the Central African Republic
remains precarious and the challenges are immense.
They include, among others, the holding and success
of the Bangui forum, which should lay the path to be
followed for the country’s future; the implementation
of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process for the cantonment of armed groups; the
redeployment of State administration throughout the
territory; the organization of constitutional referendums
and inclusive legislative and presidential elections; and
the establishment of a truly national army.
In this regard, we understand and share the concerns
of the transitional authorities over the deplorable lack
of financial resources needed to organize the elections.
We call on the international community to provide
consistent assistance to the Central African Republic
for its transition so that it may undergo a dynamic
process of stabilization and peace. We dare to hope
that, through the visit to the Central African Republic,
the Council was able not only to evaluate the progress
achieved, but also and above all to understand the
immense scope of the stabilization work that remains
to be done.
With regard to the Council’s visit to Addis Ababa, it
is part of the annual joint consultative meetings between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council on peace and security issues on that
continent. We welcome the cordial atmosphere and
mutual understanding that characterized this meeting,
which was recognized in the issuance of a joint
statement. Nevertheless, the time taken to negotiate
that joint statement demonstrates that the concerns of
the African continent are not sufficiently understood
by some Council members. There is therefore a need
for an effort towards mutual understanding between the
two Councils so that the joint meetings will contribute

15-0900717/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

to making progress on the points under consideration.
From that point of view, we support the proposal
made during the joint meeting by the delegation of
New Zealand intending to limit the agenda of the
joint meeting to two or three items in order to have
enough time to discuss them and to set up a followup mechanism after the discussions through permanent
contacts. We welcome the fact that the joint meeting
considered, among other issues, the threat of the Boko
Haram terrorist group.
As announced in Addis Ababa, Chad, on behalf of
the three African Council members, presented a draft
resolution on the deployment of a joint multinational
force, which is under consideration and will soon be
submitted for adoption. The African members of the
Council, the African Union, the States members of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin hope that
it will be adopted in the days to come. We note that
progress has already been made in considering the
text, and we thank all delegations for their valuable
contributions and constructive cooperation.
The Security Council’s visit to Bujumbura was
a major step forward. It made it possible to send a
message of trust and calm to the actors in Burundi in
view of the upcoming elections, which are schedule to
take place in April, by insisting in particular on respect
for their obligations under the Arusha Accords and
the Constitution. We hope that the upcoming coming
elections will be free, democratic and transparent and
that they will take place in a peaceful atmosphere. We
welcome the maturity of the strong forces in Burundian
society and hope that they will make every effort to
avoid a reversal of the peacebuilding process, which
has made it possible to break away from war.
The Council’s visit to Africa was a genuine
opportunity for the various actors of the countries
visited to express themselves without time limitations
or other restraints. Such a visit of the Security Council
to the field is a lot better than the reports presented
in New York. It allows the Council to see the reality
in all its dimensions and aspects. We congratulate
the French presidency and the Angolan co-presidency
on their leadership, patience, organization skills and
coordination throughout the Security Council mission.
The debates on 25 March (see S/PV.7414) and
27 March (see S/PV.7419) focused on current important
issues, as demonstrated by the very broad participation
of Member States. Despite the laudable efforts of

18/20

30/03/2015

the international community to assist child victims,
the problem of children associated with non-State
armed groups is far from being resolved. The moving
and poignant testimony of Mr. Junior Nzita of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who was recruited
by rebel forces against his will at age 12, reflected
the difficulty of the situation facing child soldiers. In
that regard, Chad is pleased to have been cited as an
example for having succeeded, with the help of United
Nations agencies, in removing child soldiers from its
armed forces and ensuring their reintegration. Chad is
ready to share its modest experience in that area with
any country that so wishes in order to eradicate the
scourge of child soldiers.
With respect to the issue of attacks and abuses
committed against ethnic and religious minorities in
the Middle East, we are pleased that France has drawn
the attention of the international community to the fate
of these minorities. We also welcome the convergence
of perspectives that emerged from the public debate on
this issue. We welcome the plan of action proposed by
the Secretary-General to protect these minorities and
the initiative of France to organize an international
conference on this subject. In addition to the measures
to be taken to protect the victimized minorities, we
must underscore the urgent need to provide them with
humanitarian assistance in accordance with their needs
and help them return to their lands of origin.
In conclusion, we reiterate our congratulations to
you, Mr. President, and your entire team on having
conducted an exemplary presidency of the Security
Council and for the excellent work accomplished
this month. I cannot conclude without wishing the
delegation of Jordan every success and assuring it of
Chad’s full support.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
condemning the Al-Shabaab attack this weekend in
Mogadishu. Our colleague, Ambassador Yusuf BariBari, Somalia’s Permanent Representative to the
United Nations in Geneva, was among those killed.
Ambassador Yusuf will be remembered as someone
who worked tirelessly at the Human Rights Council
to improve the lives of others. I offer our heartfelt
condolences to the people and Government of Somalia.
These senseless attacks will not dent this Council’s
resolve to support the people of Somalia.
We thank you and your Mission, Sir, for the energy
and leadership shown during this month’s presidency.

15-09007

30/03/2015

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

We welcome the fact that this meeting is again being
held in public. We covered a huge amount in March,
and others during this debate have enumerated the
numerous aspects on the agenda, so I would like to
focus on our preventative work.
We welcome the concrete actions on children
and armed conflict proposed in the open debate last
week and we support the continued strengthening
of our relationships with regional and subregional
organizations, as seen in our visit to Addis Ababa
and by the first visit to the United Nations by the new
European Union High Representative. I want to focus
in particular on the visit of the Security Council to the
Central African Republic, Burundi and the African
Union. It is good for the Council to travel, and making it
happen takes a huge amount of work on the part of both
the presidency and the Secretariat. I will touch on three
areas in particular: first, the importance of effective
and efficient peacekeeping; secondly, the significance
of up-coming elections; and, thirdly, the value of strong
and flexible models for regional cooperation.
First, with regard to peacekeeping, during our visit
to the Central African Republic the potential of that
country was clear for everybody to see: hardworking
people and significant natural resources. The problem is
how to ensure the security necessary for development to
take hold. We welcome the role that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) has played in
delivering such security, in conjunction with Sangaris
and the European Union-led force (EUFOR). The
increase of the MINUSCA troop ceiling this month was
another welcome step forward to meet the substantial
protection-of-civilians challenge in the Central African
Republic, in particular as EUFOR draws down. But as
we look ahead to the peace operations review later this
year, we must also think about how we can empower
and incentivize host Governments to embed security
so that missions can responsibly draw down when the
time is right. As our debate on Haiti (see S/PV.7408)
this month showed, clear planning for the transition
away from peacekeeping is vital for security gains to
become sustainable.
Part of that transition process brings me to my
second point — holding free and fair elections. That
is particularly relevant this year. In Africa alone, there
will be 11 presidential and parliamentary elections in
2015. And as we saw on our visit, Burundi’s election
in June will be an important opportunity to showcase

S/PV.7422

how far that country has progressed under Arusha in
the past 20 years. There is much to celebrate in that
progress, including the increased contribution made
by Burundian peacekeepers. Over 1,200 are deployed,
including in the Central African Republic. But we are
concerned by plans for a presidential third term. That
would risk undermining the stability that President
Nkurunziza has done so much to bring about. I am
pleased that so many members of the Council made that
clear in our meeting with him.
Finally, on regional cooperation, let me turn to our
consultations with the African Union in Addis Ababa.
We welcome such regular consultations and we are keen
to make future discussions as focused and interactive
as possible. As the Permanent Representative of
Chad has said, limiting the agenda to fewer items and
concentrating on the urgent issues would provide greater
value to our meetings. As we heard from the European
Union High Representative, regional and subregional
group, such as the European and African Unions, will
play a vital role working with the United Nations in the
future. We therefore support more focused contact to
help us achieve that goal.
Let me close on a sombre note. This month marked
the fourth anniversary of the start of the crisis in Syria.
The continued suffering of those in Syria and the region
is a direct consequence of Al-Assad’s refusal to give all
Syrian people a voice, his failure to preserve security
and his unwillingness to cooperate with the region.
We must be mindful of the lessons learnt from Syria,
in particular that those who cling to power without
thinking of their people undermine stability rather than
strengthen it.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has requested to take the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I regret having to take the floor a second
time, but I am forced to make a statement on behalf of
the Russian Federation.
I was, on the one hand, disappointed by the
comments made by my colleague, the representative
of the United States of America; on the other hand, I
am filled with hope. Why was I disappointed? I was
disappointed because, in March, the people of the
Crimea marked quite a different anniversary — the
anniversary of their historic reunification with the
Russian Federation, based on the outcome of an open

15-0900719/20

S/PV.7422

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

and fair referendum. The people of the Crimea support
that choice unanimously. Now, why did the statement
made by my colleague the representative of the United
States give me hope? I feel hope because she confirmed
the importance and significance of resolution 2202
(2015), which endorses the Minsk package of measures
as a basis for a solution to the situation in Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): As this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of March 2015, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of France to the members
of the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives, their respective staff and to the
Secretariat of the Council, for all the support they have
provided.

20/20

30/03/2015

It has been a busy month indeed, and one in
which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone and without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat. I would like to thank the conference
service officers and our interpreters. They have done a
great deal for us.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of Jordan good
luck in the month of April.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

15-09007
