V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Cornmittec

(b) To formulate recommendations on possible
measures to combat the international inflationary process and make it possible to formulate policies designed
to reduce the economic and social effects of inflation;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
to transmit to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session, through the Economic and Social Council, the
study prepared by the governmental group of experts
established in accordance with paragraph 1 above,
together with the comments of the Trade and Development Board, so that the Assembly may decide what
action should be taken, including the possibility of
holding a world conference on inflation;
3. Recommends, at the same time, that the international community should devote special attention to
the problem of world inflation in the negotiations concerning the establishment of the new international
economic order and in the preparation of a new international development strategy.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/176.

Multilateral development assistance for
the exploration of natural resources

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of its resolution 3201 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974 which relate to permanent sovereignty
over natural resources,
Reaffirming that the effective discovery, exploration,
development and conservation of their natural resources
by developing countries is indispensable to the mobilization of their resources for development,
Bearin,g in mind especially the over-all impact of
natural resources on the development of developing
countries and the connexion thereof with the flow of
capital and the transfer of technology,
Emphasizing the link between the improvement of
the structure of the raw materials markets, taking into
account the interest of developing countries, and the
adequate flow of investment into the raw materials
sector,
Noting that several developing countries desiring to
do so have been unable to undertake systematically
the survey of their natural resources,
Taking into account the work of the Committee on
Natural Resources, 123
Emphasizing also the need to increase, ínter afia,
the resources of the United Nations Revolving Fund for
Natural Resources,
Recalling also the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States,1 24
Recalling further the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Devclopment
Decade, 125
1 2a For the work of the Committee on its second i'>pecial
and its fifth sessions, see Official Records of the Economic and
Social Council, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 2
(E/5907), Supplement No. 2A (E/6004) and E/6004/ Add.1.
124 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
125 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

109

Emphasizing further the need for urgent specific action in order to cstablish the new international cconomic
order,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with
the assistance of a group of high-level experts appointed
by him on the recommendation of Governments and
with due regard to equitable geographical distribution,
a report on the following, including conclusions and
recommendations, taking into account studies already
undertaken within the United N ations system:
(a) An estímate of the financia! requirements over
the next ten to fifteen years for the exploration and
location of natural resources in developing countries
which indicate to the Secretary-General their interest;
( b) The availability of multilateral mechanisms
for the provision of adequate finance for the exploration
of natural resources with special reference to the availability of soft loans with an element of subsidy for developing countries, bearing in mind, inter alía, the special needs of the least developed, land-locked and island
developing countries and the most seriously affected
among them;
(e) The availability of mechanisms for the transfer
of technology to developing countries for the exploration and exploitation of natural resources;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide
the group with material for its consideration, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and other interested bodies of the United Nations system;
3. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its thirty-third session.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/177.

Finance for development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/174 of 21 December 1976
on ways and means of accelerating the transfer of real
resources to developing countries on a predictable, assured and continuous basis,
Convinced of the urgent need to develop policies to
ensure the increased flow of resources to developing
countries, including thc access of developing countries
to capital markets, as indispensable to the mobilization
of their resources for development, and to develop the
general concepts in this regard emerging from the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, 12 n
Takin.g into account consideration of this urgcncy in
the discussions of, ínter alia, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on financing related to trade and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization on the redeployment of industry,
investment guarantees and manpower training ami employment,
Confident that the framework of economic co-operation among developing countries and countries of different economic and social systems can encourage investments in developing countries as determined by
them,
12n See

A/31/478 and Corr.1, annex, and A/31/478/Add.l

and Add.1/Corr. l.

no

General Assemhly-Thirly-second Session

Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 127
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with
the assistance of a group of high-level experts appointed
by him on the recommendation of Governments and
with due regard to equitable geographical distribution,
a report on the following, including conclusions and
recommendations, taking into account studies already
undertaken within the United Nations system:
(a) The guarantee powers of existing international
financia! institutions and their possible enlargement;
(b) The feasibility and desirability of establishing
a multilateral insurance and reinsurance agency;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide
the group with material for its consideration, in consultation with relevant bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system;
3. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its thirty-third session under the item entitled "Acceleration of the transfer of real resources to
developing countries".
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/178.

Network for the exchange of technological information and the industrial
and technological information hank

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 197 5 on development and international economic co-operation,
Further recalling the Lima Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation, 128
adopted by the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization at its Second General Conference, held
at Lima from 12 to 26 March 1975,
Taking into account resolutions 87 (IV), 88 (IV)
and 89 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development129 concerning
strengthening the technological capacity of the developing countries,
Further taking into account General Assembly resolutions 3507 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/183
of 21 December 1976 and Industrial Development
Board decision V (XI) of 6 June 1977 regarding institutional arrangements in the transfer of technology, 180
Recalling paragraph 1 of its resolution 31/183, in
which it reaffi.rmed the importance of wider dissemination of scientific and technological information for the
121 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
12s See A/10112, chap. IV.
129 See Proceedings of the United

Nations Conference on
Trade and Deve/opment, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), ,part one, &ect. A.
180 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtysecond Session, Supp/ement No. 16 (A/32/16), annex l.

purpose of allowing developing countries access to
research findings that they considered to be of interest
as well as project experience of other developing countries, thus permitting the selection of technologies essential for their industrial growth and promoting the development of their own technological capacity,
Reaffirming thc need for the improvement and
strengthening of national capacities of developing countries for access to, collection, storage, analysis and dissemination of technological and related information, in
arder, inter afia, to make the proposed network fully
cffective,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
011 the establishment of a network for the exchange of
technological information 131 and the note by the Secretary-General concerning the patent information system, 132 prepared in response to General Assembly
resolution 3507 (XXX), and expresses its thanks to
the lnter-Agency Task Force on Information Exchange
and the Transfer of Technology and to the World Intellectual Property Organization;
2. W e/comes the progress achieved thus far in
determining the shape of a technological information
network, useful to ali countries, in particular developing countries, in studying regional and national
capacities and needs in technological information, particularly in the publication of a pilot user-oriented
directory of information services of the United Nations
system;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
preparatory studies and assessments of existing information networks already undertaken;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the regional commissions, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, as well as with the World InteUectual Property
Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies concerned, to develop altematives for further work
011 the network, including time schedules, costs and
user-oriented operational suggestions, together with
suggestions on sectors and/or subject areas where there
is a particular requirement for an international information network, using the best possible experience in
the fields of identification of user needs, information
exchange and the transfer of technology;
5. Requests the Administrative Committee on Coordination, in view of the fruitful collaboration developed by the Inter-Agency Task Force among agencies
of the United Nations system on measures undertaken
thus far in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 31/183, to make appropriate arrangements to
continue such support and co-ordination during the
period of study envisaged under paragraphs 3 and 4
ahove;
6. Reafjirms that ali countries, particularly developed countries, should take measures as a matter of
high priority to improve the availability and quality of
the technological information, including advanced technologies, needed to assist developing countries in the
selection of technologies relevant to their needs;
7. Urges the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
rn1 E/6055.
13 2 E/6054.
