United Nations

S/PV.4497

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4497

th meeting
Tuesday, 26 March 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Petersen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Norway)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Ngoh Ngoh
Mr. Wang Ying fan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Fall
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Gokool
Mr. Aguilar Zínser
Mr. Lavrov
Ms. Tan
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-30290 (E)

*0230290*

S/PV.4497

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of sympathy concerning earthquake in
Afghanistan
The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, let me convey our deepest condolences to the
Afghan authorities and people following the
devastating earthquake in northern Afghanistan. Our
thoughts and prayers go to the thousands of Afghan
families bereaved and affected by this calamity, in a
land which has had far more than its share of suffering
in recent years. There can be no doubt that the
international community will help the Interim
Administration and the local Afghans deal with this
tragedy and help the victims, as we are helping the
Afghans heal the wounds of war and create lasting
peace and development in their country.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Spain, Tajikistan and Turkey, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhâdi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr.
Dauth
(Australia),
Mr.
Chowdhury
(Bangladesh),
Mr.
Heinbecker
(Canada),
Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (the
Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Yoshikawa
(Japan), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan), Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) and Mr. Pamir (Turkey) took seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

2

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Danilo Türk, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Council is
meeting with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. Members of the Council have before
them the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security, document S/2002/278.
I should also like to draw attention to the
following documents: S/2002/274, which contains a
letter date 14 March 2002 from the representative of
the United Kingdom transmitting a report on the
activities of the International Security Assistance Force
in Afghanistan, and S/2002/283, which contains a joint
letter from the representatives of Afghanistan and the
Russian Federation transmitting a Joint RussianAfghan Statement of 12 March 2002.
I welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Her
Excellency Ms. Louise Fréchette, to this meeting and
invite her to take the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I am pleased to
be able to address the Security Council on the question
of Afghanistan this morning. But it is sad to have to do
so on a day when there is yet more bad news from that
unhappy country. You have just referred, Sir, to the
severe earthquake in the north of the country, which
has caused heavy loss of life and thousands of injuries,
and left tens of thousands without shelter. The
Secretary-General issued a statement this morning
expressing his distress at this news, which I am sure we
all share.
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations have already sent relief items and
assessment teams into the area. A helicopter with
people from the United Nations and the International
Security Assistance Force is currently surveying the
damage. Chairman Karzai and Mr. Nigel Fisher, the
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, intend to visit the area tomorrow.

S/PV.4497

I note the large number of non-members of the
Council participating in this open meeting, and I am
encouraged by the continuing interest and support of
the international community in helping the Afghans
rebuild their society. Above all, I am pleased to be able
to introduce the Secretary-General’s report to the
Security Council on the situation in Afghanistan. As
you know, in addition to providing an update on recent
events, the report also presents the Secretary-General’s
concept for the future United Nations presence in
Afghanistan, for which we will seek the endorsement
of the Security Council.
Before addressing the structure of the new
mission, I would like to highlight a few developments
that have occurred in Afghanistan since the report was
issued. As the report was released only last week and
as the list of speakers before us is fairly long, I hope to
be brief.
The Interim Administration and the United
Nations have made education a key priority. The first
day of the school year, which was last Saturday,
marked a major step in getting children back to school.
Chairman Karzai launched a nationwide back-to-school
programme at a high school in Kabul, and similar
ceremonies took place throughout the country. Carol
Bellamy, of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), was also in Kabul for the occasion. It is
estimated that, around the country, 1.5 million students
were able to return to school. As part of the
programme, UNICEF organized the delivery of more
than 7,000 tons of supplies to 3,000 schools across the
country. These will provide primary-school learning
materials to more than 1.8 million children, and
teaching materials to 51,000 teachers. UNICEF is also
working to help restore some of the 2,000 schools that
have been damaged or destroyed since 1979. In
addition, 500 tents will be provided in areas where
there are no schools.
There is other good news, too. Increased rainfall
has left many farmers in the west, north and north-east
of the country optimistic about the next crop, after
three years of drought. There has been a massive
increase in land under cultivation. That optimism is
reflected in recent population movements. Internally
displaced persons have, in some areas, started to return
home spontaneously, without waiting for assistance
from aid organizations. Similarly, a record number of
refugees have benefited from an assisted-return
programme organized by the Office of the United

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
the Interim Administration and the Government of
Pakistan. An average of 10,000 refugees a day crossed
into Afghanistan from Pakistan between 18 and 22
March. More than 83,000 Afghans have returned since
the programme began on 1 March. Six more
registration centres will be opened by UNHCR in
Pakistan within the next few weeks to cope with this
accelerating increase in demand. Preparations are under
way for the start of a similar scheme for refugees from
Iran, beginning in April.
While we are heartened by this demonstration of
popular confidence in Afghanistan’s future, we are also
concerned about nutritional deficits in some parts of
the country. Rapid emergency assessments are being
undertaken in areas identified as having high rates of
malnutrition. The recent outbreak of scurvy in the
Taiwara district of Ghor province, which resulted in 20
deaths, highlights the severity of the malnutrition
problem and the need for carefully targeted
interventions. The World Food Programme (WFP) will
shortly launch a new emergency programme in the
most-affected areas. Up to 8.8 million people,
including internally displaced persons, will receive
food assistance over the next three months. In addition,
by December an estimated 1 million schoolchildren
will receive food handouts.
And yet, even while United Nations agencies
have been gearing up to meet these major
challenges — the back-to-school programme, the
return of refugees and the continuing malnutrition
crisis — they have also become increasingly alarmed
by the slow pace of funding. Almost a month ago, at
Kabul, we presented the Immediate and Transitional
Assistance Programme for the Afghan People for this
year, spelling out requirements of $1.18 billion. We
now urgently need to convert the generous pledges
already made into actual contributions. Otherwise we
shall not be able to carry on with the vital activities I
have just described.
Turning to the political front, here too we can
report significant progress. The first stage of the Loya
Jirga process will soon be completed with the public
announcement of the rules and procedures for the
selection and indirect election of participants in the
Loya Jirga and for the convening of the Loya Jirga
itself. Those rules have been developed by the Special
Independent Commission for the Convening of the
Emergency Loya Jirga following a process of

3

S/PV.4497

consultation that took place across Afghanistan and at
all levels of society.
A budget has been drawn up to cover the
complicated organizational and logistical arrangements
needed to convene the Loya Jirga. We are extremely
grateful for the generous contributions already made by
Germany — which has contributed $3 million — and
by the United Kingdom, the United States and the
European Commission. The Commission’s secretariat,
with the support of Mr. Brahimi’s Office, has designed
a public information campaign to inform Afghans
throughout the country about the Loya Jirga process.
That campaign is in part supported by the Open Media
Fund for Afghanistan, which was recently established
on the initiative of the well-known journalist and
expert on Afghanistan, Mr. Ahmed Rashid. It is
perhaps a sign of how things have changed that a man
who became famous for his reporting on war and
oppression in Afghanistan can now lend his name to
the process of democratic change there.
Recent trips by the Loya Jirga Commission to the
provinces have confirmed the enormous interest in the
Loya Jirga process across the country. In Herat, a
meeting hastily convened in the space of two hours was
attended by over 1,000 people. When it was discovered
that no women were present, another meeting was
organized at a girls’ school nearby, and was attended
by several hundred women. On the other hand, the
possibility that the Loya Jirga might be intimidated or
corrupted remains a key concern. There are reports that
in Herat people have been arrested for speaking out in
favour of the Loya Jirga. In other regions people claim
that they cannot speak openly about the process for
fear of their lives. Addressing those concerns is
directly related to the question of security, to which I
will now turn.
The security situation across the country as a
whole appears to have improved somewhat over the
past few weeks. There have, however, been further
violent incidents in a few places. In particular, clashes
took place between Hazara factions in Daikundi, in the
province of Oruzgan. Mr. Brahimi met with
representatives of those factions, who then agreed to
accept an independent delegation from the Interim
Administration to mediate their differences. That
mediation process is under way. In Kandahar a grenade
was thrown into a crowded bazaar, killing one person
and injuring others. Finally, there are reports that
Taliban elements are regrouping in southern Paktia for

4

a guerrilla campaign against the Interim Administration
and foreign troops. Those incidents remind us how
volatile the situation in Afghanistan still is and should
warn us not to be complacent. The concerns about
security expressed in the Secretary-General’s report
remain all too pertinent.
I would also like to address the related, and
increasingly important, question of the demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants. A working group
composed of the Interim Administration, the United
Nations, the International Security Assistance Force
and other parties has been established to find solutions
to this question. This group, which has already met
twice, is preparing proposals that will be considered at
a conference on security financing to be held in Geneva
on 3 April.
There have been encouraging signs form the
Ministry of Defence, commanders and soldiers that
many ex-combatants would be interested in
reintegration programmes. Work is under way to
identify labour-intensive projects and other schemes
that can employ former combatants and provide them
with an alternative to war. One promising possibility is
to train a further 5,000 deminers to help clear the vast
number of mines still scattered around the country.
The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) has continued to build on its success in
reducing crime and improving security in Kabul. On 19
March, the command of the Kabul multinational
brigade was handed over to the German contingent,
while the United Kingdom continues to maintain
overall command of the ISAF. ISAF is about to
complete its training of the 1st Battalion of the Afghan
National Guard. The unit will hold a parade on 4 April,
and will thereafter assume its new role alongside the
existing palace guard.
Preparations for the training of a national Afghan
police force are progressing. An advance party of a
German training team arrived on 16 March. The sixweek basic training course will start in July, when the
renovation of the police academy is complete. A public
information campaign is under way to attract new
recruits. The National Commission on Police Reform
has also started its work.
Now I would like to turn to the important issue of
human rights. As stated in the Secretary-General’s
report, four standing working groups were established
at the Afghan national workshop on human rights held

S/PV.4497

in Kabul on 9 March. With the support of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in particular, those working groups are planning
programmes to implement the human rights provisions
of the Bonn Agreement, including the establishment of
an independent Human Rights Commission, the
investigation and monitoring of human rights abuses
and the provision of human rights education. The
establishment of the Commission is particularly
pressing in the light of reports of continuing human
rights abuses, such as the attack on ethnic Pashtun
civilians in the north of the country, which are
described in the Secretary-General’s report.
With regard to a related matter, after wide
consultations, the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has prepared a paper on the
Judicial Commission outlining its proposed mission,
composition, powers and operating procedures. The
paper provides a necessary basis for proceeding with
the establishment of that Commission, as required by
the Bonn Agreement.
Finally, I should like to say something about the
future United Nations mission to Afghanistan, which
has been provisionally named the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). In his
report, the Secretary-General proposes a mission
structure supported by two pillars: pillar I for political
affairs and pillar II for relief, recovery and
reconstruction activities. The proposed structure
contains mechanisms for inter-pillar coordination at
both the mission headquarters and the regional levels,
thus ensuring that political and reconstruction activities
support each other rather than run at cross purposes.
A key innovation of UNAMA is the integration of
humanitarian relief, recovery and reconstruction
activities within a single pillar. The Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in charge of
pillar II will thus be responsible for direction and
oversight of all United Nations relief and
reconstruction activities in Afghanistan. This integrated
configuration will make it easier to work closely with
the legitimate Afghan authorities to rebuild
Afghanistan in a sustainable way.
Another innovation is the Secretary-General’s
proposal that the mission have a light expatriate
footprint. This is to ensure that Afghans take the lead
in the post-conflict recovery phase and that the bulk of

foreign aid pledged to Afghanistan actually goes to
Afghans.
Human rights will be central to the purposes and
functions of the new mission, both as it fulfils the
provisions of the Bonn Agreement directly related to
human rights and as it seeks to integrate human rights
fully into its humanitarian, reconstruction and political
activities, including the rule of law and national
capacity-building.
A senior human rights coordinator in the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
will work with staff in both of the mission’s main
operational pillars and will also coordinate human
rights activities under both pillars. The coordinator will
serve as the principal contact for the independent
Human Rights Commission and will liaise with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other United Nations human rights
mechanisms. Staff, including Afghan nationals, will be
equipped to perform the human rights aspects of their
work, including the integration of rights-based and
gender-sensitive approaches, in the Mission’s relief and
reconstruction activities.
With regard to policing, Germany has taken the
lead in this sector and has initiated a number of
significant projects related to police reform. It has
dispatched a highly experienced team of police
advisers to Kabul to undertake this work. Germany has
made clear, however, that assistance will also be
required from other donors and international
organizations. The two meetings convened in Berlin
over the past two months on the subject of policing
were aimed at securing such commitments.
In order to support German efforts in Afghanistan
and to ensure that UNAMA has adequate resources to
coordinate closely with the German team, the Afghan
Ministry of Interior and the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), as well as to provide advice
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Secretary-General has recommended that three
police advisers be added to the mission. Both Germany
and the Ministry of Interior have welcomed that
recommendation.
The new mission in Afghanistan will face
extremely complex challenges. I believe that the
Secretary-General’s proposals, developed in close
consultation with Mr. Brahimi and his team, are an
imaginative and constructive response to the

5

S/PV.4497

operational challenges on the ground. I look forward to
the Council’s discussion of those proposals, and I very
much hope that the Council will endorse them.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Welcome
to New York, Mr. Minister. It is a privilege for us that
this meeting is taking place under your presidency.
First of all, I should like to convey the
condolences and solidarity of the French people to the
Afghan people, struck once again by a cruel ordeal: the
earthquake that has just destroyed an entire region in
the north of the country and claimed thousands of
victims.
The representative of Spain will be making a
statement on behalf of the entire European Union, and
France subscribes fully to it. Therefore, I shall limit my
statement to a few comments.
This meeting is taking a first look at the record
six months after the beginning of the military
intervention by the coalition, three months after the
Interim Administration began to function and three
months before the convening of the Emergency Loya
Jirga.
That record, which Louise Fréchette has just
described in eloquent detail, is clearly positive. The
ground covered over the past six months is impressive.
The fight against terrorism has been marked by several
decisive elements and is being pursued vigorously and
relentlessly. The United States and its allies, including
France, are tracking down Al Qaeda elements day by
day.
The political transition is also progressing. The
Afghan people is regaining control of its destiny. The
Emergency Loya Jirga, scheduled for June, will be a
new step towards the creation of a multi-ethnic,
representative and democratic Government. The
responsible conduct of the transitional authorities has
made it possible largely to avoid repeating past errors,
such as the ordeals in 1992 in Kabul or in 1997 in
Mazar-e-Sharif.
Finally, the reconstruction of Afghanistan has
now begun with the assistance of the entire
international community, illustrated by the pledges
made in Tokyo. Throughout the country there are signs
of this true rebirth. The most moving example, referred
to by Louise Fréchette, is undoubtedly the beginning of
the school year: last Saturday, a million and a half
children of both sexes literally rushed to their schools

6

and to knowledge. The French Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Hubert Védrine, who was in Kabul at the time,
shared this moment of hope by visiting the two schools
rebuilt by France — the Esteqlal high school for boys
and the Malalai high school for girls.
The success of the reconstruction now depends in
part on good coordination between bilateral and
multilateral donors, organized in the Afghan Support
Group and the Implementation Group, or through the
United Nations system. Locally, one person, in our
view, should provide this indispensable coordination:
Lakhdar Brahimi.
In New York too, impressive ground has been
covered in only six months. A series of resolutions
were adopted, at a sustained pace on the principles for
a settlement — resolution 1378 (2001); the
endorsement of the Bonn Agreement — resolution
1383 (2001); the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) — resolution 1386 (2001);
and, finally, the creation of a de-territorialized regime
against Al Qaeda to replace the sanctions against
Afghanistan — resolution 1390 (2002).
A new draft resolution is now being prepared. It
will allow for the rapid implementation of the excellent
recommendations of the Secretary-General, as
described to us by Louise Fréchette. It will give
structure and a unified form to the United Nations
presence, which has developed, with impressive
effectiveness, under the authority of Lakhdar Brahimi.
France is working on this draft, which will be
submitted to the Council tomorrow during our
consultations.
The issue of security remains a more difficult
one. Agreement is emerging on the extension of ISAF
beyond the time frame set out in resolution 1386
(2001) — that is, 20 June. Together we will have to
decide on the right time to announce it and also on the
right time frame.
Regarding the geographic expansion of the Force
beyond Kabul and its vicinity, the position of the major
contributors is clear: they are not in favour of it.
Indeed, a force spread out beyond Kabul and its
environs would have to be involved in settling conflicts
falling under the purview of Afghan authority.
Absolute priority, then, must be given to the
training of a unified Afghan police force and army. We
must create an army that is free from ethnic and

S/PV.4497

regional divisions and from the influence of political
parties and warlords. We must also use all available
instruments to help in achieving security and law and
order in the provinces. The economic lever should then
be
used
with
determination.
Assistance
in
reconstruction cannot be brought to provinces where
local authorities commit massive violations of human
rights or maintain a climate of insecurity. On the other
hand, of course, humanitarian assistance should not be
made conditional.
France will participate fully in the reconstruction
of Afghanistan. It has already entered into specific
commitments with regard to health care, education,
agriculture, administration, the preservation of its
patrimony, training of the future Afghan army and
police, as well as assistance in combating drugs.
The fulfilment of these commitments has been the
subject of in-depth discussions with the Afghan
authorities, first of all during the visit of President
Hamid Karzai to Paris on 28 February, and, quite
recently, last Sunday, when Mr. Hubert Védrine went to
Kabul.
The President: I thank the representative of
France for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. Minister, your presence at this meeting honours us
and also attests to your country’s commitment to the
subject that we are considering today.
May I begin by expressing our solidarity with the
Afghan people in these painful times as a result of the
severe earthquake. We would request the Ambassador
to pass on our sincerest condolences.
We are grateful for the presentation made by the
Deputy Secretary-General, Louise Fréchette, and for
the report of the Secretary-General, which emphasizes
the historical complexities of the situation in
Afghanistan, as well as the shape of the challenges to
be confronted by the United Nations in the months and
years to come.
We agree with the Secretary-General that security
is, one the one hand, a vital prerequisite for
safeguarding the peace process in Afghanistan and that
it is also, on the other hand, the first issue to be
addressed in the context of the reconstruction of that
country, as is indicated in the relevant paragraphs of
the report, including paragraphs 45 and 126. This is the
most important need of the Afghan people at the

present time, and the Security Council, through its
actions, must contribute to meeting it.
Indeed,
without
security,
the
Interim
Administration will not be able to fulfil its functions
adequately throughout the territory. Without security,
the legitimacy of the outcome of the Loya Jirga will be
called into question. Without security, the United
Nations presence will face difficulties, and, without
security, it will be virtually impossible to provide
humanitarian assistance.
Colombia therefore expresses its resolute support
for expanding the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) beyond Kabul. As paragraph 59 of the
report emphasizes, “the main threats to the Interim
Administration emanate from the provinces”.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to invite
those countries that lead the Force or are members of it
to explore mechanisms to respond to this appeal from
the Afghan people. We have taken note of the
reservations expressed thus far in this connection.
This could be the best way to begin to respond to
the risks and the threats that are mentioned in
paragraph 123 of the report of the Secretary-General.
In the face of these risks, it is necessary to strengthen
security measures in order to meet short-, medium- and
long-term needs and to make it possible for
Afghanistan to be a viable country from an economic
and political standpoint.
In this respect, I wish to emphasize the report’s
assertion that:
“The only way to ensure the eradication of
terrorism from Afghan soil is by empowering the
country’s legitimate authorities to police their
own territory.” (S/2002/278, para. 123)
In addition, on the subject of security, we must
always bear in mind the military operation that has
been under way for six months now, fighting against Al
Qaeda and Taliban forces, and realize that, as things
stand now, there is a need for careful coordination with
the activities of ISAF if it is expanded to the remainder
of Afghanistan.
We would like to refer to some specific points of
importance to our delegation.
First, let me express our deep satisfaction at the
return to school, on 23 March, of boys and girls. We
welcome the actions of the Interim Administration that

7

S/PV.4497

made it possible to fulfil this objective, and, in doing
so, we extend our appreciation to all of those who
facilitated that return, in particular the United Nations
Children's Fund and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Secondly, we wish to refer to the financial
situation of the Interim Administration, because we
believe this to be a subject that deserves our
consideration. We are referring to the delays and the
difficulties in channelling those resources that were
pledged during the Tokyo Conference - problems that
could paralyse the Administration and jeopardize the
credibility of the emerging institutions in Afghanistan.
We trust that these delays and difficulties do not reflect
a lack of commitment on the part of the international
community.
Thirdly, a comment on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Colombia supports the proposed structure that has been
submitted to us for consideration, and we are prepared
to support a concise Security Council draft resolution
endorsing this concept. As Ambassador Levitte has
informed us, the draft resolution has already been
prepared. We wish to emphasize nevertheless that
UNAMA is an integrated mechanism that will have to
coordinate many agencies and programmes free of any
subordinate relationship. That will not necessarily be
easy.
If in the future we achieve a real process of
cooperation among the various intergovernmental
organs of the United Nations, we may be able to
produce decisions that make the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General easier. There
is clearly a role for the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, which we must identify
and relate to the decisions that the Security Council
will be taking on that structure.
Little time has elapsed since the establishment of
the Interim Administration in December 2001.
Nonetheless, in this brief period fundamental changes
have occurred in Afghanistan’s political structure that
are encouraging. The report indicates the frankly
overwhelming magnitude of the tasks ahead. That is
why we believe it timely to revive the initiative of
conducting a comprehensive assessment of the
situation in that country. We feel that such a
comprehensive assessment will be the best starting
point for the new United Nations mission in

8

Afghanistan. We should perhaps initiate that exercise
some time in July. It should put the international
community’s role in a clear perspective and help the
Security Council itself fully to grasp the most complex
challenge that the United Nations faces in that region,
which is particularly critical to international peace and
security.
The President: I thank the representative of
Colombia for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Cunningham (United States): I, too, wish to
welcome you, Sir, to New York. Your presence here
with us today is most welcome and signifies your
country’s commitment to Afghanistan. I want to
completely associate the United States with your
message of condolence and sympathy to the Afghan
people in the aftermath of the earthquake today.
I also want to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for her comprehensive overview of where we stand
now. I think it is a very useful outline.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
the situation in Afghanistan and the proposal for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We look forward to hearing other nations’
views on UNAMA and to discussing it more fully in
the coming days. For now, I want to second the
Secretary-General’s comment that what Ambassador
Brahimi, his colleagues, the United Nations and,
indeed,
the
international
community
have
accomplished thus far is truly remarkable under the
circumstances. We support the Secretary-General’s
intent to get an effective, efficient and integrated
mission fully in place as soon as possible with a light
expatriate footprint and heavy reliance on the Afghans
themselves.
Today, I want to say a word about security. We all
recognize that there is a variety of security challenges
in Afghanistan today. The Afghans are addressing these
challenges and the United States, together with others,
is assisting them to do so in a number of ways. We will
continue the campaign against Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. Working with our international partners in the
coming weeks, we will begin training a national army
and the United States will contribute significantly to
the training and equipping of police. In early April, we
intend to meet with other interested countries to
discuss efforts to improve the security situation in
Afghanistan.

S/PV.4497

When the current mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) comes up for
renewal, we will support its extension through
December of this year. We will also provide assistance
to Turkey should it, as we hope, agree to take over
ISAF command from the United Kingdom. The United
States is working, through its special forces and civil
affairs teams, with local Afghan commanders and these
teams will continue to help local commanders deal with
contentious issues and to discourage conflict among
them. We believe that these efforts are responsive to
Afghanistan’s needs and are already having a very
positive impact.
Given the present security situation and the range
and variety of assistance already available or under
way, we do not currently see the need to expand ISAF’s
areas of activity beyond Kabul and its immediate
environs. We remain extremely appreciative of the
United Kingdom’s leadership of the International
Security Assistance Force and express our thanks for
the support of the other troop-contributing nations.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are honoured and pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over this meeting to discuss issues relating to
a great people and its country. This demonstrates your
interest in and concern for Afghanistan, just as you
have shown your interest in and concern for African
affairs.
Allow me to express our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on the situation
in Afghanistan. We also wish to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Fréchette for her briefing on
developments in that country. We believe that the
report provides the Council with an important
opportunity to assess and to discuss ways of improving
the situation in Afghanistan, which has suffered more
than 23 years of domestic and external conflicts and
their consequences, affecting all aspects of life in that
country. Any assessment and discussion of the United
Nations role in this area require us to address the
various issues with great patience and specificity, given
the sensitivity of the situation.
We wish to express our satisfaction with the
information contained in the report on the status of
implementation of the Bonn Agreement and the
establishment of the Afghan Interim Administration

and its key commissions, which have had important
political results. Notwithstanding the emergence of
these embryonic political institutions in a turbulent
political atmosphere, we believe that they have been
tested and made significant strides in various aspects of
national life, including education, the fight against
illicit drugs, the participation of women and the
convening of the Loya Jirga, which represents the core
of the political process. Its success will dispel the
threat of another war looming over that unhappy
country.
With respect to Afghanistan, which has suffered
for so long, I wish to associate myself with previous
speakers in expressing our deep sorrow for the victims
of the earthquakes in the northern regions of that
country. On behalf of the Syrian Arab Republic, I
convey our sincere condolences to the people and
Government of friendly Afghanistan for the catastrophe
and for their losses. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other
relevant entities that have hastened to provide
assistance to all the victims of the earthquake.
Security and stability in that country continue to
be of major concern. Without the establishment of
security, neither the peace process nor economic
development and reconstruction can go forward. In this
regard, we share the Secretary-General’s concern over
the ongoing instability of the security situation in many
parts of Afghanistan, particularly outside major cities.
This instability is caused by the persistence of pockets
of Taliban and Al Qaeda resistance and by the
continuing confrontation between political and military
rivals.
We would like to express our regret that these
confrontations have reached a level of ethnic violence
between and among the different parties. The report
notes many serious attacks on and violations of human
rights based on ethnic motives. We support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation on making all
efforts as soon as possible with the different Afghani
leaders and their hesitant partners to participate in the
political process. We also support his recommendations
on training and equipping an Afghani security force
under the Interim Administration, making all
international efforts to set to rights the security
situation currently dividing the various Afghani parties,
and on deploying the Afghani security force efficiently
and as soon as possible.

9

S/PV.4497

In this regard, we would like to note the wish of
the Interim Administration and the Afghani people to
expand the area of work of the International Security
Assistance Force — ISAF — because of the sense of
security achieved in the region. We believe that the
Council should consider this issue seriously and give it
the importance it deserves.
At the same time, we believe that a national army
should be established as soon as possible, an army not
based on ethnic criteria or any other affiliations. It
should bear the responsibility for security of every part
of Afghanistan, as prescribed by the Bonn Agreement.
It should also be provided with all the logistical
support it requires, because this is the least that we can
give the Afghani people — international assistance that
would enhance stability.
The report makes clear the importance of the
continuation of humanitarian assistance and of proper
coordination among various humanitarian agencies and
institutions. Deep concern has been raised by the
drought that has struck many areas, in addition to the
disaster last night, and by the blocked roads in
mountainous areas of Afghanistan, thus threatening
great loss of life and requiring immediate measures to
prevent such a catastrophe.
We express our great satisfaction with the pioneer
girl students going back to school, raising hopes for a
future of stability and normality.
We also express concern with regard to the
information in the Secretary-General’s report on poppy
cultivation in the eastern and southern areas of
Afghanistan in spite of the Interim Administration’s
efforts and issuance of an edict prohibiting the
cultivation, production, processing or use of illicit
drugs. They require international financial assistance
that would dissuade different Afghani groups from
considering illicit drugs as a major source of income.
Of course, dealing with this issue requires a long time.
We support the information in the report on
Afghanistan’s need for enormous international
financial assistance in the near future in order to meet
current humanitarian needs and to begin the process of
economic recovery.
The report states that current United Nations
deployment in Afghanistan is not commensurate with
the level of effort required and the role to be played in
this game of the nation’s future. Therefore, the

10

proposal to erect a new structure of the United Nations
presence in Afghanistan comes within the proper time
frame and represents an urgent need for the
Organization to play its role and to coordinate all of its
efforts.
We would like to express our sincere appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and his team for their arduous
efforts in performing their difficult mandate. We hope
that the composition of the new mission, as described
by Ms. Fréchette, and in the manner presented by
Ambassador Levitte, represents new hope towards
strengthening all of Ambassador Brahimi’s efforts and
those of his team in Afghanistan. We believe that the
Secretary-General’s appointment of two
very
competent personalities to be Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and the fact
that each chairs one of the two major components —
political
affairs,
and
relief,
recovery
and
reconstruction — are very encouraging and raise hope
that this mission will be able to coordinate among the
various agencies and to carry out its mandate under
Ambassador Brahimi’s leadership in the best possible
way.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for his kind words addressed to
me.
Ms. Tan (Singapore): At the outset, let me thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Fréchette,
for introducing the Secretary-General’s latest report on
the situation in Afghanistan, which is both informative
and comprehensive.
Singapore is in full agreement with most of the
points made in the report. A recurring motive in the
Secretary-General’s report is for Afghan priorities to
lead the international community’s efforts, and this
should maximize the use of Afghan capacity. Indeed,
Afghan voices should constantly guide our work here
in the Council. However, it is imperative that all
Afghans also work cohesively together and transcend
ethnic and regional parochialism.
The international community has a unique
opportunity to make good in Afghanistan. Similarly,
Afghanistan has a singular chance to make the most of
the international community’s focused attention on it.
Neither should squander the prospect.

S/PV.4497

It is also timely and appropriate for the
Norwegian presidency to convene today’s open debate
to review developments in Afghanistan four months
since the last such debate and three months since the
inauguration of the Afghan Interim Authority and
establishment of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF).
We join others in expressing our condolences to
the Afghan authorities and people for the thousands
feared dead after a series of earthquakes struck
northern Afghanistan last night and earlier today and in
appealing for urgent humanitarian and other assistance
to be extended.
Given the global interest in Afghanistan, it is
especially important for Council members to listen
regularly to the views of non-Council members,
especially members of the “six plus two” group, which
now meets in Kabul and includes Afghanistan and
other key players, as we deliberate on the next steps,
including the draft resolution referred to by France.
The presence of the Norwegian Foreign Minister, Chair
of the Afghan Support Group, will also provide an
important dimension to the Council’s work.
The Security Council has been intimately
involved in developments in Afghanistan for many
years. More recently, the Council has closely
monitored and given the added push and support
whenever necessary to affirm the United Nations
central role in supporting the Afghan people’s efforts in
reinstating Afghanistan into the community of nations.
The Council stands ready, as it declared in resolution
1383 (2001), to support the interim institutions
established by the Bonn Agreement, as well as to
support the implementation of the Agreement itself.
Singapore
therefore
looks
forward
to
participating in the Council’s discussion to establish
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan:
a lean, unified and integrated United Nations structure,
designed to support the various processes outlined in
the Bonn Agreement.
It is clear from the participation in this open
debate, and from the various complementary tracks —
including the Tokyo donor’s conference, which made
an important contribution to securing the political
process — that the Security Council is but one forum
involved in the development of a global consensus on a
coherent and comprehensive long-term strategy to
bring peace to Afghanistan. Nonetheless, because of its

responsibility under the Charter and its operational
capability, the Security Council is perhaps best
equipped to harness the collective and sustained
political will to address the underlying causes and
dynamics of the conflict in Afghanistan and to help the
country’s transition from war to peace. This, of course,
does not preclude the Security Council from
collaborating closely with all relevant partners to
develop complementarity in our common endeavour.
With the help of the United Nations and the rest
of the international community, Afghanistan has made
huge strides in the right direction in many areas. The
first stage of the three-step Bonn process has made
headway in generating both domestic and international
legitimacy for the Afghan Interim Authority. There is a
growing sense of security in Kabul. The worst of the
humanitarian crisis has been averted. There is a steady
stream of Afghan refugees from neighbouring countries
and internally displaced persons returning home.
Nascent institutions have been re-established.
Singapore has pledged, in addition to humanitarian
assistance, a special five-year technical assistance
package to train Afghans to help the most vulnerable
groups in society, in particular women and children.
However, despite progress in all of these areas, there is,
as the Secretary-General noted, no room for
complacency. Simple events that would be taken for
granted in most parts of the world, such as Afghans
celebrating the new year on 21 March and 1.5 million
Afghan children returning to school last Saturday, hit
the headlines and made front-page news precisely
because of the depths to which Afghanistan had sunk.
Tensions bubble beneath the surface and
constantly threaten to reverse the fragile and tentative
progress that has been made. As we have learned from
so many conflicts around the world, in order to be
sustainable, any political or peace process must adopt a
comprehensive and coherent approach. This is
something that Singapore has long advocated, and it is
an issue to which Colombia also referred.
Elements of progress on the political,
humanitarian, reconstruction and security tracks are
mutually reinforcing. While it is not necessary for
progress on all of these tracks to proceed at the same
pace, a critical lag on one of them could seriously
jeopardize the entire process. In this regard, an urgent
and pressing issue, which the Secretary-General has
brought to our attention, is the security situation. We
are grateful to the United Kingdom for its leadership in

11

S/PV.4497

establishing the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF), as well as for the contribution of all the troopcontributing countries, which has brought a degree of
calm to Kabul. ISAF has provided a crucial anchor,
allowing the Afghan Interim Authority to extend its
influence, especially to the provinces and outlying
regions. However, while security and neutrality are
being maintained in Kabul, there have been worrying
reports of instability in other parts of Afghanistan,
especially in the crucial period leading up to the
emergency Loya Jirga.
As the recent activities of the international
coalition demonstrate, Al Qaeda and Taliban fighters
remaining in Afghanistan continue to pose a threat to
the peace process. Important efforts have been made to
establish an Afghan national army and police force.
However, stopgap measures might be needed in the
interim before both are brought to effective capacity.
The Security Council should therefore examine all the
instruments in its toolbox of actions to address this
important question. Calibrating international assistance
could be a powerful incentive for good behaviour.
However, carrots must always be backed up by strong
sticks. The Security Council must carefully examine
how best to avoid any major armed conflict and
provide security for the main transportation and trade
routes.
Even as the international community’s attention is
focused on Afghanistan, we should not forget the
interlinkages with the wider region. The generous
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts directed at
Afghanistan should therefore have a regional focus,
and should generate peace dividends for Afghanistan’s
neighbours, so that a vested interest in Afghanistan’s
stability can be developed. Similarly, it is important to
remember that Afghanistan is but one of the many
trouble spots in the world deserving of the world’s
attention and involvement. The big lesson of
Afghanistan is that the fate of a distant country can
have a global and catastrophic impact. The United
Nations and the international community at large must
therefore not repeat the mistakes of the past, but stay
the course in their efforts in Afghanistan and elsewhere
for the long term.
The President: I thank the representative of
Singapore for the kind words she addressed to me.
Mr. Aguilar Zínser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like, first of all, to express my Government’s

12

condolences in connection with the loss of life and the
other consequences of today’s earthquake, which struck
the Baghlan region of Afghanistan, in particular the
city of Nahrin.
I would like to express my Government’s
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council. Not only does your
presence bear witness to your interest in the situation in
Afghanistan, but it is a clear demonstration of the
serious approach and sense of responsibility of your
Government in participating in the work of the Security
Council.
My Government would also like to associate
itself with the satisfaction expressed by other members
of the Council about the progress that has been made in
recent months in the reconstruction effort in
Afghanistan, and we commend all of those who have
participated actively in that endeavour.
My Government believes, however, that the
message delivered by Ms. Louise Fréchette contained a
warning that we must heed. This is no time for
complacency, because the task ahead of the
international community and, in particular, the task that
lies ahead for the Afghan people, is extremely difficult
and complex. In this regard, two basic criteria must be
taken into account. The first is that the efforts of the
international community must be sustained. Past
experience in the case of Afghanistan shows that any
loss of sustained effort can give rise to a new cycle of
problems, which the international community
afterwards bemoans. The Security Council must thus
ensure that the reconstruction effort under way in
Afghanistan represents a commitment that must be
fulfilled — an effort that will involve tasks being
accomplished over time in a sustained fashion.
Secondly, my country believes that the task of
reconstructing Afghanistan is fundamentally one of
coordination among all international efforts by all the
nations and organizations that have expressed their
readiness to become involved. In this connection, we
fully agree with the comments made earlier by Ms.
Fréchette in identifying four major challenges that
must immediately be met in a coordinated and
concerted way. The first is, undoubtedly, the political
integration of Afghanistan through the Loya Jirga
process. We believe this to be the most vital task, on
which the success of all the other tasks depends.
Nothing can replace the will of the Afghan people

S/PV.4497

themselves in the reconstruction of their country, and
nothing can help them to express their will better than a
Government in which everyone can participate — a
representative Government with the capacity to ensure
that the rule of law prevails throughout Afghan
territory.
Undoubtedly, the second topic, which other
members of the Council have already referred to, is
security in the country. The immediate task is to
combine activities to demobilize combatants, form a
new Afghan military force that represents the national
interests, and form a national police whose peacebuilding efforts, my country wishes to emphasize,
should have as one goal the eradication of the
production and trafficking of narcotics. The production
of drugs greatly underlies much of the violence and the
sources of power in the interior of Afghanistan, and we
must make an effort not to lose sight of the issue of
combating the production and trafficking of narcotics
in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, we believe that it is essential to pay due
attention to humanitarian issues and not sidestep them.
Giving appropriate attention to refugees and displaced
persons will be a prerequisite for the stabilization of
the country and the advancement of the Loya Jirga
political process. It is fundamental that the Afghans
recover control over their own communities and that
they rebuild those communities in peace and achieve
reconstruction on that basis. This must be done with
full respect for human rights, promoting civil rights
and freedoms in Afghanistan, including the equality of
women, which is a very important element. We believe
that many difficulties lie ahead in the achievement of
these goals, and unfortunately there will be many
causes of frustration in the future.
Finally, we believe that all these measures must
also be part of great sustained efforts at economic and
social development through the appropriate use of
resources and the creation of national capacities in
order to make proper use of these resources.
All of these are fundamental tasks that are, above
all, in the hands of the Afghans themselves. I
emphasize that the international community cannot in
any way replace the will and the commitment of the
Afghan people regarding their own political process
and the reconstruction of their country. It is up to the
international community to motivate, support and lend

coherence and content to the efforts of the Afghan
people.
In this regard, the United Nations Mission — for
which a concrete proposal has already been made to us
by the Secretariat, to be reflected in a resolution that,
as the Ambassador of France has pointed out, is now
being prepared — must be designed with a very clear
idea of combining efforts and producing a real model
partnership among all the many agencies of the United
Nations system that are participating in the task of
reconstructing Afghanistan, so that in the short term
their work can be made more effective. That Mission
must also be inspired by the capacity and the skill of
the international community to transfer, as soon as
possible, all the development responsibilities to the
Afghan institutions that emerge as part of the economic
and social consolidation process. We hope that the
resolution being drafted will adequately reflect the
mandate for achieving these objectives.
May I conclude by emphasizing once again that
the reconstruction of Afghanistan will not be at all
easy. The present momentum augurs well. The Security
Council, therefore, must see to it that that momentum
is maintained.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mexico for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
My delegation welcomes your presence today, Sir, and
we thank you for presiding over today’s meeting. Our
thanks also go to Ms. Fréchette, Deputy SecretaryGeneral, for her briefing and her introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General.
Like other delegations, my delegation would like
to express its condolences to and solidarity with the
Afghan people, who have suffered great losses from
the earthquake.
In his report, the Secretary-General gives a full
analysis of the present situation in Afghanistan, and we
agree with that analysis. Since the signing of the Bonn
Agreement, the political process in that country has
gained headway, and there have been some important
changes in Afghan society. The Interim Administration
has made some important decisions and decrees since
its inauguration. The Special Independent Commission
is making is making preparations for the convening of
the emergency Loya Jirga. As a new school year has
begun, a large number of school dropouts — including

13

S/PV.4497

girls, who for the first time in six years are able to
receive education — are going back to school. The
situation of women has been improved.
Through cooperation with United Nations
agencies, the Governments concerned and relevant
non-governmental organizations, Afghanistan is setting
the stage for resuming agricultural activities and
starting economic reconstruction. It is improving its
relations with its neighbours. We congratulate the
country on the hard-won achievements that it has made
within a short period of time. The relevant agencies of
the United Nations system, and especially the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team,
have all made important contributions to achieving
progress in Afghanistan. We would like to express our
great appreciation to Mr. Brahimi and his team for their
effective efforts in difficult conditions for peace and
economic reconstruction in the country.
On the other hand, the overall situation,
especially the state of security in the country, remains
rather fragile. The eradication of the Taliban and Al
Qaeda remnants, the promotion of reconciliation and
confidence among different ethnic groups and putting
an end to the partition and military conflicts among
warlords and armed groups are all difficult challenges
facing the country. Especially with the coming of the
Loya Jirga, people are worried about the possible
outbreak of new conflicts triggered by the distribution
of power.
The Secretary-General’s report contains a
thorough analysis of the security situation. He has also
produced pertinent recommendations and observations.
We support those recommendations, including the
extension of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and its appropriate expansion.
In his report, the Secretary-General focuses on
the establishment of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and he details his
ideas about its mandate and structure. We believe that
given the current circumstances, it is necessary and
timely to establish such an integrated and unified
structure, which will synchronize the various assistance
initiatives of the United Nations, so that together these
combined initiatives will lend stronger support for the
peace process of Afghanistan. We support the
establishment of UNAMA and hope that the Security
Council will adopt a resolution on this, so that the

14

Assistance Mission can be established and put into
operation in a timely fashion.
As a neighbour of Afghanistan, China has always
been committed to the full settlement of the Afghan
question, and we actively support the Bonn process.
Since the establishment of the Interim Administration,
China has reopened its embassy in Kabul and has
provided emergency assistance. Our assistance in cash
has been disbursed, and the first shipment of material
assistance, which mainly consists of badly needed
medical equipment and school supplies, has arrived in
Kabul.
The Chinese Government is working in
coordination with the Interim Administration and with
Germany on the training of the Afghan police force.
China has signed an agreement with the Afghan
authorities to provide 20,000 police uniforms, 50,000
pair of military boots and other clothing. A
comprehensive assistance team assembled from more
than 10 departments in China has arrived in Kabul; it
will coordinate with its Afghan counterparts on
reconstruction assistance, and on the building of
hospitals. We are willing to work with other concerned
countries to make our own contribution towards the
economic reconstruction of Afghanistan.
The President: I thank the representative of
China for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Ngoh Ngoh (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by expressing Cameroon’s most
sincere condolences to the Afghan people on the
earthquake that has devastated the country, claiming
numerous victims.
My country also welcomes your presence among
us, Mr. Minister, which clearly illustrates the
importance that your country and the international
community attach to the situation in Afghanistan. I
thank Ms. Louise Fréchette for her comprehensive
briefing, and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2002/278).
My
delegation
welcomes
the
positive
developments in the political situation in Afghanistan,
in particular the gradual implementation of the Bonn
Agreement. The Interim Authority, established on 22
December 2001, has begun its work and has drafted a
road map for the development of Afghanistan. It has
also set up the Special Independent Commission for the
Convening of the Emergency Loya Jirga, whose work

S/PV.4497

is already well under way. The Interim Administration
has also begun to establish other institutions provided
for under the Bonn Agreement: the Civil Service,
Judicial and Human Rights Commissions. In that
regard, we welcome the organization of a national
workshop on human rights at Kabul on 9 March 2002,
in which the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights participated.
In spite of the praiseworthy progress made, the
fact remains that the security situation continues to be a
major source of concern. The existence of the vestiges
of Taliban and terrorist forces, clashes between
political and military factions, inter-clan and interethnic violence and banditry all make the situation
outside Kabul unstable and precarious. We welcome
the positive role played in Afghanistan by the
International Security Assistance Force. We support its
expansion to other major urban centres, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in paragraph
126 of his report, in order to reduce the chances of an
outbreak of hostilities among armed factions. We also
agree with the Secretary-General’s view on the need to
give priority to the creation of an effective Afghan
security force and a genuinely multi-ethnic and
apolitical Afghan army.
The humanitarian situation also continues to be
very worrisome, and has worsened with the recent
earthquake. We welcome the praiseworthy efforts that
have been made in this regard by United Nations
agencies, humanitarian organizations and various
countries. We call on donor countries to resolutely
support the Immediate and Transitional Assistance
Programme for the Afghan People, which includes
projects aimed at responding to urgent humanitarian
needs and addresses the country’s rehabilitation and
reconstruction.
My delegation supports the comments and
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report on the creation of a United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which would be
based on two pillars, namely, political affairs on the
one hand and relief, recovery and reconstruction on the
other. We believe the mission will play a very
important role, especially in ensuring coordination and
consistency among various activities. The General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council should
be included as needed in the establishment of this
structure.

My delegation would also like to pay tribute to
the activities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General
in
Afghanistan,
Ambassador
Brahimi, as well as to the entire United Nations team in
the field.
The President: I thank the representative of
Cameroon for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I thank
you for honouring us with your presence here today,
Mr. Minister, to preside over the Security Council.
I too wish to extend to the Afghan people the
condolences of the people of Bulgaria over the loss of
human life caused by the earthquake in the northeastern part of the country.
I thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
report on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2002/278). I also thank Ms. Fréchette for
introducing the report, and for giving us additional
useful information.
Bulgaria fully supports the statement soon to be
made by Spain on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore confine myself to a few brief comments in
my national capacity.
If the Afghan people’s prospects are brighter
today — something that was not expected only six
months ago — it is due in large part to the efforts,
determination and courage of the anti-terrorist coalition
led by the United States. The struggle against
terrorism, in which Bulgaria is proud to participate,
continues today. Its success will also determine the
success of reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan. The
United Nations has a full role to play in those efforts,
and we are very grateful to the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and
his team, for the remarkable work they have
accomplished thus far.
I would like, at the outset, to say that my country
fully supports the Secretary-General’s approach to the
structure of a United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and in particular his intention
to rely on the talents of the Afghan people for the work
of the mission.
We share the view that the question of security
remains of primary importance for the recovery of
Afghanistan. The International Security Assistance

15

S/PV.4497

Force (ISAF), which includes a Bulgarian contingent,
plays a key role in that regard. We believe that it would
be appropriate for ISAF’s mandate to be extended after
the initial six months. I take this opportunity to thank
the United Kingdom once again for its effective
leadership of ISAF. The extension of ISAF’s mandate
would be an expression of the international
community’s commitment to the Afghan people. In our
view, a careful approach is necessary with regard to
ISAF’s territorial expansion beyond Kabul. Such
expansion must take place in tandem with the process
of establishing an Afghan national army and police
force.
Bulgaria welcomes the progress made in the area
of human rights in Afghanistan. Among the events
organized in Kabul in March, we should like to note
the commemoration of International Women’s Day and
the first national workshop on human rights. It must be
pointed out, however, that disturbing information has
been reported concerning acts of ethnic intolerance and
repression that require increased vigilance on the part
of the international community.
We share the opinion of the Secretary-General,
expressed in his 28 February letter to Member States,
concerning the urgent need to deliver humanitarian aid,
which has been made even more important by
yesterday’s earthquake. In response to the appeal
launched, Bulgaria has done its best to speed the
humanitarian assistance that we pledged at the Tokyo
donor Conference in January.
The fight against drug trafficking is of major
importance for the future of Afghanistan. The
eradication of illicit drugs requires a coherent
programme that ensures the participation of the rural
population. My country is directly affected by that
traffic, because it lies directly on the path of illicit
drugs that flow from Afghanistan to users in Europe
and elsewhere.
Plans for recovery in Afghanistan require optimal
balance and coordination among the various forms of
bilateral and multilateral cooperation. My country is
mobilizing its own potential in order to participate
actively in Afghanistan’s recovery.
The President: I thank the representative of
Bulgaria for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Welcome to New
York and to the Security Council, Mr. Foreign Minister.

16

Your presence here, and that of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, who briefed us earlier this morning, are ample
testimony to Afghanistan’s importance for the United
Nations. I hope your presence and your conduct of this
meeting will help get that message out. We in the
British Mission are hearing it with particular
immediacy, as a member of our staff is currently
serving on temporary duty at the British Embassy in
Kabul.
I will be as brief as I can, not least because, as
Ambassador Tafrov has said, the representative of
Spain will be speaking later in the debate on behalf of
the European Union; I associate myself entirely with
that statement.
At the outset, I should like to associate myself
with all those who have expressed condolences to the
Interim Administration of Afghanistan and to the
Afghan people at the earthquake which has occurred in
the north of the country. As the Deputy SecretaryGeneral said, the Commander of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was asked by the
Interim Administration to assist and was authorized
earlier today to deploy a team to the disaster area. The
team includes representatives of ISAF and of the
United Nations Children’s Fund, as well as
representatives of the United Kingdom Department for
International Development. They deployed by
helicopter and are currently expected to report back to
donors and agencies at another meeting in Kabul this
evening. A follow-up donors’ coordination meeting
will take place tomorrow morning. Meanwhile, ISAF is
assisting the United Nations Development Programme
in establishing an operations room in Kabul.
We very much welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on Afghanistan (S/2002/278). It is very clear to
us that the Special Representative and his colleagues
have achieved a very great deal in a short space of
time. We will certainly work with the French
delegation to ensure that the draft resolution that they
are preparing is adopted quickly and expeditiously.
The formal establishment of a United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will be a
crucial element of support for the Bonn process, and
we very much welcome the unified, integrated structure
that is envisaged. It is important that the political and
reconstruction efforts of the United Nations be closely
coordinated, for, as the Secretary-General has pointed
out, good reconstruction helps political stability.

S/PV.4497

UNAMA should also aim to increase Afghan
capacity and should pursue a human-rights-oriented
and gender-sensitive approach. It is also important, as
others have said, that we not lose sight of the fact that
there is still a major humanitarian problem in
Afghanistan. Much will still depend on the efforts of
local Afghan staff, and we very much agree with the
Secretary-General that what they have done in
distributing aid thus far has been heroic. Fast and
effective delivery of aid is essential in giving the
Interim Administration the support it needs.
We also welcome the profile that the SecretaryGeneral has given to the problem of landmines and
unexploded ordnance. For some time, the United
Kingdom has been a strong supporter of the mine
action effort in Afghanistan, both in terms of finance
and otherwise. Mine action is sometimes overlooked in
dealing with the various crises on the Council’s
agenda, as our intervention in the 15 March debate on
the protection of civilians made clear. We anticipate
seeing forward planning to deal with the landmines
problem taking place within the wider framework of
reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan. Appropriate
sequencing and prioritization of mine clearance
activities will be important points in that respect.
We also hope that the Council’s deliberations on
the protection of civilians are very much borne in mind
as UNAMA is established. Here, I would like to point
to the importance, relevance and usefulness of the aidememoire and presidential statement adopted by the
Council on that occasion as we plan future work on
Afghanistan. It is very important that the protection of
civilians be mainstreamed into the activities of the
Secretariat and of the Council.
We would also be interested to hear whether the
Secretary-General foresees a role in Afghanistan for
the internally displaced persons unit of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
since there is very obviously a major problem with
regard to internally displaced persons. It would be very
helpful if Assistant Secretary-General Türk were able
to give us some indication of the Secretariat’s thinking
on that issue as he wraps up the debate.
It is also clear that the role of donor groups, such
as the Afghan Support Group, will remain very
important as the Council takes forward its work on
Afghanistan. We need to ensure that the work of the
Afghan Support Group can inform and strengthen the

emerging coordination and integration of structures in
UNAMA.
On the political side, it is essential that the
Emergency Loya Jirga be successful, with agreement
on a more representative Transitional Administration as
part of the Bonn process. We very much welcome the
support that the United Nations has given to the
Special Independent Commission for the Convening of
the Emergency Loya Jirga. That effort deserves wider
international support and recognition.
Security has, quite rightly, been a major issue in
the discussion thus far. ISAF has helped to maintain
security in and around Kabul. I am sure it is the sense
of all Council members that its mandate should be
extended beyond June, and I would like to send that
clear political message now. We also accept the
importance of spreading the ISAF effect outside Kabul,
although, as Ambassador Levitte and others have made
clear, expansion of the Force’s area of operation looks
difficult. It is clear that the future stability and
reconstruction of Afghanistan, and the return of
refugees, will depend on adequate security, so we will
need to give careful consideration to how the ISAF
effect might be encouraged to take root throughout the
country.
Training of the Afghan police and army will be
an essential element of this, and we need to help the
Afghan authorities with the development of their own
structures. The focus needs to be on security sector
reform, and we very much welcome the meeting of
interested donors next month, to which Ambassador
Cunningham and others have referred.
Finally, I should like to mention the problem of
narcotics, as Ambassador Wehbe and Ambassador
Aguilar Zínser have done before me. There is an urgent
need to tackle this problem. Recent announcements by
the Interim Administration have been a very positive
start. But the opium harvest begins next month. The
international community should provide financial and
political support to ensure that the poppy crop is
destroyed and that the product does not find its way
onto the international drugs market. This is a vital issue
for all of us, and I make no apology for leaving the
Council with that final thought.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to
me.

17

S/PV.4497

Mr. Ryan (Ireland): May I thank you, Mr.
Minister, for presiding over our deliberations today at
this public meeting of the Council on Afghanistan. I
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Louise Fréchette
for her comprehensive briefing.
The Government and the people of Ireland are
deeply saddened at reports this morning of another
devastating earthquake in northern Afghanistan. We
extend our condolences to the Afghan authorities and
people. We greatly appreciate the tremendous efforts
being made by relief agencies to provide rapid
assistance in the affected area.
My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.
Afghanistan, as the Secretary-General says in his
report before the Council, is a shattered society. At the
same time, the overwhelming majority of its people
desperately want peace, security and a new beginning.
It is a notable feature of the Secretary-General’s
assessment of the challenges now facing Afghanistan
that no effort is made to portray the situation as other
than it is: real promise matched by real opportunities,
but also accompanied by formidable and daunting
challenges for all of us — the people of Afghanistan,
the United Nations, the entire international community.
For this honesty and clarity of focus, Ireland is
deeply grateful to the Secretary-General and to Special
Representative Brahimi.
It may occasionally be possible to lose sight of
the magnitude of the United Nations achievement in
Afghanistan over recent months and of the scale of the
challenge which the United Nations and others
involved are now addressing. In this respect, one
statistic cited today by the Deputy Secretary-General
should confirm the reality to all of us. Over the coming
months, food assistance will be provided to a
staggering total of 8.8 million people. We can all be
genuinely gratified by the work of our SecretaryGeneral and his colleagues. The case of Afghanistan
surely proves that an effective, well-supported United
Nations is unquestionably indispensable to the world
today.
It is Ireland’s clear and unambiguous conviction
that the international community, the Council and the
United Nations as a whole must now assume our full

18

obligations in supporting the Secretary-General’s
proposals, which he has placed before us, on how the
United Nations can help the people of Afghanistan to
reweave the shredded fabric of their country. This is
not only because of implications for international peace
and security — although these, of course, exist — but
because we can truly do no less: it is now time, as
Abraham Lincoln said of the tasks facing America after
a terrible Civil War, to bind up a nation’s wounds. That
is what the proposals in this report of the SecretaryGeneral really amount to.
The Secretary-General rightly describes the
remarkable progress made in Afghanistan since the
Bonn Agreement and the subsequent establishment of
the Interim Authority, under the leadership of
Chairman Karzai. The Cabinet has been formed and
meets; work has substantially started on an interim
budget; and a back-to-school campaign is very happily
under way. Across the range of issues, in summary, a
good beginning has been made.
At the same time, the Secretary-General rightly
asks difficult questions regarding those elements that
may continue to seek to disrupt the building of peace in
Afghanistan. It is essential, as he says, that the
Government be able to extend its authority throughout
the territory of Afghanistan; that it enhance its
legitimacy; and that it reinforce the importance of
central authority, particularly in the lead-up to the
emergency Loya Jirga due to be convened by 22 June.
Just three months remain until the convening of
that forum. All in Afghanistan must cooperate with the
Loya Jirga Commission, which has performed
exceptionally well over the first two months of its
existence. We are, of course, concerned at reports of
attempts to exercise influence on the Commission, and
we hope that all will assist in ensuring that the
Commission can continue to operate unhindered. The
extension of real stability throughout the country will
be critical in this regard.
As the Secretary-General asserts, stability and
security are essential to the success of the activities of
the United Nations in Afghanistan. We appreciate the
ongoing efforts of those contributing to the
International
Security
Assistance
Force
in
consolidating the stability of Kabul and its surrounds,
permitting the return of substantial numbers of United
Nations and other relief and reconstruction personnel.
We hope the United Nations will gradually be able to

S/PV.4497

begin deployment of civilian personnel throughout the
country to address the still-acute humanitarian needs of
the Afghan population. We remain extremely
concerned at continued reports of insecurity hampering
the delivery of assistance in several parts of the
country.
The Secretary-General outlines in clear and
specific detail the proposed structure for the United
Nations presence in Afghanistan: the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). It is
imperative that the integrated mission approach, which
rightly builds on the lessons learned from past United
Nations operations, be given real shape on the ground.
It is also vitally important that all elements of the
United Nations system cooperate in every respect with
the Secretary-General and with Mr. Brahimi in making
this carefully calculated approach work with maximum
positive effect.
My delegation feels that the appointment, at the
regional level, of designated representatives of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General is
essential to the coherence and coordination of the
United Nations Mission. Special Representative
Brahimi has stressed throughout the past months that
UNAMA should have the lightest possible international
footprint. This is a strong phrase, and Mr. Brahimi is
surely right. For this reason, we hope that all efforts
will be made to ensure that the numbers of
international staff are kept to the effective minimum.
Afghan ownership of the relief and reconstruction
process is essential to the long-term stability of the
country.
I very much support the strong emphasis placed
earlier by Deputy Secretary-General Fréchette in the
area of human rights. Ireland is very concerned that
human rights should continue to be placed at the
forefront of United Nations efforts in Afghanistan. We
were extremely gratified by the human rights workshop
held earlier this month and attended by High
Commissioner for Human Rights Robinson, marking
International Women’s Day, and by the Afghan
working groups that have flowed from it.
We are enormously gratified by the profoundly
positive transformation of the circumstances of women
and girls in Afghanistan due to the successful
developments of the past six months.
Given the very substantive successes to date of
the Loya Jirga Commission, we look forward now to

early progress on the creation of a human rights
commission, which, as the Secretary-General notes,
will greatly enhance the United Nations capacity to
fulfil its role in developing a comprehensive human
rights programme.
The reports of continuing human rights abuses,
particularly directed at ethnic Pashtuns, remain
extremely worrying. Such abuses are unacceptable, and
the Interim Authority and all the elements that
compose its membership, as well as the United Nations
mission, must work together to ensure full adherence to
human rights norms. Human rights violations of this
kind can only contribute to a further refugee crisis and
serve to exacerbate instability in parts of Afghanistan.
By contrast, we are heartened by the very positive
reports regarding the return of refugees from Pakistan
and look forward to the extension of the facilitated
return programme to Iran next month.
The beginning of the new school year in
Afghanistan over the past few days is a powerful
symbol of how much has changed in Afghanistan in
just six months. We especially welcome the return of
women and girls to the education system, while
recognizing that almost all young Afghans have lost
several vital years of education. Though conditions
may remain less than ideal for some time, we
appreciate the tremendous work that has been done by
Afghan and international authorities and donors to
make possible the opening of so many schools in time.
Ireland, along with others, has made substantial
commitments to both relief and reconstruction efforts
in Afghanistan. Ireland contributed over €5 million in
2001 in humanitarian assistance. At Tokyo, we pledged
€12 million over 3 years in reconstruction assistance.
This is in addition to humanitarian aid. In 2002, we
expect to exceed the level of humanitarian aid given in
2001. We welcome the most recent statements by
Foreign Minister Abdullah confirming the commitment
of the Afghan Interim Authority to giving the highest
priority to drug control. The setting up of a drugcontrol unit in the Interior Ministry, as well as a State
high commission on drug control, are positive steps in
this regard.
The recommendations of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan are both wise and also carefully
considered in their detail. Ireland wholeheartedly

19

S/PV.4497

endorses them. We will play our full part in helping
bring them to reality. None of us can do any less.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ireland for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see presiding over the
Security Council the Foreign Minister of Norway, a
State that is not only a neighbour here in the Council,
but also a geographical neighbour of Russia with which
we have the friendliest of relations in the political,
trade, economic and other areas.
We join in the sincere condolences that have been
expressed to the people and Government of
Afghanistan over the earthquake in the northern parts
of that country, which took a great toll in human life.
We are grateful to Deputy Secretary-General
Louise Fréchette for her participation in today’s
meeting and for the report she introduced on the
situation in Afghanistan, which provides a good basis
for our discussion.
For many years, the Council considered the
situation in Afghanistan from the perspective of
confronting the Taliban regime, which supported
international terrorism, encouraged the production of
and illicit trade in narcotic drugs, destroyed the
historical and cultural landmarks of Afghanistan,
flagrantly violated human rights and unleashed an open
civil war against its own people. Fortunately, those
dark days in the lives of Afghans are over. Thanks to
the collective efforts of the international community,
including the United Nations, the power of the Taliban
movement has crumbled and the country has entered a
new era in its life.
Like many Members of the United Nations, we
eagerly looked forward to the proposals on the new
role to be played by the United Nations in
Afghanistan’s post-conflict recovery. We agree with the
assessment made in the Secretary-General’s report of
the current situation in the country and the stress
placed on the various fields in which the United
Nations is to play a leadership role.
We support the recommendation on the
establishment of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which, under the
guidance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, will be
responsible for ensuring that all forms of United

20

Nations assistance — political, human rights, law
enforcement, gender equality, emergency assistance,
economic rehabilitation and reconstruction — are
designed to restore a peaceful existence for the Afghan
people. The proposed structure and size of the Mission
is, on the one hand, to ensure effective international
participation in the recovery of Afghanistan and, on the
other, to provide first and foremost for the active
participation of Afghans themselves in the rebirth of
their country.
During the course of the recent visit to Moscow
of the head of the Interim Administration, Mr. Karzai,
and his negotiations with President Putin and Foreign
Minister Ivanov of Russia, we expressed our support
for the efforts of the Afghan authorities, under United
Nations auspices, to normalize the situation in the
country, to establish Government institutions at the
central and local levels and to restore social and
economic infrastructure. Emphasis was placed on the
importance of consistent compliance with the
provisions of the Bonn Agreement, which has become
the starting point for the formation of a stable Afghan
State and civil society. Following Mr. Karzai’s visit to
Moscow, 17 memorandums were signed on cooperation
between ministries and agencies, representatives of
Russian business circles and the Afghan side. These
memorandums relate fundamentally to the construction
and restoration of petroleum and gas infrastructure,
energy installations and the delivery of Russian
agricultural vehicles, industrial equipment and various
other types of machinery to Afghanistan.
We value the important role of the international
community and of Norway, heading the Afghanistan
Assistance Coordination Authority, in providing
humanitarian assistance to that country. In the course
of the first phase of humanitarian operations, Russia
has also made its own contribution, providing direct
assistance of over $12 million to Afghanistan. We are
now preparing a project for providing assistance during
the second phase.
We are pleased that peaceful life in Afghanistan
is gradually being established. Afghans have begun to
go to the movies and museums; girls and boys are
attending schools; hospitals are opening.
The political process is also gaining momentum.
Active preparations are under way for the pan-Afghan
Loya Jirga in June, which will elect a Transitional
Authority. We believe it important to emphasize once

S/PV.4497

again that, in preparing for convening the Loya Jirga, it
is essential to ensure that the representatives of the
Taliban and their followers have no place in future
State institutions.
The most serious problem today is the problem of
ensuring security in Afghanistan. We regularly receive
reports on emerging hotbeds of conflict, in which the
remnants of the Taliban and Al Qaeda terrorist groups
are active. We are especially concerned by the presence
of a large number of foreign mercenaries, including
Chechens, among the terrorists.
We attach great importance to the activities of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), in
compliance with the mandate adopted by the Security
Council in resolution 1386 (2001). We believe that
ISAF is playing an important role in ensuring calm in
Kabul, allowing the Interim Administration to work
effectively. Obviously, questions relating to the
activities of the Force under resolution 1386 (2001)
must be coordinated with the Afghan authorities. If its
mandate must be prolonged or expanded, the Security
Council must be willing to consider doing so, bearing
in mind the requests of the acting authorities in
Afghanistan.
In the long term, as we see it, we must emphasize
the establishment of a strictly Afghan army. In this
connection, we would point to the onset of training,
with the active participation of ISAF, for the first
battalion of the National Guard. We welcome
Germany’s readiness to lead the training of the Afghan
police force. In the course of the visits of the Ministers
of Defence and Internal Affairs of Afghanistan to
Moscow in February and March, the Russian side
expressed its readiness to develop military and
technical cooperation, with participation in the building
of national armed forces and the establishment of law
enforcement bodies.
Clearly, the establishment of armed forces and
issues pertaining to the recovery and reconstruction of
Afghanistan — as well as all other areas of
international cooperation in helping that country —
require the most serious coordination of effort. It
would be absolutely unacceptable for the territory of
Afghanistan to become the arena of rivalry,
competition or struggle among the various interests. If
that should occur, the opportunity for a peaceful
settlement in Afghanistan may once again be
squandered.

We trust that the United Nations will assume a
central role in establishing broad international
cooperation in post-conflict Afghanistan and in
coordinating all international efforts to assist that
country.
In this connection, we attach great significance to
UNAMA’s work. Russian specialists who have the
necessary experience are prepared to take a most active
part in the Mission’s activities. We have given our
concrete proposals relating to this area to the
Secretariat, and we expect operative replies to them.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Mr.
Minister, we are pleased to see you here in New York,
presiding over this important Security Council meeting
on the situation in Afghanistan, and I would like to
express my delegation’s appreciation for the serious
and effective way in which your delegation has led our
Council’s work this month.
On behalf of Guinea, I would also like to join
other delegations in conveying our condolences to the
Afghan people and Government following the
earthquake that took place in the northern part of the
country. We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for the presentation of the report and for the additional
information Ms. Louise Fréchette, Deputy SecretaryGeneral has given us.
I would also like to commend Mr. Jean Arnault
and Mr. Nigel Fisher on their appointments as Deputy
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
dealing respectively with political affairs and with
humanitarian and development affairs. We wish them
every success in carrying out their mission.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the
successes of the Interim Authority in the
implementation of the political process resulting from
the Bonn Agreement. This shows the Afghan people’s
determination to emerge from 23 years of a war that
has left deep scars. We encourage the Afghan
authorities to continue their actions in order to
conclude national reconciliation, democratization,
stabilization and restoration of the country. The backto-school campaign has registered significant progress,
with the return of children to schools in Kabul on 23
March. We followed this event with relief, especially
the return of young girls to school.

21

S/PV.4497

We would like to thank all of those who in
various forms have contributed to the establishment of
a basis for viable development in Afghanistan. We
expressly convey our gratitude to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) for the return of calm
to Kabul and its environs, as well as to those countries
that are ensuring training and equipment for the army
and police in order to consolidate the indigenous
security sector.
The success of the political process so
methodically embarked upon depends on the
restoration of a climate of security throughout the
country, for the continuation of acts of banditry and
rivalry among factions trying to achieve power, pockets
of resistance of the Al Qaeda forces and the Taliban
and repeated violations of human rights are all factors
that destabilize and threaten peace.
In my delegation’s view, the restoration of peace
and security should enable the Afghan authorities to
embark upon the reconstruction of the country, with the
assistance of the international community. In this
context, my delegation once again appeals to donors to
quickly make good on their pledges of contributions
made during the Tokyo International Conference. The
recovery of Afghanistan will depend largely on this, in
view of the immense and urgent needs felt in all areas.
If some difficulties have been overcome, as is
pointed out in the Secretary-General’s report, we still
note that the humanitarian crisis, particularly the food
crisis, remains a concern. In such circumstances, we
still need time and additional financial resources to
cope with this. In this connection, humanitarian
agencies in the field should mobilize further in order to
bring increased assistance to refugees returning from
neighbouring countries, as well as to displaced persons.
My delegation believes that these activities
should go hand in hand with the continuation and
broadening of the mine clearance programme. This
would facilitate the implementation of development
projects that would have a speedy impact to the benefit
of the people.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
encourage the rapid and effective establishment of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
This would be the best way to consolidate our
achievements and to continue the implementation of
the Bonn Agreement in a harmonious and integrated
manner.

22

My delegation would like to thank Ambassador
Levitte for the draft resolution now being prepared and
would like here and now to express our great interest in
this initiative.
The President: I thank the representative of
Guinea for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): First of all, on behalf of
my delegation, I express our deepest sympathy to and
solidarity with the Government and people of
Afghanistan for their losses suffered as a result of the
devastating earthquake in the north of the country.
Let me join others in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for the very comprehensive and detailed report
and Ms. Fréchette for her statement this morning.
Mr. President, your chairing this meeting today
signifies how much Norway takes to heart the peace
process in Afghanistan. We are very grateful for this.
Mauritius fully supports the recommendations
and observations made in the report. As observed in its
paragraph 116, we must set realistic and achievable
objectives, which we can attain only through genuine
commitment and determination. We agree that
Afghanistan now has the chance at least to be a country
at peace with its neighbours and itself. We must,
however, strive hard to translate this into reality.
Among other things, two important ingredients
for the success of reconstruction and rehabilitation
programmes are, first, the readiness of the Afghans
themselves to assume responsibility for rebuilding their
country, and, secondly, the continued effort and
commitment of the international community. Reading
through the report, my delegation has no doubt that
both ingredients are adequately expressed. We
appreciate the majestic strides made towards normalcy
and peace by the Interim Administration.
We also appreciate the preparatory work for the
convening of the emergency Loya Jirga, which would
pave the way for a broad-based multi-ethnic, multireligious representative assembly for a united
Afghanistan.
We support the proposal for a single mission, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which will bring all humanitarian and
reconstruction activities under one umbrella.
Like other delegations, we too believe that the
challenges of UNAMA will be multifaceted and

S/PV.4497

complex. Any shortcoming or delay in the
implementation process of the plan would reverse all
achievements. Complacency, procrastination and
unnecessary delays in extending the pledges of support,
financial or otherwise, would be a real impediment. We
must at all cost avoid the effects of the domino theory
and start putting all efforts into the reconstruction of
Afghanistan, which could take many, many years to
complete.
In this regard, we have just asked ourselves what
the priorities should be. I would like to enumerate four
of these. The first priority is security assurance. As the
report mentions in paragraph 45, the unstable security
situation in certain parts of the country remains a very
worrying factor. A stable and peaceful life cannot be
possible in a country where the threat of violence and
ethnic rivalry prevails. Recent incidents in Afghanistan
prove once again how dangerous it would be for the
international community to operate without assured
security. The Interim Administration is trying to build
its capacity for providing peace and security to the
Afghan people.
To meet Afghanistan’s immediate needs, my
delegation fully supports the proposal for an expanded
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), an
extended mandate as suggested by Chairman Karzai.
Any effort to address the immediate concerns of
Afghanistan without prioritizing the security aspect
would fail to produce the desired results.
Secondly, the reconciliation process should not be
delayed. The clashes between Afghan political leaders
in certain provinces are matters of real concern. No
political advancement towards a broad-based and
representative Government in Afghanistan will be
possible if ethnic rivalries are left unchecked. We must
ensure that the establishment of the emergency Loya
Jirga will give due consideration to ethnic and regional
differences and will help accommodate the parties in a
fair and equitable manner.
Thirdly, I would like to associate myself with the
comments of other delegations concerning the question
of narcotic drugs and drug trafficking, which should be
urgently addressed. The pre-assessment survey of
opium poppy cultivation conducted by the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme
confirms earlier indications that cultivation has
resumed at a relatively high level throughout the
country, after the considerable decline in 2001. As

terrorism exploits the drug trade, the international
community should take prompt action in this regard.
We welcome the decree passed on 22 December by the
Interim Administration banning the cultivation,
production, processing, use of and trafficking in illicit
drugs. We hope that the restructured Afghan police will
effectively deal with that problem.
Fourthly, with regard to humanitarian concerns,
no political process will succeed in bringing about
stability and peace in Afghanistan if the humanitarian
situation is not addressed in the right way and at the
right time. The plight of refugees and displaced
persons must be given the consideration that it
deserves. More than 20 per cent of the Afghan
population has been displaced; the poverty rate is
increasing at an alarming pace; food distribution to the
needy in the affected areas is uneven; and blatant
abuses of human rights, especially those of women and
children, have rent the social fabric of the country. My
delegation feels that it is high time for the international
community to focus its efforts on seeking appropriate
solutions to the humanitarian problems. We welcome
the proposal to confer responsibility for relief, recovery
and reconstruction activities in Afghanistan on the
Deputy Special Representative, to whom we wish
every success in this regard.
We believe that the international community’s
efforts in Afghanistan should lead to durable results. It
is the belief of my delegation that in our efforts we
must ensure that the Afghan reality is kept fully in
view.
Finally, I would like to stress that national
prosperity is furthered not by war but by peace, and
that it is not to be found in opposition or confrontation,
but in cooperation. It is a positive-sum game, in which
all the parties win. The partnership between the
international community and the Afghan people
represents a leap forward, and this process needs to be
further promoted in order successfully to realize
programmes to rebuild Afghanistan. We hope that
international multilateral and bilateral donors will
continue to contribute to the development of
Afghanistan.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritius for the kind words he addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Norway.

23

S/PV.4497

Like previous speakers, I would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Fréchette for her briefing
and for the comprehensive report. This debate clearly
shows that the United Nations is on the right track in
Afghanistan. I warmly commend the work of the
Special Representative and his staff. I can assure
Mr. Brahimi and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) of Norway’s
continued support, both in the Council and in the
Afghan Support Group, which we are chairing.
We only have to look back a few months to recall
the remarkable progress that has been achieved. We
have seen the fall of the Taliban, which, with its
repressive fundamentalism and its support for
terrorism, led Afghanistan into international isolation.
It was a regime which had no regard for the suffering
of millions of Afghans under its misrule.
In December, the Bonn Agreement created a
representative
interim
leadership,
which
is
demonstrating
its
responsibility
in
returning
Afghanistan to peace and stability. The Security
Council responded in January by lifting the sanctions
on the country, while tightening the measures against
the Taliban and Al Qaeda terrorists. Only three months
into the term of the Interim Authority, led by Hamid
Karzai, the future for the Afghan people looks more
hopeful than it has for a very long time.
Last weekend, at the start of the Afghan new
year, schools were reopened. Now girls too are allowed
to learn, and women allowed to teach, for the first time
in years. Kabul is peaceful, its people displaying the
dignity that the Taliban sought to deny them. In other
cities and areas around the country, too, life is
returning to normal.
I warmly commend the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) for the role it is playing.
Norway is proud to provide troops to ISAF under the
able command of the United Kingdom. We look
forward to continuing under a new leadership. Norway
will work with Council members to ensure the timely
extension of ISAF’s mandate beyond June.
A humanitarian disaster, which seemed to be
under way last autumn, has been averted. Relief aid is
now reaching most of the needy. Our thanks go to all
the women and men involved — often at great personal
risk — in this effort. As chair of the Afghan Support
Group, Norway will continue to work with other
donors, the United Nations mission and the Interim

24

Authority to improve the coordination of aid and to
increase access to remote areas.
Let there be no doubt: many challenges still lie
ahead. Terrorists and the Taliban still pose a threat to
the peace and the political process. The recent combat
operations conducted by coalition forces against Al
Qaeda supporters testify to this.
Norway is proud to provide personnel to the
counter-terrorism campaign in Afghanistan. We will
continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with the United
States and other coalition partners in fighting global
terrorism. We will work to ensure that Afghanistan
never again becomes a base for terrorists.
To succeed, the Interim Authority must extend its
influence beyond Kabul, to all parts of Afghanistan.
Public services must be improved. The Loya Jirga must
be supported. This will require increased international
assistance. More funds are needed for the Interim
Authority to pay salaries and to function as an
administration. Norway has paid $6 million to the
United Nations Development Programme trust fund.
We call on donors to help find the funds that
Mr. Brahimi has asked for.
Measures are needed also to ensure that the
security situation continues to improve. Norway is
contributing to the international efforts under way to
support the establishment of national Afghan police
and security forces. I welcome the lead taken by
Germany, the United States, the United Kingdom and
others in this regard.
Recovery and reconstruction must be undertaken
with a view to underpinning long-term prospects for
peace and political progress. Norway looks forward to
working with the Afghan authorities and donors,
including through the Implementation Group, to make
concrete and constructive use of the assistance pledged
at the Tokyo Conference.
As agreed at the Afghan Support Group meeting
in Geneva earlier this month, basic humanitarian
assistance and financing remain an immediate priority.
Much of the $40 million that Norway will provide this
year will be for relief aid.
The United Nations and its new, integrated
mission have a key role in the Bonn implementation
process in assisting the Afghan authorities and in
sustaining the progress achieved, not least with regard
to women’s rights and all the rights of the child.

S/PV.4497

Norway
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
proposal for a lean, integrated structure for UNAMA
and a strong coordinating role for the Special
Representative. The Afghanistan Support Group will
work with UNAMA to improve coordination, and with
multilateral and bilateral donors, non-governmental
organizations and the Afghan authorities. This must go
hand in hand with meaningful assistance at the local
community level. By using Afghan staff, UNAMA will
promote national capacity and ownership of the
process.
Continued, long-term commitment by the United
Nations and its Member States is needed to ensure that
Afghanistan remains firmly on the path to peace and
reconciliation and does not again become a haven for
terrorists. Constructive support, in particular by
neighbouring States, will be crucial. The Council will
do its part, next by adopting a resolution endorsing the
new United Nations Mission.
We look forward to seeing UNAMA operational.
Ultimately it is up to the Afghan leaders and people
themselves to create conditions for lasting peace and
development in their country. But the international
community can and must help.
I resume my function as President of the Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Spain. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia — the associated countries Malta
and Turkey, and the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA) countries belonging to the European Economic
Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align themselves with
this statement.
First of all, may I express the sorrow of the
European Union at the consequences of the terrible
earthquake that occurred in northern Afghanistan. This
is one more hardship for the Afghan people, which has
already suffered untold troubles. The European Union
has already sent initial humanitarian assistance in this
connection.
The past months have witnessed very important
events on the path towards the establishment of peace

and stability in Afghanistan through reconciliation and
a representative government, as well as in eliminating
the use of Afghan territory by terrorists and curbing
narcotics production and trafficking.
First, an agreement was reached by the Afghan
parties in Bonn on 5 December 2001, which constitutes
the basic road map for the political future of
Afghanistan. Secondly, there is the creation and full
deployment of the International Security Assistance
Force, known as ISAF, to which European Union
members are currently the major contributors. Last,
though not least, there was the Tokyo International
Conference
on
Reconstruction
Assistance
to
Afghanistan, co-chaired by the European Union.
In spite of these very positive events, enormous
challenges remain before the Afghan people can regain
a measure of normalcy. To name but a few, we can
mention the timely and full implementation of the
Bonn Agreement, the lack of security in wide areas of
the country, the dire humanitarian situation, the dismal
state of health and education, the situation of women
and children, and the very serious and extensive risk
arising from landmines. The European Union is
committed to helping the Afghan people to surmount
these problems and is ready to carry its share in
cooperation with neighbouring countries and the rest of
the international community.
The European Union has played and continues to
play a very important role in the current Afghan
process. Given that the United Nations has been
entrusted with the central coordinating role, the
European Union seeks to support and promote the
United Nations-led process and the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi. The European Union Special
Representative for Afghanistan, Mr. Klaus Peter
Klaiber, has a primary role in the coordination of
European Union efforts.
The European Union commends the SecretaryGeneral for the excellent report, which summarizes the
most significant developments for Afghanistan since
the signing of the Bonn Agreement and proposes a
structure for a United Nations presence in that country.
We appreciate the effort made in recent months by the
United Nations system under the guidance of the
Special Representative to bring together their efforts
and capacities so as to create a really integrated United
Nations mission in Afghanistan.

25

S/PV.4497

The European Union supports the proposed
mandate and basic operating principles for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
which provide for an integrated structure under the
authority of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and which will support the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement by the Afghans
themselves with the assistance of the international
community. The proposed overall structure seems to be
well thought out and focuses on two main goals:
building a strongly coordinated United Nations
presence and avoiding dependency on international
staff, so as to encourage development of domestic
capacities.
However, in order to meet the objective of a light
international footprint, UNAMA structures should take
into account already existing initiatives in order to
avoid duplication of work. The European Union
welcomes the proposed structure of lead sectoral
agencies for the implementation of humanitarian and
reconstruction activities by the United Nations family
in Afghanistan. We appeal for a strong and effective
coordination and collaboration in the field. In this
respect, the European Union would welcome a
memorandum of understanding to be signed between
the lead agency and the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, in which the roles and
responsibilities of the lead agency concept would be
spelled out more in detail. The European Union is
ready to support and assist UNAMA.
I will now turn to the most pressing issue in
Afghanistan today, which is security. Thanks to the
efforts of the international community, Afghanistan is
no longer a safe haven for terrorists, and we have been
able to avoid a humanitarian disaster. However, these
developments achieved thus far with enormous effort
are not guaranteed.
Security across Afghanistan is an essential
element for achieving the goals set forth in Bonn. We
support the early extension of ISAF beyond its current
six-month mandate. Aside from their participation in
ISAF, European Union’s member States are
contributing and will continue to contribute to the
creation of Afghan security institutions, including the
development of a national army and an independent
police force. In this regard, the European Union
profoundly regrets the tragic loss of five young
nationals of two of its member States whose lives were

26

given in the effort to improve the security situation in
Afghanistan.
The European Union underlines the importance of
an effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme for reducing the risks that
stem from the existence of numerous informal armed
groups and bringing their members into civil society.
Furthermore, the European Union considers the
formation of a national army of the utmost importance.
We welcome the work ISAF has initiated to train the
first battalion of the Afghan National Guard. The
development of national and local police and an
effective justice system are also essential components
in creating a stable and secure environment.
Concerning the political situation, the main goal
should be the punctual implementation of the measures
agreed to in Bonn. The emergency Loya Jirga will
inaugurate the next major phase of the path towards a
fully representative, multi-ethnic and democratic
Afghan political system. It is essential that the
selection process take place in a secure and neutral
political environment. The European Union will
continue to support this process and will seek to ensure
that it is free from intimidation or any other form of
pressure or
manipulation. Through important
contributions of several of its member States and of the
European Commission, the European Union is helping
to finance the emergency Loya Jirga.
The European Union reiterates its firm support to
the Interim Authority of Afghanistan. We call upon the
current Interim Authority, future administrations and
Afghan leaders to support and fully implement the
Bonn Agreement in order to ensure respect for the rule
of law, democracy, pluralism and the human rights of
all, including those of women, children and all ethnic
groups. The commitment entered into in Bonn to hold
free and fair elections within two years of the
convening of the Loya Jirga should be strictly adhered
to.
The European Union believes that Afghanistan
should be guided by the following generally accepted
principles enshrined in international instruments to
which Afghanistan is party: responsible and
representative Government with a mandate periodically
renewed by the Afghan people; commitment to
political pluralism; respect for human rights and the
rights of minorities, without discrimination on the basis
of ethnicity, religion, gender or any other distinction;

S/PV.4497

commitment to maintaining friendly relations with
neighbouring countries and to the prevention of the use
of Afghan territory for subversive or terrorist purposes
or activities; and commitment to poppy eradication and
to the prevention of drug trafficking.

major donors, international financial institutions and
United Nations agencies. In that regard, the
Afghanistan reconstruction Implementation Group can
play a coordinating role in the reconstruction of
Afghanistan until a consultative group is established.

All of those principles should be properly
reflected in the future constitution to be adopted within
the time frame agreed in Bonn. The European Union is
ready to maintain an active dialogue with the Interim
Administration and successor Governments in order to
assist in attaining the political objectives laid down in
Bonn and to ensure Afghan ownership of the political
process and the reconstruction of the country.

There is an acute need for continued humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan under effective United
Nations coordination. The European Union will
support the efforts of the humanitarian agencies on the
ground. As regards donor coordination, the Afghan
Support Group could contribute to bridging the gap
between humanitarian assistance and the beginning of
assistance for the country’s reconstruction. Given that
the chairman of the Support Group also holds a vicechairmanship of the Implementation Group, the risk of
problematic transition gaps is reduced even further.

The reconstruction of Afghanistan is essential to
attaining the objectives set out in Bonn. The European
Union is committed to that goal and, through the
assistance provided by its member States and by the
European Community, is one of the leading partners in
both humanitarian and reconstruction assistance to
Afghanistan. The European Union co-hosted a
successful Afghan Reconstruction Steering Group
meeting in Brussels in December 2001, which paved
the way for the Tokyo Conference. It is pertinent to
recall that the co-chairs’ summary of conclusions of the
Tokyo Conference stressed the idea that reconstruction
assistance will be conditional upon all Afghan parties
positively contributing to the process and goals agreed
in Bonn.
Through contributions announced at Tokyo and
thereafter, the European Union will provide 600
million euros, which represents 30 per cent of the total
announced pledges for the year 2002. Similarly, the
European Union has pledged 2.3 billion euros for the
period 2002-2006, covering 23 per cent of the needs
identified by the joint assessment by the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.
This, in turn, represents about 45 per cent of the total
announced
commitment
of
the
international
community.
An accountable Afghan administration and
effective donor coordination are imperative for the
reconstruction process to succeed. Afghanistan needs
accountable, transparent and efficient authorities.
Donors can support them through coordination that
follows the procedures agreed to in Tokyo. The
Presidency of the European Commission, in its
capacity as co-chair of the Steering Group, will
endeavour to achieve close coordination with other

Respect for human rights is essential for
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence among ethnic
groups. The European Union will assist in establishing
national and local structures to ensure respect for
human rights without discrimination. The European
Union believes that Afghan women must enjoy equal
access to education and employment, have the
opportunity to participate without discrimination in the
political and social life of their country and be able to
play a central role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
The European Union calls on the United Nations and
on all of Afghanistan’s partners to support relevant
national initiatives and to fully integrate gender
considerations in their political dialogue and
reconstruction programming.
Successful reconstruction of Afghanistan and the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement will depend to
a large extent on the cooperation and commitment of
neighbouring countries. In that regard, the European
Union is ready to take into account this regional
dimension.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that peace,
security, stability and reconstruction in Afghanistan are
interdependent issues. They should be addressed first
and foremost by the Afghan people, but the
international community should not falter in its
support. The European Union stands ready to make its
contribution to that common task.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Pakistan. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

27

S/PV.4497

Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I too would like to begin
by conveying to our Afghan brothers, on behalf of my
Government and the people of Pakistan, our profound
grief and sympathy over the tragic loss of life and the
material devastation caused by the earthquakes in the
northern part of Afghanistan, which have also affected
north-western parts of Pakistan. I want to tell my
brother Ambassador Ravan Farhâdi, present here, that
we in Pakistan share his grief and pain, just as we have
always felt the pain and grief of Afghanistan in its
difficult moments. We know that this is a moment of
supreme grief for his people. The Government and the
people of Pakistan would like to do whatever they can
to help their Afghan brothers.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Fréchette, who I understand
made a comprehensive presentation earlier this
morning on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/278).
We are delighted to see you in the Chair this
morning, Mr. Minister, presiding over an important
meeting of the Security Council on a subject that has
been haunting us all for decades, and which today
affects us all and must be the focus of the priority
attention of the international community in terms of
chasing away the ghosts of violence and misery that
have been haunting that unfortunate and war-ravaged
country.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi, to restore peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We also welcome the continuing efforts and
engagement of the United Nations in facilitating the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement.
In this regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
proposal, contained in his report, for a two-pillared
structure for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) — first, to facilitate the
political process in Afghanistan, and secondly to assist
in the humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
reconstruction of that war-ravaged country. We agree
with the concept of what is described by the SecretaryGeneral as a “light expatriate ‘footprint’” (S/2002/278,
para. 98) and with its aim to bolster Afghan capacities.
We hope that the United Nations will continue to play
its role in helping the Afghans find home-grown
solutions to their problems and bring their country back

28

into the comity of nations as a responsible and lawabiding State.
In trying to assist in Afghanistan’s political,
humanitarian and economic recovery, we must draw
lessons from the country’s tragic past. Not only is
Afghanistan one of the most difficult challenges the
international community has faced in recent times, it
also represents a case in which a country so much in
need of international support and assistance was
neglected, isolated and left in the lurch, mercilessly
rendering it a wilderness that attracted runaway
dissidents and terrorists from all over the world.
Today, however, is not the time for remorse or for
remaining frozen in the past. We need a new beginning.
Unusual situations always warrant unusual and fresh
responses and approaches. As we seek to rebuild
Afghanistan, we must be guided by the need not only
to rectify the mistakes of the past, but also to avoid
repeating them. History always provides the most
relevant lessons.
Now that the international community has
committed itself to healing Afghanistan, we hope that
it will not walk away from the country again. It must
remain engaged in Afghanistan and in the region. A
country ravaged by war has to be rebuilt; a society torn
by conflicts has to be healed. All this requires
commitment and perseverance. Afghanistan must never
again be allowed to become a breeding ground or
haven for terrorists. The long-term solution of the
problem of terrorism in Afghanistan lies in the
restoration of peace and stability and in the
reconstruction of the country. No amount of financial
resources alone would be sufficient to accomplish
those tasks. The international community must honour
its obligations, not only for the benefit of the people of
Afghanistan, but also for its own greater good.
The time has now come to break the vicious
circle of the past. Humanitarian relief and
reconstruction plans must be aimed at genuinely
addressing the causes and consequences of the
instability and violence which the Afghan people have
endured for decades. Every economic plan, whether for
relief or for reconstruction, must generate job
opportunities and employment for the common Afghan
people — those who are living in the country. Their
attention must be diverted from misery and violence to
peaceful and constructive activities.

S/PV.4497

Extensive blueprints have been prepared by the
regional organization known as the Economic
Cooperation Organization. My friend Ambassador
Farhâdi is well aware of the goals and objectives of
that organization, which I had the privilege to serve as
its Secretary-General for four years. Those blueprints
could be utilized in converting this landlocked county
into a bridgehead connecting Central Asia with the
warm waters of the Arabian Sea.

Without security, there can be no peace in
Afghanistan, no unity, no stability, no humanitarian
relief, no reconstruction or recovery. I think that this is
a point that everyone appreciates, understands and
agrees with. Even the Secretary-General has made this
point.
The
Bonn
Agreement
stipulated
the
establishment of a United Nations mandated force for
the maintenance of security in Kabul as well as in other
areas of the country.

Afghanistan has the potential to be the shortest
transit route between the Central Asian States and the
rest of the world. In due course, road, rail and gas and
oil pipeline projects — which are already there —
passing
through
Afghanistan
could
bring
unprecedented economic well-being to the country.
Perhaps this would require various consortiums to be
constituted by the international community. No politics
should be involved in this effort; it is a genuine need of
the Afghan people, and the world at large would
benefit from such economic development.

While we support the deployment of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Kabul, we feel that its size and scope must now be
expanded and extended to all of the country, especially
its major urban centres. ISAF, in the absence of a
proper Afghan security force, is the only option we
have at the moment, and restricting it only to Kabul
would, in effect, defeat the very purpose for which it
was established.

Here I must caution that any attempt sponsored or
exploited by external vested interests to pit
Afghanistan against any of its neighbours or to deepen
its ethnic or sectarian divide would only prolong the
agony of its people. We must guard against any such
temptation. It is needless to emphasize that an
Afghanistan at peace with itself and with all of its
neighbours is the surest safeguard of its own future
security, as well as that of the entire region.
Security remains the most pressing issue at this
point in time. It is the very prerequisite for the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement and is
imperative for a stable political and economic future in
Afghanistan. Lack of security has been a major
hindrance to stability in the past and continues to
threaten peace today. The Afghan people have suffered
far too long at the hands of ambitious warlords.
Equally, nature has not been fair to the Afghan people;
the country has suffered frequent calamities.
The international community must therefore
ensure that the old rivalries and hatreds which once
wreaked havoc across Afghanistan are not given a
chance to obstruct the establishment of a stable
political dispensation in that country. Similarly,
humanitarian relief must come forth generously to
alleviate the misery of the Afghans who are either
displaced internally or who have been forced to leave
their country for reasons beyond their control.

In addition to the efforts of the international
community to help them, we hope that all Afghan
factions and groups will avail themselves of this unique
opportunity to extricate their country from the abyss in
which it has remained for the last two decades. The
success of the Bonn Agreement will depend on how the
Afghan leaders acquit themselves of rebuilding their
country through a mutual spirit of accommodation.
Tribal and ethnic structures and traditions will, of
course, remain of special relevance in any future setup. While the world owes the Afghans a helping hand,
in the larger measure and in the ultimate analysis, it is
they themselves who will make or mar the future of
their country, and they recognize this.
Pakistan, for its part, remains committed to
continuing to play its role in assisting the recovery and
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We have assured the
Afghan Interim Administration, under the leadership of
Chairman Hamid Karzai, of our full support and
cooperation. Over the last two decades, Pakistan has
been providing shelter to millions of Afghan refugees,
without any outside assistance. In addition, we have
recently pledged another $100 million worth of
assistance for Afghanistan’s immediate rehabilitation
and reconstruction needs. No country, other than
Afghanistan itself, has suffered more from the conflict
and violence in Afghanistan than Pakistan, and no
country could have a greater stake in the return of
peace and stability to Afghanistan than Pakistan. My
country, like the rest of the international community,
hopes that this new era will bring positive changes to

29

S/PV.4497

Afghanistan. We hope that the efforts of the United
Nations in Afghanistan will truly contribute to the
achievement of peace, security and development in that
country, which needs these so badly.
Finally, I need not emphasize again that this time,
the international community must not walk away from
Afghanistan, as it did in the past. It must demonstrate
the political will and the determination to engage and
help the Afghan people in rebuilding peace and the
economy of their country, and this time the United
Nations must be an effective instrument of relief and
development in Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General is correct when he says in
his report that Afghanistan is a shattered society. It will
certainly take a long time to heal the wounds left by 23
years of war. The process of healing has started and
must not be allowed to reverse itself. This requires
from all — from the Afghans themselves as well as
from the international community — a continued
commitment and determination to stay the course.
Afghanistan now has the chance at least to be a country
at peace with its neighbours and with itself.
The President: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): At the outset, allow me
to express my Government’s sincere condolences to
those affected by yet another earthquake, the one that
struck northern Afghanistan last night. We are
receiving disturbing information — that thousands may
have died and many thousands more have lost their
homes. Urgent assistance is needed to help the victims.
We welcome the fact that the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has already
convened a meeting with United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations in Kabul, with the aim
of assisting the Interim Administration.
At the midpoint of the six-month term of the
Interim Authority of Afghanistan, and with the
Secretary-General’s comprehensive report issued last
week, we have a sufficient basis for reviewing the
progress made thus far and for considering ways to
proceed henceforth.
I am happy to note today that last Saturday, as the
result of the successful “back to school” campaign,
over 1 million Afghan children have gone back to
school, many of them for the first time in six years.
Looking back over the three and a half months since

30

the Bonn Agreement was signed, we cannot but note
that a number of significant achievements have been
made. The Interim Authority has been established; the
Loya Jirga Commission is up and running; the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has
been deployed; and the Tokyo Conference was held
successfully, as were national conferences, with the
participation of regional commanders and governors. It
is also important to note that salaries have been paid to
the civil servants of the central Government and that
salary payments are on the way for local officials.
The fact that so much progress has been made in
this short period towards the restoration of peace and
stability is indeed extraordinary, but the situation in
Afghanistan is still fraught with grave difficulties. It is
therefore necessary to continue our efforts well into the
foreseeable future so as to ensure that Afghanistan will
be able to pursue its course of development in a
peaceful and stable environment. In this context, allow
me briefly to touch upon a few points which Japan
believes to be of particular importance.
On the political front, the next important step is
the convening of the emergency Loya Jirga. We
warmly commend the accomplishments made so far by
the Loya Jirga Commission, particularly its successful
visits to the regions. A number of additional needs will
emerge as the convening of the Loya Jirga approaches,
and the timely initiatives taken by the Governments of
Germany, the United Kingdom and other countries to
support this process are much appreciated.
It is important for all parties to remind
themselves that the emergency Loya Jirga will mark
only the midpoint in the process leading to the
establishment of a legitimately elected Government.
Key words for the Loya Jirga should be compromise
and tolerance, with all parties working together to
establish an effectively functioning Transitional
Authority that is capable of carrying the country
through the next phase of the Bonn process.
It is essential to ensure that the recovery and
reconstruction process continues to have a positive
impact on the political process. In this regard, all
parties need to be reminded that, as stated in the cochairs’ summary of conclusions of the Tokyo
Conference,
“assistance will be conditional on all Afghan
parties’ positively contributing to the process and
goals agreed in Bonn.”

S/PV.4497

On the other hand, we are beginning to detect a
certain level of frustration in Afghanistan at the current
pace of implementation of the pledges and
commitments. The donors and United Nations agencies
must do their part by rapidly implementing their
assistance in a strategically coherent and coordinated
manner so that the people of Afghanistan can tangibly
feel the will of the international community. While I
am happy to note that some concrete results are starting
to emerge, as exemplified by the “Back to School”
campaign led by the United Nations Children’s Fund,
we will need to strengthen our efforts so as to continue
producing such results. In this connection, the
Implementation Group meeting to be held in Kabul on
10 and 11 April under the chairmanship of Finance
Minister Amin Arsala will be an important opportunity
to coordinate our assistance to Afghanistan.
For its part, Japan has been making steady
progress in the disbursement of the $250 million that it
pledged in Tokyo for 2002. As introduced by UnderSecretary-General Prendergast in his statement to the
Council two weeks ago, Japan has funded the United
Nations Development Programme’s Recovery and
Employment Afghanistan Programme, designed to
provide employment for over 20,000 people in labourintensive public works projects in Kabul. Japan is the
single largest contributor to the “Back to School”
campaign. Other recent contributions include $20
million for demining activities and $12 million for
basic medical equipment, medicine and other healthrelated items. I urge Council members to refer to the
fact sheet attached to the distributed text of my
statement for a more comprehensive list of Japan’s
contributions as of March 2002.
I have touched upon two important aspects of the
situation in Afghanistan: the political process, on the
one hand, and recovery and reconstruction, on the
other. Needless to say, neither of these processes can
proceed without the provision of nationwide security.
In this regard, we thank the countries participating in
ISAF, especially the United Kingdom for its leadership,
and welcome the progress made so far in the training of
the Afghan military and police. We take note of the
request made by Chairman Karzai for the expansion of
ISAF and agree with the Secretary-General that,
whatever form of international security assistance is to
be provided, speed is of the essence. I wish to add my
voice to those who are asking the Council for its early
examination and its determined action.

Before I conclude, allow me to reaffirm Japan’s
support for the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative as they pursue their mandate in
Afghanistan. In this context, we hope that the Security
Council will act soon so that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will be established
in a timely manner.
Lastly, let me appeal to the people of Afghanistan
to continue their efforts to produce concrete results on
both the political and reconstruction fronts, which are
also necessary in order to sustain the willingness of the
international community to lend its support. I say this
not as a critic, but as a committed friend of
Afghanistan. All of us here at the United Nations know
how difficult it is to sustain international attention, and
this unique opportunity to help Afghanistan develop as
a stable and prosperous country must not be
squandered.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Australia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): Let me at the outset
welcome you, Sir, to New York and congratulate you
on the skill with which Norway, Ambassador Kolby in
particular, has guided the work of the Security Council
this month. Let me at the outset also associate myself
and the Government and people of Australia with the
expressions of regret from our colleagues today at the
appalling natural tragedy which has occurred in
Afghanistan. Ambassador Farhâdi has the sympathy
and support of all Australians.
It is very timely and relevant to hold a meeting on
Afghanistan and to do so in a format that allows for the
views of interested Member States to be heard. We all
have a stake in seeing Afghanistan recover and we all
have a responsibility to do what we can to help.
The Secretary-General’s report presents a
comprehensive picture of the situation in Afghanistan
and the challenges ahead. Australia agrees with and
welcomes the thrust of the report. We would like to
draw out three aspects which we feel will be important
to the success of the United Nations involvement in
Afghanistan.
First, as to the issue of security, there is for now
no greater risk to Afghanistan’s recovery than a
possible lapse back into violence. Ridding Afghanistan
of the terrorist threat posed by Al Qaeda and Taliban

31

S/PV.4497

fighters remains the first priority. There can be no true
security in Afghanistan, and indeed beyond, until this
is achieved.
Unfortunately, this of course is not the only
threat. The impulse in Afghanistan to resort to violence
to achieve political and other objectives remains
dangerously real. This impulse can be and is being
dampened by the external military presence, but such a
presence is not the long-term answer. Ideally, one
might want to see the International Security Assistance
Force
expanded
numerically
and
extended
geographically. This is to be encouraged, as is an
extension of its mandate beyond the initial six-month
period, but planning also has to be based on realistic
expectations.
Consequently, the responsibility of Afghan
leaders to achieve political progress, as set out in the
Bonn Agreement, is all the greater. The successful
convening of the emergency Loya Jirga must be
pursued with utmost vigour. The risk of a return to
violence is inversely related to the authority and
legitimacy that the Loya Jirga and Interim
Administration achieve. Political progress is also
needed to underpin a unified national military.
Afghanistan’s neighbours, including through the “sixplus-two” group, can help foster a benign security
environment.
This brings me to my second point, and it is this:
political legitimacy does not emerge in a vacuum. It
requires resources and the intelligent deployment of
resources. The Tokyo Conference demonstrated the
willingness of the international community to support
Afghanistan. For its part, Australia has pledged over 40
million Australian dollars. We have also made a
contribution to the Afghan Interim Administration
Fund.
While the international support is welcome, it is
important that funds be made available expeditiously
and that programmes be coordinated. We therefore
fully support the Secretary-General’s intention for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to have a unified, integrated structure under
the authority and leadership of Mr. Brahimi. It will be
important, too, that political objectives and relief,
recovery and reconstruction activities be mutually
supporting. All United Nations agencies need to work
towards common goals.

32

International assistance should build up the
strength and authority of Afghan institutions and not
substitute for them. UNAMA should therefore be a
lean operation with a light footprint and with a
decentralized structure to support regional activities.
The ultimate yardstick of UNAMA’s success will not
be what it has done, but what it has helped Afghans —
including Afghan civil society and the private sector —
to do.
The third point I want to make also relates to
resources and legitimacy, but from a different
perspective.
The efforts of the international community can
and will be undermined if illegal sources of funds are
available to those who do not accept the authority of
the Afghan State. For this reason, among others, the
fight against the production and trafficking of illicit
drugs needs to be a very high priority. We welcome the
intention to build a strong drug-control unit in the
Afghan police. We also encourage the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to work closely
with the Interim Administration.
Alternative sources of income need to be found
quickly to avoid a resurgence of criminal activity. Aid
needs to be creatively designed and speedily delivered.
Reconstruction must proceed together with relief and
recovery. The role of the private sector, small and
medium-sized enterprises and traditional trading
capabilities should be emphasized.
Finally, it must be said that no durable peace,
reconciliation and development is possible without
explicit attention to the rights and special needs of
Afghan women and children. These considerations
must be woven into all of UNAMA’s activities. Women
should be fully involved in all decisions about
Afghanistan’s future. Consistent with resolution 1325
(2000), a gender perspective should inform
Afghanistan’s post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding.
We Australians have no illusions about the
complexity of the task of rebuilding Afghanistan. The
Secretary-General’s report does, however, provide a
realistic basis for planning how best the United Nations
can contribute.
The President: I thank the representative of
Australia for his kind words.

S/PV.4497

The next speaker is the representative of India. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Sharma (India): Thank you, Mr. President,
for accommodating me in the forenoon portion of
today’s Council meeting. We welcome you to the
Council and convey our deep appreciation of the
contribution of Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby and his
team to the work of the Council. Today’s meeting is
timely and, under your presidency, most appropriate, as
Norway has provided valuable assistance for
Afghanistan. We should also like to congratulate
Mexico on last month’s presidency and on having
brought greater transparency to the work of the Council
by holding open briefings by the Secretariat on issues
of importance, including Afghanistan.
We convey our heartfelt condolences and
sympathy to the people of Afghanistan and to the
Interim Administration for the terrible loss of life and
devastation in the tragic earthquake that befell their
country yesterday.
On 22 December 2001, when the Interim
Administration of Chairman Karzai took charge, the
challenges confronting Afghanistan were many, and
each was daunting and formidable by itself. Among
those challenges were: to provide security without a
national army or police for a people which had not
known peace for decades; in a landscape of ruin, to
provide some of the bare minimum public services that
any society expects from its Government; to provide
humanitarian assistance to poverty-stricken areas
devastated by war and drought; to reconstruct a country
utterly shattered by decades-long conflict; to heal the
deep wounds of the past; to promote national
reconciliation; and to restore kinship.
The Interim Administration has just completed
100 days. So much was expected of it, and quite
remarkably, it has accomplished so much in so little
time, with so few resources. It is a vindication of the
faith reposed by the international community in the
Interim Administration and in the overwhelming
yearning of the Afghans to break from the recent past
and to move towards a future full of promise and hope.
It is a manifestation of the indomitable spirit for which
the Afghans are justly known.
However, no one is in doubt that the Interim
Administration has only just taken the first steps in a
long and arduous, but fulfilling and rewarding, journey.

The Taliban and Al Qaeda, the twin tormentors of
Afghanistan, are down but not out. As recent events in
Afghanistan have amply demonstrated, those forces of
darkness are still there, hidden in caves and crevasses,
lying low and waiting for an opportunity to strike back.
Collectively, the international community has paid a
very heavy price for allowing those malevolent forces
to seize and dominate Afghanistan. Those forces can
have no place in Afghanistan or anywhere else. They
have to be extirpated at the root in the interest not just
of Afghanistan but also of the countries in its
neighbourhood and of the international community.
This is a collective imperative and obligation from
which we cannot turn away, no matter how long it
takes or how demanding it may become.
As clearly brought out by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2002/278), the security situation,
particularly outside Kabul, remains a cause of concern.
While the Interim Administration is resolutely trying
gradually to re-establish a sense of security, it lacks the
resources, particularly a trained and well-equipped
police and military force. Until such time as the Interim
Administration acquires those resources, it requires and
has requested international assistance. In January, in
this very Chamber, Chairman Karzai appealed to the
Council to expand and extend the mandate of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). While
we recognize that this is a decision first and foremost
of the members participating in ISAF, the Council
should bring its persuasive powers to bear on them, as
must the international community as a whole, to
convince them that this is a calling from which they
cannot, and should not, turn away.
It is encouraging to note the steps being taken by
the Interim Administration, in collaboration with the
international community, to train a national army and a
modern police force for Afghanistan. The importance
of strengthening the capacity of the Interim
Administration to build an indigenous, professionally
trained security apparatus cannot be over-emphasized.
In fact, it is also intrinsic to the exit strategy for the
international security presence in Afghanistan.
The timely nomination of the Special Independent
Commission for the Convening of the Emergency Loya
Jirga and the work it has carried out in the last 50 days,
including its consultations with a cross-section of the
Afghan population — not just in major towns, but also
elsewhere — bodes well for a representative gathering
which reflects the will and the wishes of the Afghan

33

S/PV.4497

people. We appreciate and commend the work done so
far by the Commission. However, let me say a word of
caution: fears have been expressed that the Taliban and
its backers are attempting to subvert the process by
insinuating themselves into it. We hope that the
Commission will be alert to this and will ensure that
the Taliban and its sympathizers, in any guise, will
have no place in the emergency Loya Jirga.
The meeting in Tokyo in January of this year
brought
significant,
although
not
sufficient,
commitments for the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Afghanistan. But to create circumstances in which
the billions of dollars pledged can be productively
utilized, millions are required now. The SecretaryGeneral has eloquently brought out the Interim
Administration’s dire need for financial resources to
pay the salaries of civil servants, without which the
Interim Administration can neither extend and maintain
its authority over the entire country nor deliver basic
services, such as education and health care, to the
Afghan people. It is therefore of paramount importance
that the international community extend its unflinching
help. The sense of hope that has been kindled in
Afghanistan should not be allowed to be extinguished
by a tardy or delayed response. Innovative approaches
to cut through bureaucratic procedures are the need of
the day.
Afghanistan’s rehabilitation and reconstruction
will take time, will need considerable resources and
will need patience. But, once peace and security have
been restored in Afghanistan, which we hope will soon
be in the case, the arc lights of the media will no longer
find this to be newsworthy. However, the international
community must stay the course and not turn its back
on Afghanistan. On its part, India is committed to
extending assistance to Afghanistan over the long term,
covering not just immediately required humanitarian
assistance in the form of a million tons of wheat and
much-needed medical aid, but also in sectors including
police training, education, housing, human-resource
development, public transport, information technology
and industrial development. India has already extended
a line of credit of $100 million. During Chairman
Karzai’s visit to India on 26 and 27 February, bilateral
cooperation was discussed in detail. Our Prime
Minister also announced a grant of $100 million for
immediate utilization by the Afghan Government. We
are ready to do more.

34

For its developmental efforts to be productive and
lasting, the international community must match
generosity with wisdom. It is therefore important to
listen carefully to what the Afghans need and to respect
their priorities and preferences, as no one knows better
than the Afghan people what is good for them and how
best to bring it about. The temptation to foist on them
solutions or structures not suitable or responsive to the
local environment should be resisted, as these will
serve the cause of neither the donors nor the Afghans.
In determining what will work, sustainability
should be the touchstone. We therefore strongly
recommend that we do not lose sight of the leastdeveloped-country perspective. We believe that
emphasis on South-South cooperation in meeting the
development needs of Afghanistan should be an
integral part of the international community’s strategy.
Women in Afghanistan were particularly
traumatized by the Taliban and its brand of misogyny
and obscurantism. Their role in rebuilding Afghanistan
is central. We appreciate, and fully support, the efforts
to increase the role and participation of women in the
decision-making
structures
of
the
Interim
Administration. A continued commitment to this norm
will not just help in overcoming the harsh and inhuman
practices of the Taliban against women, but will be a
significant contribution towards building the bulwark
of a more tolerant, participative democratic and
forward-looking society.
Afghanistan suffered for long at the hands of the
Taliban, which were foisted upon it from outside. The
international community must work together to prevent
such interference in the future and to stop Afghanistan
from becoming a playground for the pursuit of narrow
national interests or for re-enacting the Great Game
with a new cast. The need, therefore, is for greater
ownership, openness and transparency in the actions of
the international community in Afghanistan. Outdated
structures which failed to prevent conflict in
Afghanistan in the past are unlikely to promote peace
in the future. To persist with these may prove to be a
costly triumph of hope over experience. The role of the
Group of 21, which brings together in a cooperative
framework a large number of countries with the ability
to contribute towards peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan, should be strengthened.
The United Nations has made a significant
contribution in assisting the Interim Administration to

S/PV.4497

address the enormous challenges ahead of it. We
therefore support the Secretary-General’s proposal to
establish the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, with a light international footprint, to
continue the engagement of the United Nations in
Afghanistan.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our
prime concern. By all evidence, the Interim
Administration is doing all it can to bring peace and
prosperity to Afghanistan. Is the international
community matching this endeavour with the timely
assistance that Afghanistan needs and deserves?

Ambassador Brahimi richly deserves our deep
appreciation and recognition for his outstanding
contribution, first in fostering the Bonn Agreement,
and then in so ably assisting the work of the Interim
Administration. We wish him every success in his
demanding endeavours and assure him of our full
support.

The President: I thank the representative of
India for his kind words addressed to me.
There are still a number of speakers remaining on
the list. In view of the lateness of the hour, and with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I will
suspend the meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 1.35 p.m.

35
