S/PV.8945

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8945th meeting

Tuesday, 11 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2021/1117)
Letter dated 4 January 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/8)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-22722 (E)
*2222722*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8945

General’s report (S/2021/1117) and his letter (S/2022/8).
As you have both documents before you, Madam, I will
focus my briefing on more recent updates, progress and
challenges.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2021/1117)
Letter dated 4 January 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/8)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and Ms. Adam
Dicko, social activist and Executive Director of the Youth
Association for Active Citizenship and Democracy.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2021/1117, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, and
S/2022/8, which contains the text of a letter dated
4 January 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Mali since the release of the Secretary2/22

11/01/2022

Over the weekend, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) held an extraordinary
summit to take stock of the steps taken by Mali towards
the holding of elections and a return to constitutional
order. The summit followed the previous meeting of
the regional leaders, on 12 December 2021, in Abuja,
as well as Mali’s confirming that it would not be able
to meet the deadline for the holding of elections on
27 February 2022 and pledging to revert to ECOWAS
by 31 December with a revised electoral calendar
following the completion of the Assises nationales de
la refondation. The Assises, as you may recall, Madam
President, were billed as a forum that would create
broad political consensus on the future direction of
Mali, notably through institutional reforms.
Held between 11 and 30 December at the local and
national level, the Assises nationales produced extensive
recommendations on institutional and governance
reforms. Although they are subject to divergence among
members of the political class over their relevance and
modalities, it is clear that the implementation of the
Assises nationales recommendations, which will go
well beyond the transition period, would go a long way
to supporting a more stable Mali.
Following the conclusion of the Assises, on New
Year’s Eve, the Malian authorities conveyed to the
Chair of ECOWAS the Assises outcomes along with a
projection for the holding of presidential elections at
the end of 2026. On 5 January, the ECOWAS Mediator
was dispatched to Mali for further consultations, after
which Mali reverted with a revised proposal for the
holding of elections at the end of 2025.
As outlined in their communiqué, the ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government found the proposed
timetable to be unacceptable. Urging the Malian
authorities to focus on a speedy return to constitutional
order, they upheld the individual sanctions put in place
on 12 December and imposed additional ones, including
the recall of the ECOWAS member States ambassadors
from Mali; the closing of land and air borders between
member States and Mali; the suspension of all
commercial and financial transactions, with exemptions
for food products, medical supplies, petroleum and
electricity; the freezing of Malian public-enterprise
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

assets located in commercial banks in the region; and
the suspension of financial assistance from ECOWAS
institutions. As indicated by ECOWAS, these sanctions
are to be reviewed and gradually lifted on the basis of
the finalization of an acceptable timetable for elections
and requisite progress towards its implementation.
Following the announcement, Mali made a number
of decisions, including recalling its ambassadors from
ECOWAS member States and closing its borders with
them. In an address to the nation last evening, the
Transition President called for calm and unity, and he
also stated that Mali remains open to dialogue with
ECOWAS to find a compromise that would reconcile
the aspirations of the Malian people and respect the
principles of the organization. Given that support to the
transition is a key aspect of the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), we will continue to
work with Malian authorities alongside ECOWAS
and the African Union to find a consensual way out
to overcome the current impasse and facilitate Mali’s
return to a path to peace and stability.
Against the current political backdrop, the
importance of the Mission’s priorities linked to
the 2015 Peace Agreement and stabilization of the
country’s centre cannot be overemphasized, as they
are both critical to Mali’s long-term stability. In this
regard, it should be noted that the Assises nationales
de la refondation highlighted the need to enhance the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. Some of its
main recommendations — such as the constitutional
review, the creation of a Senate and the acceleration of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
and territorial-decentralization processes, — offer
a window of opportunity on which all stakeholders
should build to move forward on the implementation of
the Peace Agreement.
The international mediation led by Algeria,
including MINUSMA and other international
stakeholders, continued to be actively involved. On
5 January, the mediation met for the third time since
October 2021 and called for the early convening
of a decision-making meeting between the Malian
signatories, which we hope will take place in the coming
weeks and allow for overdue progress, most notably on
global DDR on the basis of the Government’s concrete
offer to integrate 26,000 combatants in the next two
to three years. A high-level seminar to be organized
next week will also allow all stakeholders to better

S/PV. 8945

operationalize the articles contained in the Independent
Observer’s recommendations.
MINUSMA has consistently continued to engage
with Malian parties and international partners in
support of the peace process. It has also pursued
its efforts on the ground, notably by supporting the
reconstituted battalions, now an integral part of the
Malian armed forces, including the one in Kidal, which
is currently planning its fourth patrol, which is to take
place by the end of month.
MINUSMA’s approach towards the centre of Mali
continues to be multifaceted and revolves around
structured support for Malian authorities linked to
the drafting of a politically led strategy for central
Mali, as requested by the Security Council. A series
of consultations has been undertaken in recent months
by the Malian Cadre politique de gestion de la crise
au centre with MINUSMA support to identify strategic
approaches, priority efforts and quickly implementable
actions in such fields as security, governance,
development and humanitarian assistance.
These efforts, made in support to the Peace
Agreement and the stabilization of the centre, were
undertaken as 2021 saw more extremist attacks than
any years prior and with MINUSMA facing the highest
number of casualties since 2013, following a significant
rise of asymmetric attacks targeting main axes, convoys,
camps and temporary operating bases. The series of
coordinated attacks against our camps, as well as the
death of 28 peacekeepers in 2021, including of seven
Togolese in a single incident in December, underlines
the dangerous environment in which MINUSMA
continues to operate.
I would like to pay tribute to all of our troop- and
police-contributing countries, including those from the
region, who constitute the bulk of our troops and have
been supporting Mali since the very beginning of the
crisis in 2012.
The conflict has had a devastating impact
on civilians and the humanitarian situation. On
3 December, for instance, 72 civilians, including
26 women and children, were killed near Songho, in
central Mali, when their bus was attacked by extremist
elements. The number of displaced persons has
increased from 216,000 in 2020 to more than 400,000
a year later. The deteriorating security situation also
affects agriculture production — more than 1.8 million
people are expected to need food assistance in 2022,

22-227223/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

11/01/2022

compared to 1.3 million in 2021. This would be the
highest level of food insecurity recorded since 2014.

Forces, notably through casualty evacuations, capacitybuilding and infrastructure.

Despite such difficult circumstances, the response
to the humanitarian appeal has been lukewarm, as only
38 per cent of funds needed were received. Stronger
support from the international community is urgently
needed to address this funding gap.

Finally, the Mission is supporting humanitarian
efforts in villages that have been encircled for months
by extremist groups in central Mali. For instance, 49
tons of food were delivered to Farabougou through 22
flights from 21 December to 6 January.

One of the most concerning consequences of
violence in the Sahel in the past few years is its impact
on education. In Mali, more than half a million children
have been affected by school closures, putting the
future of the country in jeopardy and making youth
more vulnerable to radicalization and abuse.

Much has also been done to ensure the safety and
security of peacekeepers, in the light of the marked
evolution of the threat, notably in tactics and the
lethality of improvised explosives devices and mines.
Significant improvements in terms of camp security
and the contingents’ preparedness, equipment and
detection capabilities over the years have clearly
saved many lives, but those efforts must continue.
MINUSMA is also actively exploring the opening
of additional supply routes in order to reduce risk to
our convoys. As the Council knows, the Republic of
Chad recently offered to deploy 1,000 additional troops
to MINUSMA, a development that was welcomed by
Malian authorities. Once operationalized, that would
provide more flexibility to respond to threats against
civilians and peacekeepers, while also providing the
Mission with more room to support the Malian Defence
and Security Forces.

MINUSMA is making every effort to physically
verify the status of schools during patrols in remote
locations, while United Nations agencies are working
closely with the Education Ministry to implement key
mitigation strategies. We are exploring options to better
support such efforts, including in terms of security,
through the use of our own programmatic funding and
trust fund, as well as communication and outreach.
Despite a very difficult environment and capacity
challenges, MINUSMA peacekeepers continue to do
their level best to protect civilians, main supply routes
and key infrastructure, as well as support Malian
institutions and promote local reconciliation and
community engagement.
Here, I would like to highlight our effective response
in Aguelhok, in Mali’s far north, where MINUSMA’s
robust response to attacks in April was complemented
by engagement with local authorities and community
leaders as well as stabilization projects.
Another example is linked to the deployment
of a quick reaction force and the establishment of a
temporary operating base in Tassiga, in the Gao region,
after extremists threatened the local population if
they did not leave the village. MINUSMA, along with
Malian reconciliation teams, also paved the way to
the local reconciliation agreement signed in October
between communities in Ogossagou, where some 200
civilians were killed in March 2019 and February 2020.
Furthermore, MINUSMA, in support of the Malian
Armed Forces, is protecting key roads and infrastructure
that are vital to increasingly isolated populations and
to our operations, in particular bridges along the key
axis between Sévaré and Bandiagara. We also continue
to extend support to the Malian Defence and Security
4/22

It has been a decade since the crisis started.
Unfortunately, hopes for an early resolution did
not materialize. Instead, insecurity has become
more widespread, the humanitarian situation has
deteriorated, more children are out of school and
the country has been plagued by an endless cycle of
instability. Yet, the situation would have been far worse
without the sustained and multifaceted engagement of
the international community, including through the
deployment of MINUSMA.
As Mali faces difficult times, we observe a deep
aspiration among the people of Mali to reform, improve
governance and create a more effective State. Mali’s
partners should build on those aspirations to help lay
the foundations for lasting stability.
Every effort should be made to resolve the current
challenges linked to the transition process as soon as
possible. A protracted impasse would make it much
harder to find a consensual way out, while increasing
hardship for the population and further weakening
State capacity. Such a scenario would have far-reaching
consequences for Mali and its neighbours.
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

Beyond the political transition, it is crucial that
the Council continues to pay equal attention to the
implementation of the peace agreement and to the
stabilization of the centre, which are two other building
blocks for a peaceful a stable Mali.
The President: I thank Mr. Wane for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Dicko.
Ms. Dicko (spoke in French): My name is Adam
Dicko, Executive Director of the Youth Association for
Active Citizenship and Democracy, an organization
that is active throughout my country. Its mission is to
promote social justice and democratic values.
I welcome the opportunity to address the Security
Council today. Before I begin my remarks, I would like
to welcome Norway’s initiative to include the voice
of Malian civil society in this important meeting on
the situation in Mali. In the 10 years that my country
has been plagued by conflict and instability, several
conferences and summits have been held without
making room for those on the ground working to
promote social justice, the defence of human rights and
the construction of a peaceful Mali.
My
country
—
and
the
Sahel,
in
general — are nevertheless rich in dynamic and
innovative civil societies. They are rich in creative and
ebullient youth. Without claiming to speak on behalf of
the whole of Malian civil society, which is pluralistic
and diverse, I am nevertheless pleased to be able to
bring before the Security Council a vision of Malian
youth on the ills that my country is experiencing and
the aspirations that we hold. After 10 years of failed
stabilization strategies and with the Sahelian crisis at
its worst, it is time for a change in order to resolve the
Sahelian crises. It is time for a paradigm change. It is
time for humility; we must accept that the strategies
we have attempted have been ineffective. It is time
to allow the elaboration of common solutions that the
local populations fully endorse.
Today I want to speak to the Council on behalf of
Anta, a young girl from the centre of Mali who was the
first victim of the security crisis. She was forced to flee
her village to find refuge in a displaced persons camp
and witnessed the massacre of her parents by terrorist
groups. I also want to speak to the Council on behalf
of Amadou, a young man from the south in search of
economic prospects, who, barely out of adolescence,
had to leave his country and take to the sea to cross

S/PV. 8945

the desert, risking his life in search of a better life. I
speak on behalf of all young Malians who aspire to a
better tomorrow.
In these times of uncertainty for the whole of
humankind, after two years of relentless struggle
against the coronavirus disease pandemic, I would like
to speak to the Council today about another virus that
has been spreading in Mali and the Sahel for years and
whose many variants are dangerously fuelling the crises
and instability that bring us together today — social,
economic, political and environmental inequalities.
This virus generates glaring disparities, particularly
in access to essential services. In Mali, barely 2 to 3 per
cent of the children of nomadic pastoralists attend school
and life expectancy among the healthy population is
barely 50 years. This virus deprives millions of young
Malians of happiness and pushes most of them to live
in poverty. It mutates and adapts by taking advantage of
a system riddled with bad political governance, a lack
of transparency and democratic deficiencies that makes
many of my compatriots feel unintegrated in a society
that at best ignores them and at worst excludes them.
For the virus of inequality is insidious. When
power and wealth are monopolized by a small minority,
trust in the system that enables such a situation to
occur breaks down. That is exactly the other epidemic
that Mali is facing today — the population’s general
mistrust vis-à-vis an unequal political, economic and
social model, resulting in a broken social contract.
Malian youth, who represent more than 45 per cent of
the total active population, are, however, not asking
for the world’s compassion to rid themselves of the
virus; they simply ask to be integrated into the concept
of inclusive and fair public policies and that they be
considered as key actors to bring about positive change.
The exacerbation of the Malian crisis compels me
to make several observations.
First, with regard to the security situation, it
important to note the inadequacy of the current
military response, which has shown its limitations and
inability not only in overcoming the threat, but also
in even containing it. Internal displacement linked
to the violence among populations is leading to the
displacement of families, thereby exposing children
to a lack of education and young girls in particular
to sexual and gender-based violence — children who
grow up in environments polluted by the presence of
armed men and weapons destructive of humankind at

22-227225/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

an age when they are supposed to be learning about life
in society and compassion for others; young men and
women who are disappointed and outraged by a State
that can no longer ensure their security; and the most
vulnerable who join extremist groups for financial and
material reasons but, above all, often simply to protect
their loved ones.
At the same time, young Malians are following
with curiosity media reports of the repeated actions
of countries with so-called opposing points of view
fighting for apparent geopolitical interests in new
arenas after Syria, Afghanistan and Libya, to name
only a few. Mali must not become the new battleground
for world Powers.
It is incumbent upon Council members to safeguard
peace and security. It is indeed the primary goal of the
Council’s mandate. Council members must not only
live up to their responsibilities, but, above all, set an
example. Malian soil deserves better than to be used as
a political battleground. Members of the Council will
be judged not by their statements but by their actions.
Malian democracy is in bad shape and lacks sincere
friends. In the name of all-important stability, world
Powers are negotiating compromises that are weakening
its already-fragile democracy. There is an urgent need
to guarantee greater transparency in public life, as well
as in the relations that Council members maintain with
my country, Mali, which will enable young people to
see through the myths sold to them by ill-intentioned
official and unofficial actors.
The lack of economic prospects exposes young
people to migration as a solution, often clandestinely
and at their own risk. However, financing solutions
for entrepreneurship are primarily motivated to
prevent migratory flows rather than to facilitate a
genuine economic and financial development for the
intended beneficiaries.
Aid is as important as the conditions under which
it is granted. Today, unfortunately, Mali is facing
the consequences of poor political and economic
governance, fuelling the despair, hunger and poverty
from which young people are the first to suffer. The
issue of governance has been trivialized for too long by
those who claim to provide the solution to the Sahelian
crises. It is, however, at the heart of the challenges that
we are facing in Mali.
6/22

11/01/2022

There is now talk of returning the State to areas
where it has been absent for years and which have been
taken over by so-called jihadist groups. No one ever
asks, however, about the kind of State to be restored
under discussion. Is restoring a State that is often seen
by young people as indifferent to their fate and even
predatory the solution? Mali is suffering from a broken
social contract. Our challenge is not only to restore the
State, but also to transform it and public action so that
they serve all Malians. Our problems are rooted in this
inequality pyramid. Nevertheless, if inequalities act
like a virus that spreads, mutates and kills, vaccines
exist to counter such an epidemic.
The fight against inequality is within our reach. That
means reinvesting heavily in high-quality social policies
for the benefit of all. The international community has
a crucial role to play. Today my country is marshalling
precious resources to finance our security, often to the
detriment of our schools and hospitals, which are just as
precious and important as security.
I call on the Council to put its trust in the Malian
people and their civil society. It is the key to solving
the crises facing us. It is imperative that our civil
society be supported and strengthened, through which
we will improve governance by working for greater
transparency and accountability in public action.
We will bring new solutions and create a new way of
living together.
In that regard, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has an
important role to play, provided that it integrates local
solutions in conflict management and involves local
populations in the search for sustainable solutions. It is
time to stop making top-down decisions. The budgets
voted in New York must no longer determine the needs
on the ground.
In view of the political situation prevailing in
my country, I call on the Council to increase its
involvement in rapidly finding solutions to the situation
between the Government of Mali and the Economic
Community of West African States for the benefit of
the citizens, especially the young, for whom the future
is becoming increasingly desperate. The Malian people
is the first victim of sanctions and has already suffered
enough. One does not impose sanctions on a people
that is already suffering. For my part, I reaffirm that
the young people are already engaged in reforging
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8945

mentalities and behaviours to give birth to true hope
and our country’s renewal.

of Mali’s partners — first and foremost, the countries
of the region.

The President: I thank Ms. Dicko for her briefing.

We recognize the gravity of the challenges facing
Mali and we do not underestimate the scale of the task
at hand. That is why we are continuing our military
operations to address the terrorist threat in the Sahel
and why, together with the European Union, we have
continued to provide development and humanitarian
aid to the Malian people. We are also strengthening
our support for Malian civil society, whose vigour is to
be commended.

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Ms. Dicko for their briefings.
As the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) noted at its fourth extraordinary
session on 9 January, the situation in Mali is extremely
worrisome. The transitional authorities have not
upheld their commitments, which they nevertheless
undertook before the Malian people, ECOWAS and all
international partners committed to Mali, and which
were endorsed by the Security Council. There has
therefore been no realistic path to date towards a return
to constitutional order, and we are witnessing, on the
contrary, a narrowing of the democratic space.
France therefore fully supports all ECOWAS
efforts to ensure that the transitional authorities
uphold their commitments and that the elections to
end the transitional period are held within a reasonable
time frame. As a result of the current crisis, the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali — the key to the stabilization of
Mali — is no longer seeing any progress. At the same
time, the lack of an integrated strategy for the central
regions is exposing the population to insecurity and a
deteriorating humanitarian situation.
Like ECOWAS, we deeply regret that the
transitional authorities are using already-limited public
funds to pay foreign mercenaries instead of supporting
the national forces and public services for the benefit
of the Malian people. France and its closest partners
have strongly condemned the deployment on Malian
territory of mercenaries from the Wagner Group, who
are known to threaten civilians, plunder resources and
violate international law and the sovereignty of States.
France remains determined to support Mali and the
Malian people. We call on the transitional authorities
to return to the path of dialogue, move forward with
concrete preparations for elections based on a credible
timetable, make progress on the implementation of
the peace agreement and develop a strategy for the
centre of the country. There is still time to meet the
aspirations of the Malian people and the expectations

France reaffirms its support for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We welcome the commitment
demonstrated by troop-contributing countries. We
are very concerned about the threats posed by the
deployment of Wagner Group mercenaries to the proper
implementation of MINUSMA’s mandate. In that
regard, the serious experience of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic must serve as a lesson.
In conclusion, we will continue our efforts to meet
the needs of the Malian people. We call once again on the
transitional authorities to resume dialogue and to make
clear commitments to a return to constitutional order.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I wish to thank to
Special Representative Wane and Ms. Dicko for their
briefings and for everything they are doing in the most
difficult of circumstances.
Like other Council members, the United Kingdom
is seriously concerned about recent developments in
Mali. We deeply regret the deaths of eight peacekeepers
as a result of hostile acts since the Council last met to
discuss the situation in October (see S/PV.8893). The
frequency of those deplorable attacks speaks to the
severity of the security challenges facing Mali, with
dire consequences for civilians and peacekeepers
alike. It underlines the need for concerted efforts by
the Malian authorities and international partners to
stabilize the country.
Those efforts need to be led by a legitimate
Government that is focused on meeting the needs of
its people. Instead, we have a transitional Government
that is focused on extending its time in office. Mali’s
proposal to delay elections by up to five years is deeply
disappointing. It brings into question the transitional

22-227227/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

authorities’ commitment to democracy and the rule
of law, despite assurances given to members of the
Council during our visit to Bamako in October.
We continue to stand behind the mediation efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We call on the transitional authorities to
prepare for elections without delay so that constitutional
order can be restored as soon as possible. Like
ECOWAS, we believe that any longer-term reforms
should be taken forward by the next democratically
elected Government. We encourage the transitional
authorities to continue engaging with ECOWAS in good
faith so that a credible election timetable can be agreed.
With the conflict in Mali escalating and spreading
further south, civilians are in greater need than ever of
protection and humanitarian assistance. The confirmed
presence of the Wagner Group in Mali risks destabilizing
the country further. The United Kingdom made clear
its concerns in the joint statement it co-signed with
other international partners on 23 December. We have
seen how civilians have had their human rights abused
and how United Nations peacekeepers have been put at
risk by the presence of unaccountable Wagner forces
in the Central African Republic. The deployment of
mercenaries will only increase the challenges facing
Mali. We urge the Malian authorities to rethink
their decision.
The United Kingdom remains committed to the
Malian people and to helping build long-term stability
and development. Through our deployment to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, United Kingdom troops are making a
tangible contribution to Mission objectives, including
on the protection of civilians in hard-to-reach areas.
They are also helping United Nations human rights
teams to investigate abuses.
In November, the United Kingdom’s Global
Ambassador for Human Rights, Mrs. Rita French,
visited Mali and heard about the declining space for
human rights actors in the country and the remaining
barriers to women’s involvement in political and
peacebuilding processes. The United Kingdom is
using programme funding to help amplify women’s
voices, and we welcome the voice and testimony of
Ms. Dicko here today. As we look toward elections
and the restarting of the peace process, we urge the
transitional authorities, signatory armed groups and all
8/22

11/01/2022

stakeholders to redouble their efforts to include women
and young people.
The United Kingdom will continue to monitor
the situation in Mali closely. We believe the Security
Council should do the same, keeping all options open
with the aim of ensuring a timely return to constitutional
rule and the protection of human rights.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, for leading
the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and his briefing on the situation in the country. We also
listened attentively to the civil society representative,
Ms. Adam Dicko.
It is clear that improving the situation in
Mali, implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, eradicating terrorism and
alleviating socioeconomic difficulties depend above
all on internal political stability. In that connection, we
welcome the measures undertaken by the transitional
Government of Mali aimed at conducting an inclusive
nationwide dialogue with all stakeholders in order to
identify a way forward to achieve further reform and
development in the country. We trust that the results of
that dialogue will be implemented as soon as possible.
We believe that commitments made with regard
to re-establishing constitutional order must be
implemented in accordance with the realities on
the ground, which have their own logic and require
certain necessary adjustments. We acknowledge
and understand the difficulties faced by the Malian
authorities in preparing for general elections. We agree
that, without the restoration of State control in many
parts of the country, it will be difficult to consider
the results of the popular vote to be legitimate. That
will lead directly to yet another wave of political
destabilization, as it did in Mali in 2020. We believe
that excessive external interference in those matters, as
we have witnessed in recent months, can only further
complicate the situation.
The security situation remains grave. Extremists
continue to terrorize the local population and to
attack Malian military units and United Nations
peacekeepers. The Malian armed forces and the Blue
Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali continue to
suffer casualties and losses.
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

Against the backdrop of the unexpected
reformatting of the French military presence in the
country, as a result of which a number of key bases in
the fight against terrorism in the region were shut down,
the Malian forces must now single-handedly combat
terrorist activity in those areas. In that connection,
we are of the view that the Malian people are fully
entitled to engage with other partners that are willing to
cooperate with them to strengthen security. The hysteria
surrounding the presence of the Russian company is
yet another manifestation of double standards, for it is
clear that the market for such services is monopolized
by Western countries.
We welcome the development by Malian authorities
of a comprehensive strategy to stabilize the centre of
the country. We believe that, despite all differences in
the present circumstances, it would be reckless to leave
the country to the vagaries of fate, including vis-à-vis
the drawdown of military and economic assistance.
Moreover, the imposition of sanctions in the context of
the already difficult circumstances faced by Mali will
considerably degrade the situation for its population.
The stakes for security in Mali and in the region
are far too high. In that connection, we are of the view
that the Malian people have every right to look to other
partners that are willing to work with them to strengthen
security. Criticism of such action is hypocritical and
disrespectful to a sovereign State.
It is imperative that close cooperation and the
coordination of action between the Malian parties
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali continue. We agree
that there is a need to finalize adaptation measures
for MINUSMA as soon as possible. We support the
efforts of peacekeepers to mitigate intercommunal
conflicts and protect civilians. We believe that
decisions regarding the modalities for the deployment
of MINUSMA, including its troop numbers, should be
taken in consultation with Bamako. No one is stripping
Malians of their responsibility. Malians have the
primary role in overcoming the current difficulties.
With regard to a resolution in Mali, we have always
been guided by the principle of African solutions to
African problems. In that context, we support mediation
efforts on the basis of the principle of non-interference
in internal affairs.
The situation in Mali is undoubtedly a key factor
in regional security. We stand ready to thoroughly

S/PV. 8945

consider proposals to expand assistance to the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel through the
Security Council. We reaffirm our willingness to
cooperate closely with Mali and all international
players to stabilize the situation in the country and the
region as a whole.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Wane and Ms. Adam
Dicko for their briefing and welcome the representative
of Mali to this meeting.
At the outset, I would like to recognize the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and reiterate
my country’s condolences for the irreparable loss of the
Mission’s personnel in the exercise of its mandate.
Mali represents a very clear case of a complex
network of and links among exclusion, inequality
and corruption, on the one hand and armed conflict
and violence, on the other, as was so clearly stated by
Ms. Adam Dicko. That was the thesis that the President
of my country put to the Council for consideration just
a few weeks ago (see S/PV.8900).
The recent announcement by the transitional
authorities of their intention to extend the electoral
calendar further complicates the delicate political
and security situation in Mali. Mexico deems it
essential that those authorities commit to presenting
an electoral timeline that does not unnecessarily
prolong the transition period. The Security Council,
through MINUSMA and the relevant United Nations
agencies, must of course continue to accompany
the process to guarantee the necessary technical
and security conditions to ensure fair, credible and
inclusive elections.
My country also supports the role of the Economic
Community of West African States in facilitating the
transition and the return to constitutional order. We
take note of the sanctions adopted in Ghana on Sunday
and we trust that they will not affect the operations of
humanitarian actors in Mali.
My country is convinced that only a legitimate
Government resulting from democratic elections, with
the broad participation of women and young people,
will be able to achieve the long list of pending reforms
and meet the demands expressed during the national
dialogue forum.

22-227229/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

The spread of violence to the centre and south of the
country also demonstrates that international presence is
insufficient to stabilize Mali. The State must strengthen
its authority throughout its national territory. Civil
authority must therefore be imposed so that the Malian
army and security forces can focus on their fundamental
tasks: protecting the population from attacks by armed
groups, eliminating violent extremism, neutralizing
organized crime insofar as is possible and guaranteeing
the country’s territorial integrity.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf the
three African members of the Security Council
(A3) — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya — and I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, and Ms. Adam Dicko
for their briefings on the current situation in Mali.
The situation in Mali is complicated because it
combines a transition to a peaceful and democratic
Government, the presence of transnational terrorist
groups that have become more entrenched, regional
dynamics and the resurgence of great Power rivalries.
The shared interest of the A3, as representatives
of the will of the African Union, is a peaceful and
secure Mali whose Government reflects the will of
its people and has full control over its territory. Those
are the objectives behind our joint statement. We
recognize the urgent need for the Malian people to live
in security and to have a Government that is able to
meet the challenges and aspirations of its people. We
further recognize that the growing threat of terrorism
is destroying lives through violence and its negative
impact on the economy.
The rapid increase in military spending to address
this threat at a time when the economy is under pressure
for the same reasons, owing to the taking up of weapons,
has led to setbacks in development and livelihoods.
Insecurity is also fuelled by growing transnational
crime, which attracts terrorist groups while eroding
the State’s ability to maintain order. Moreover, despite
growing military means, efforts by terrorist groups to
regain de facto control of the territory have not been
effective overall, in spite of the military takeover
of power:
The A3 commends the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) for its technical assistance to the
10/22

11/01/2022

transitional authorities, namely, in the development of
a national security policy and the integration of former
combatants into the Malian Defence and Security
Forces and the future redeployment of reconstituted
units towards northern Mali. However, there are clear
limits to the Mission’s mandate and capabilities to
provide more effective security for Mali.
There are also clear limits to the capabilities of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, which while promising in
its design and ambition, lacks adequate funding and
predictable training capacity. In that regard, we note
the urgency of bridging the security gap caused by the
closure of French bases in Kidal and Tessalit in northern
Mali and Timbuktu as part of the reconfiguration of its
military presence in the Sahel.
As the security situation deteriorates, it is becoming
more fragile by the lack of progress in the transition. We
take note of the holding of the National Refoundation
Conference in Mali, which allowed a part of the Malian
population to voice its views on the actions necessary
for rebuilding Mali and the strategic paths for the
Malian transition. The commitments resulting from
those meetings, which were accepted by the military
authorities, are essential to the objectives of security
and development that we have set out above. As the
A3 has previously observed, that will require adapted
and tailored military means and resources, democratic
legitimacy, inclusive diversity management, the fight
against transnational crime and improved livelihoods at
the local level to bring peace and security to the region.
In the light of these priorities, we again encourage
the transitional authorities in Mali to honour their
commitments and values that bind them to the collective
ideals of the African Union.
(spoke in English)
On how to improve the security situation, we want
to make the following proposals to the Council, the
region and the broader international community.
First, we urge the welcoming of the
9 January communiqué of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), emerging from an
extraordinary session in Accra under the chairmanship
of His Excellency Nana Addo Dankwa AkufoAddo, President of the Republic of Ghana. We call
on the Security Council to respect and embrace the
determination of the Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS that the proposal by the authorities to extend
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

the transition to five years is unacceptable and that
an expedited transition to constitutional rule in Mali
should be undertaken without delay.
Inclusive democratic and competent government
are the foundation of a secure Mali, which, if
established, will reverse the insecurity that is such a
threat to regional and international peace. We therefore
call on the Council to extend its full support to the
decision and enforce the further measures set forth in
the communiqué. These measures includes closure of
land and air borders between ECOWAS member States
and Mali; suspension of all commercial and financial
transactions between ECOWAS member States and
Mali, with the exception of essential listed products;
the freezing of assets of the Republic of Mali in
ECOWAS Central Banks; the freezing of Malian State
enterprise and parastatal assets in commercial banks
across the region; and the suspension of Mali from all
financial assistance and transactions with all ECOWAS
financial institutions.
We encourage the region to ensure that the sanctions
are implemented with careful and supportive regard
being given to the operational needs of MINUSMA
and the ongoing efforts against terrorism in Mali
and the Sahel. We also express our support for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, in particular
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and decentralization and development processes,
particularly in the north of the country. We invite the
Malian transitional authorities to continue their efforts
in this direction.
Secondly, the ongoing deterioration of the security
situation in Mali marked by increasing numbers
of attacks targeting civilians and peacekeepers in
central, northern and southern Mali, coupled with
the increasing use of improvised explosive devices,
are of major concern. The lack of effective State
presence in parts of the country has emboldened these
terrorist groups, leading to a climate of fear, increased
school closure and the absence of basic services and
humanitarian activities.
It is crucial to keep foremost in our minds that
the instability of the security situation in Mali has
significant impacts not only on the rest of the continent
but also beyond Africa’s borders. We must tirelessly
continue to work so that this country does not become
a temple of jihadism and terrorism that ultimately
threatens our peace and common security.

S/PV. 8945

We therefore urgently call for a more adequate
response to the growing insecurity. This must include
commensurate logistical, material and financial support
for the Joint Force of the G-5 for the Sahel, pursuant
to Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. We are
deeply convinced that only a United Nations support
office can provide more direct, predictable, reliable
and adequate financial support for the Joint Force.
The A3 is convinced that this is the correct approach,
and we strongly encourage the Council to change the
paradigm and examine the question of financing in a
more favourable light.
We propose the deployment of a rapid intervention
brigade capable of conducting combat operations against
extremist groups, as has been done in the framework of
such other missions as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We further welcome the request by ECOWAS
to have a more robust and offensive mandate that will
enhance the operational capacity of MINUSMA to deal
with terrorism challenges in the region. While noting
that the Secretary-General recommended enhancing
the troop strength of MINUSMA, we encourage him to
enhance his engagement with the Malian authorities in
this regard.
We are encouraged by the regional dynamic
marked by joint operations to fight terrorism as well
as the signing of an agreement between Mali and Chad
allowing for the deployment of a thousand additional
Chadian soldiers within MINUSMA. We also welcome
the decision by the authorities to immediately activate
the ECOWAS Standby Force in preparation for any
eventuality that might occur on account of its decision
on the Malian situation.
We urge the Council to use the coming weeks to
come to grips with the growing continent-wide challenge
of terrorism. It is time that members consider additional
measures that are clear on the difference between the
national need to undertake political stabilization and
the regional need to combat transnational terrorist
groups affiliated with Al-Qaida and the Islamic State.
Thirdly, the A3 welcomes MINUSMA’s ongoing
adaptation plan and the Secretary-General’s call for
the scaling up uniformed personnel to enhance the
Mission’s ability to support national authorities in
protecting civilians, as set forth in his report contained
in document S/2021/657. We commend MINUSMA
peacekeepers for their ability to robustly repel hostile

22-2272211/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

attacks, particularly in Aguelhok, where there were 26
attacks between July and December alone.
We welcome MINUSMA’s ongoing efforts to
enhance its casualty evacuation procedures, including
through a Headquarters review in July. We pay tribute
to the MINUSMA soldiers who have worked tirelessly
to restore peace and stability in Mali, often in very
trying security conditions. As we are concerned about
the safety of peacekeepers, we take note of the lack of
sufficient and adequate airlift capability, in particular
with regard to medium utility and armed helicopters,
which continue to hamper Mission performance. The
A3 therefore urges the Council to source the Mission
with outstanding air assets, which are critical enablers
for MINUSMA to continue implementing its mandates
across its area of operation.
Fourthly, the A3 expresses its concern at the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation resulting
from the growing insecurity, given the hundreds of
thousands of Malians in refugee camps in neighbouring
countries or in camps for internally displaced persons.
The humanitarian situation could worsen owing to
intercommunal conflicts, climate-change-induced food
insecurity and destruction of civilian-owned property
by terrorists.
The A3 takes note that the 9 January ECOWAS
decision suspending commercial transactions between
ECOWAS member States and Mali exempts essential
consumer goods, pharmaceutical products, petroleum
products, electricity, and medical supplies and
equipment, including materials for controlling the
coronavirus disease. These are key items for sustaining
the provision of humanitarian aid. We urge ECOWAS
countries to ensure that the implementation of all
measures announced in the communiqué is undertaken
with maximum regard for the livelihoods of the Malian
people because such measures are key to meeting basic
daily needs.
I would like to conclude by calling on the transitional
authorities to cooperate with the international
community to ensure a speedy transition that delivers
transparent, credible and inclusive elections and the
re-establishment of constitutional order.
We further call on the Security Council to return
to the drawing board to consider the mandates and
resources that will meet the actual needs on the ground.
12/22

11/01/2022

Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to thank
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) for his briefing on the recent
developments in Mali and the activities of MINUSMA
in implementing its mandate. I also thank Ms. Adam
Dicko, from the Youth Association for Active Citizenship
and Democracy, for her insights.
At the outset, allow me to express again our
deepest condolences to the bereaved families of the
seven peacekeepers from Togo who lost their lives in
an attack on a MINUSMA convoy in central Mali on
8 December. We also express our deepest condolences
to the families of peacekeepers from countries of the
region who lost their lives in recent months. We strongly
condemn those attacks and call upon the Malian
authorities to bring the perpetrators of such heinous
crime to justice. Peacekeeping and peacekeepers cannot
function in isolation. The expeditious implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on
Mali and the strengthening of the State’s security and
administrative presence across the territory of Mali are
urgently needed to safeguard peacekeeping activities
in Mali.
The political situation in Mali remains uncertain.
It is important for the Malian stakeholders to reach a
consensus on the substantive aspects of the transition,
notably the transitional Government’s reform agenda,
electoral reforms and the period of transition. The
decade-old political and security challenges faced by
Mali cannot be resolved without a credible political
process and the involvement of all stakeholders.
While we note the recent efforts of Malian transitional
authorities, particularly the holding of National
Refoundation Conference, the onus now lies with the
Malian stakeholders to take forward the process. We
hope that the transitional authorities will undertake
necessary political, electoral and institutional reforms
and work purposefully towards holding elections and
returning to democratic governance.
The implementation of the Algiers Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remains
fundamental to achieving peace and stability in Mali.
Unfortunately, the reporting period has not seen much
progress on this front due to disagreement between the
transitional Government and the signatory parties. All
parties concerned should work together and advance
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process without any further delay.
The security situation in Mali remains worrisome,
with terrorist groups such as Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara targeting innocent
civilians, national and international security forces
and MINUSMA peacekeepers in Mali. The recurring
attacks in recent months indicate a further disturbing
trend that the influence of terrorists is growing beyond
the northern and central regions of Mali to threaten
some parts of the south as well.
Addressing the terrorist threat in Mali, which is
also present across the Sahel, needs a strong regional
security response supported by adequate resources
and capacities. At a time when international security
forces are restructuring their presence in the Sahel, it is
even more important to ensure that such restructuring
does not lead to the creation of a security vacuum to be
filled by terrorist and jihadist groups, but rather should
be supplemented by a strong presence of national
and regional forces. In that regard, we would like to
reiterate our call for greater United Nations support
for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
including by providing the Joint Force the necessary
financial support.
We commend the efforts of MINUSMA to assist
the Malian authorities. However, it is important that
the Mission be provided with adequate resources to
implement its mandate. MINUSMA remains one of
the most difficult peacekeeping missions. The safety
and security of its personnel should therefore be
paramount for all of us. We reiterate our support for
greater technological integration in United Nations
peacekeeping missions so as to enhance the safety
and security of peacekeepers and ensure effective
mandate delivery. We also take note of the Special
Representative’s efforts to implement the provisions of
resolution 2589 (2021). However, given the increasing
attacks against peacekeepers in Mali, reporting on its
implementation should be more comprehensive. We
hope that the issue of inadequate reporting will be
addressed in future reports of the Secretary-General.
I would like to conclude by saying that Mali is facing
multidimensional challenges rooted in long-standing
imbalances in its administrative, constitutional and
security institutions, which have not been addressed
in decades. The Malian stakeholders need to take

S/PV. 8945

full ownership and make sincere efforts to undertake
reforms and implement the peace agreement. We remain
hopeful that the people of Mali will be able to solve
their multidimensional challenges through a democratic
process. We continue to encourage Malian authorities
and the Economic Community of West African States
to engage constructively towards an early solution to
the current crisis. India remains steadfast in supporting
the Malian people in their quest for peace, security
and development.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank Special Representative
Wane for his briefing and, belatedly, for the support he
provided to the Security Council when we visited Mali
in October. I would also like to commend Ms. Adam
Dicko for her briefing. We welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative from Mali, and we
look forward to his response to the comments made
here today.
Today I would like to address three broad topics:
attacks on peacekeepers, the implementation of the
political transition and the Algiers Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and the increasingly volatile
security situation.
First, the United States, like others, expresses its
deep condolences to the families of the civilians and
peacekeepers killed in attacks on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) late last year, as well as to the
Governments of Mali, Egypt and Togo. Particularly
troubling are the number of attacks carried out with
improvised explosive devices. Peacekeepers must have
the necessary equipment to ensure their safety given
those threats. To that end, the United States will continue
to support peacekeeper safety by providing necessary
training and equipment through our Global Peace
Operations Initiative, but we also urge and implore
the Government of Mali to work with MINUSMA to
improve the security environment.
Secondly, we need to support every effort from
MINUSMA, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and others to help the
Malian transition authorities to implement the political
transition and the Algiers peace accord. During the
Security Council’s visit to Mali in October, the fragile
security and political situation was on display. We
support and commend ECOWAS and mediator Goodluck
Jonathan in their engagement with the transitional

22-2272213/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

Government to facilitate a return to democracy in Mali.
We commend the strong actions taken by ECOWAS on
9 January in support of democracy and stability. For
those who call for an African solution, I hope they
support the leadership of ECOWAS. I commend the
three African members of the Security Council for their
strong statement today.
We share the deep disappointment of ECOWAS with
the blatant lack of political will shown by the Malian
transition Government to make progress towards
organizing elections, as it committed to do following
the August 2020 coup d’état. We urge the transitional
Government to keep its pledge to the Malian people
to return their country to democracy. It is what the
people of Mali have asked for; it is what they want; it is
what they deserve. A five-year transition is not in their
interest and extends the pain of the people.
Elections must be free and fair; they must be
transparent. That means promoting the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women, both on the
ballot and by registering to vote. And it means using
domestic election observers to facilitate those free and
fair elections in a timely way. We welcome Boudjemaa
Delmi’s leadership of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee towards those ends, but we need concrete
progress to implement the Algiers accord.
Let us recall the specific benchmarks in resolution
2584 (2021), in particular the integration of the
remaining ex-combatants as part of an accelerated
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process.
We have to reach that benchmark, and we have to
meaningfully include women-led civil society groups
and operationalize the women’s observatory too. In
Mali, the Council met with a number of such groups,
and they were quite impressive. As we have heard from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
we must work to return Mali to a path leading to peace
and stability.
Thirdly, I want to discuss the increasingly volatile
security situation, as evidenced by the audacity,
frequency and severity of attacks against civilians,
national security forces, international forces and
MINUSMA. Widespread intercommunal violence,
terrible gender-based violence and an increasingly dire
situation in central Mali — that is not the Mali that I
know from the many years of working in that country,
and it deserves the attention of the Security Council.
MINUSMA’s work on behalf of Malian women who
14/22

11/01/2022

have experienced sexual violence is particularly
important. Malian authorities can, should and must
pursue those cases and deliver justice for those women.
MINUSMA also needs, following the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal, an increase to its troop ceiling. That
will help protect civilians in central Mali with more
quick-reaction forces and air assets and enhance the
safety and security of peacekeepers through explosive
ordnance removal teams. The transition Government
has the primary responsibility to ensure the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel and assets. As a reminder, those involved in
planning, directing, sponsoring or conducting attacks
against MINUSMA peacekeepers may be subject to
sanctions. The transition Government should carry out
transparent and credible investigations and hold those
responsible accountable.
As noted by others, we are particularly concerned
about the reported presence of individuals linked to the
Wagner Group. Based on their pattern of human rights
abuses and threats against United Nations peacekeepers
in other contexts, they pose a danger to MINUSMA
peacekeepers and the people of Mali. MINUSMA
deserves to have clarity on whether those so-called
contractors are part of official bilateral assistance,
and, if so, they need to be held accountable by their
country of origin. The transition Government must also
do its part to protect civilians, create conditions for
stability and address social grievances and root causes
of instability, as stressed by Ms. Dicko.
As the Security Council has made clear before, the
transition Government needs a comprehensive strategy
designed to protect civilians, reduce intercommunal
violence, re-establish State authority, presence and
basic social services in central Mali and hold timely
elections. That comprehensive strategy is the key
to progress. It will advance all our shared security,
development, human rights and humanitarian goals,
and, if it is done right, it will lead to peace and security
throughout Mali. It is what the people of Mali deserve.
I say to Ambassador Issa Konfourou that our goal is
to work with him. It is to work with Mali to find a lasting
solution for Mali and for its people. I know that a Mali
isolated from its community of nations and ECOWAS
is not where Mali wants to be. A Mali — the subject of
Security Council discussions and attention, as we have
seen today — is not a comfortable place to be. And I
know that this is not where Mr. Konfourou wants to be
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

today. Let us work together to bring stability to Mali
and its people and to return Mali to the community of
nations, where Mali belongs.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Wane and Ms. Dicko for their
insights today.
I would like to highlight three key issues: the
deteriorating security situation, the threat of terrorism
and the political transition process.
First, we are deeply concerned about the continuing
deteriorating security situation in Mali, which has been
amply discussed previously by colleagues. The increased
attacks against civilians and peacekeepers — and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
spoke of coordinated attacks — clearly indicates
the need to take urgent measures to address security
challenges and establish State presence throughout the
country. It is imperative that the authorities agree on
a comprehensive politically led strategy to protect the
lives of civilians.
Albania commends the steps taken by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to increase the number
of women personnel, which is critical to an effective
engagement with the population across all sectors.
Women have proven to be very successful in protecting
civilians, accessing communities and creating a
relationship of trust with local populations.
Secondly, we have deep concerns with regard to
the impact of the activities of terrorist organizations,
and we highlight the importance of continuing
counter‑terrorism efforts with the coordination of
local, regional and international forces. We cannot
underestimate the spread of radicalization and violent
extremism and the influence of new actors in the region.
The challenges are indeed huge, but the deployment of
foreign mercenaries in the country only adds to the
complexity. We call on the authorities to pause and not
take such impactful decisions lightly. As we have seen
in other scenarios, that could undermine the already
extremely fragile stability, lead to severe violation of
human rights and have serious consequences, even for
the relations of the whole United Nations system with
the country. Mali needs sound decisions and responsible
actions, not unaccountable mercenaries.
The steep rise in human rights violations and
abuses documented by MINUSMA is troubling.

S/PV. 8945

Human rights must be at the centre of the security
response, and we must continue fighting against
impunity for violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law. We strongly urge the
transitional authorities to pursue active investigations
of perpetrators and hold them accountable.
Thirdly, we stand with the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in expressing serious
concerns with regard to the delay in the transition. The
Malian authorities have failed to respect their pledge
and instead are requesting to postpone the transition for
up to five years. We fail to understand what justifies that
unacceptable extension, if not the pure desire to stay
in power. Albania firmly supports the latest measures
taken by ECOWAS. They are of magnitude and should
make the Malian authorities reflect seriously. We call
on the Malian authorities to review their file and do
what is required to facilitate an expedited return to
constitutional order. It is never about rulers. It not
about generals. It is always about the people, including
the Malian youth, as we heard earlier from Ms. Dicko.
They should be the ones to decide.
Moreover, we are concerned about the lack of
progress on the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Serious work
is required, and tangible results are needed. At the
same time, consultations to establish an independent
women’s observatory with a view to enhancing the role
of women in the peace and political process continue to
be inconclusive.
(spoke in French)
Mali’s social fabric cannot be repaired or rebuilt
without the active contribution of women. There is
no peace without inclusion. There can be no peace
without women. Albania supports the good offices and
mediation efforts of MINUSMA. We call on the Malian
authorities to retrace their steps for the good of the
country and their people.
Lastly, we believe that the Council must stand firm,
maintain pressure and adopt the necessary measures,
just as the Economic Community of West African
States has done, so that Malian stakeholders can move
from a process of consultations that is dragging on to
concrete actions and reach a consensus, which we hope
for, on a reasonable transition period.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Representative El-Ghassim Wane

22-2272215/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

for presenting the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Mali (S/2021/1117). The
report leaves no doubt about the escalation of violence
in recent months. I also thank Ms. Dicko for her
presentation, as well as the Permanent Representative
of Mali for his participation in this meeting.
The situation in Mali is extremely serious,
considering that the country has been weakened by
years of conflict and is vulnerable to the actions
of extremists and other forces that oppose national
reconciliation. In that scenario, the proposal of the
transitional authorities to postpone — for up to five
years — the return to the constitutional framework in
no way contributes to stabilization efforts.
A comprehensive political reform is of interest
of all sectors of Malian society. The initiative to base
it on broad popular consultation, bearing in mind
the participation of women and minority groups, is
commendable. But the Malian people deserve a prompt
transition towards democracy. That is the only way to
build legitimate institutions, without which the country
will continue to face serious threats to its integrity. For
that reason, Brazil supports the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
ensure the timely conclusion of the political transition.
From the beginning, ECOWAS has played an
extremely important role in fostering dialogue among
local political forces and promoting an expedited return
to constitutional order. We urge the Malian transitional
authorities to heed the message sent by ECOWAS and
to hold general elections as soon as possible.
It is important to bear in mind that elections alone
will not be enough to end the Malian conflict. To stop
the escalation of violence, it is essential to implement
the commitments made by the parties to the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Unfortunately,
the report of the Secretary-General indicates that little
progress has been made in that regard in recent months.
We urge all political forces to respect the
commitments made in Algiers, in particular with regard
to the integration of ex-combatants into the armed
forces. At this time, when the peace process is under
threat from insurgent groups, the political leadership
must take the necessary steps to earn the trust of the
Malian people and of the international community.
We share the Special Representative’s great
concern about the activities of rebel groups and
16/22

11/01/2022

terrorist organizations in Mali, especially the expansion
of the terrorist threat in southern Mali and the
significant increase in attacks against United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) camps and personnel. The
recent attacks that resulted in the deaths of numerous
civilians and nine peacekeepers demonstrate that we
are still far from achieving stability and guaranteeing
the safety of the civilian population. Reports of human
rights violations continue to be commonplace, without
those responsible being brought to justice to answer for
their crimes.
Brazil firmly supports the work of MINUSMA,
whose mandate remains extremely relevant. We were
particularly pleased that the most recent report on the
Mission highlighted the quick-impact projects and
community violence reduction projects implemented
by MINUSMA, which contribute to the achievement
of the Mission’s priorities and help address the root
causes of conflict in the country. MINUSMA has
done everything possible to contain an even greater
deterioration in security conditions. However, the
Mission’s mandate should be understood as transitory,
and a lasting solution depends on the Malian State
being able to assume its responsibilities.
Brazil defends the strengthening of State
institutions and security forces in Mali, with strong
support from the international community. We
welcome the Malian authorities’ efforts towards the
elaboration of a comprehensive, politically led strategy
for Central Mali and hope that it will be finalized soon.
In order to reverse the continued deterioration of the
security situation in Mali, there is an urgent need to
advance a timely conclusion of the political transition
and the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. Brazil thanks MINUSMA
and Special Representative Wane for their invaluable
efforts to support both processes.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French):
I would like to start by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Wane,
whom it is a pleasure to see again, for his insightful
briefing this morning. I also wish to thank Ms. Dicko
for her remarks, which were extremely pertinent and,
frankly, rather startling. Furthermore, it is a pleasure
to have here with us this morning our colleague and
brother Ambassador Konfourou of Mali, for whom we
are always available.
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

Ireland shares concerns regarding the deteriorating
situation in Mali. We join others in condemning, in the
strongest terms, the recent attacks targeting civilians
and peacekeepers, as well as national and international
security forces. We express our sincere condolences to
all those who have been affected.
Political and institutional reforms are undoubtedly
necessary to address the considerable challenges in Mali.
However, a prolonged political transition will serve only
to aggravate instability. Meaningful and sustainable
reform could be pursued legitimately by an inclusive
and democratically elected civilian Government. We
encourage the transitional Government to engage
constructively with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), as well as international
partners, in order to establish a timetable for the return
to constitutional order and the holding of elections. As
our three African Security Council colleagues have
said this morning, we support the conclusions of the
ECOWAS Summit held last weekend.
The worsening security situation contributes to
the significant challenges facing the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). We commend the work of the
Mission in implementing its mandate in such difficult
circumstances. The threat to Malian civilians and
peacekeepers serves to underscore the need to ensure
that the Mission is adequately and appropriately
resourced. We support the Secretary-General’s call
to increase the capacity of MINUSMA personnel to
support the national authorities in protecting civilians,
particularly in the centre of the country.
(spoke in English)
We strongly welcome the work of the Mission in
supporting communities at the local level in security,
stabilization and protection efforts. The Mission needs
to be accompanied by a long-term nationally owned
and politically led stabilization plan for security and
the provision of essential State services. We call on the
authorities to take the decisive action needed to enable
the State to fulfil its own responsibility in providing
basic social services, access to justice and protection
for its people. That matters to the Malian people in their
daily lives.
Ireland is deeply concerned by the deteriorating
human rights situation. We call for full accountability
for perpetrators of human rights abuses and for justice
measures to be strengthened and to be used effectively.

S/PV. 8945

We reiterate our position that all counter-terrorism
efforts, military or other, must abide by international
law, including international human rights and
international humanitarian law.
The documented increase in grave violations against
children, who are the most vulnerable — including the
recruitment and use of sexual violence, killing and
maiming — is deeply concerning. Sexual and genderbased violence remains a particular worry, and Ireland
welcomes the signing by the transitional authorities of an
action plan to address conflict-related sexual violence.
Ireland’s views on the participation of women in
the building of peace and sustainable peace are well
known. We welcome recent advancements made, but we
emphasize the absolute importance of the appointment
of women to the Agreement Monitoring Committee
and the operationalization of the independent women’s
observatory. We need to see concrete and meaningful
progress. The women of Mali are part of the solution to
the challenges being faced today. They need to be in the
room where discussions are being had and at the table
for decision-making.
We heard today, in graphic terms from the Special
Representative, about the worsening humanitarian
conditions and of a significant and worrisome decline
in humanitarian access. Rising insecurity, increased
displacement and an alarming food crisis, coupled
with the adverse effects of climate change, all require
our urgent attention in the Security Council. We call
on all parties to support humanitarian action and to
facilitate the basic delivery of essential assistance to
those in need.
(spoke in French)
The current crises that Mali is facing are serious.
An inclusive, democratic, civilian-led Government is
the best way to achieve security and prosperity in Mali.
Ireland encourages the transitional authorities to work
with established, recognized international partners to
restore peace and security. We call on all parties to
redouble their efforts for the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Ireland’s support
and gratitude for MINUSMA, including the members
of the Irish Defence Forces who are serving in that
mission. I would also like to assure Mr. Wane of my
country’s full support. We stand with him and his team
in advancing towards peace and security in Mali.

22-2272217/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Special Representative Wane for his briefing.
I also listened attentively to Ms. Dicko’s statement.
I welcome the Permanent Representative of Mali,
Ambassador Issa Konfourou, and his presence at
the meeting.
At present, Mali is in a critical period of promoting
a political transition, maintaining security and stability
and promoting national development. A peaceful,
stable and united Mali serves the common interests of
regional countries and the international community. I
wish to highlight the following.
First, Mali held a National Refoundation
Conference at the end of last year, where all parties
reached significant consensus on a series of major
issues, such as the transition process, political
reform, national security and a peace agreement. The
entire international community should support all
parties in Mali in implementing the outcome of the
conference, resolving differences through dialogue and
consultation and injecting new impetus into national
peace and stability.
The issue of political transition and general elections
is currently the focus of attention. The promotion of
the relevant process should be aimed at maintaining
unity and stable development in Mali. The drawing
up of the relevant road map should respect the will of
the Malian people, be tailored to the actual situation in
Mali and avoid new disruptions that could be caused by
electoral arrangements.
China has taken note of the decision taken by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) on 9 January and the reaction of the
transitional Government of Mali. China understands
that the efforts of ECOWAS and the transitional
Government of Mali are in the same direction of creating
enabling conditions for the holding of general elections
and ensuring that they are conducive to the maintenance
of peace and stability in Mali. China encourages the
two sides to maintain contact, strengthen dialogue
and jointly make efforts to resolve regional issues. At
the same time, forces outside the region should avoid
exerting excessive pressure on Mali, which will in no
way contribute to a political settlement.
Secondly, terrorist forces have frequently launched
attacks in the central and northern regions, which are
spreading to the south, with clashes among armed
groups, militias, extremist forces and so forth. Mali is
18/22

11/01/2022

a significant force in the counter-terrorism operations
in the Sahel region, and the international community
should continue to support the Malian Government’s
efforts to fight terrorism and maintain stability
and respect Mali’s sovereignty and leadership in
conducting foreign security cooperation. It is necessary
to facilitate the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and achieve further
results on issues such as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; the redeployment of armed forces;
and a Northern Development Zone. China supports
Mali in developing a comprehensive political processbased strategy in the central region and making more
efforts to restore State authority and reduce poverty to
eliminate the root causes of conflict.
Thirdly, China appreciates the leadership of Special
Representative Wane in overcoming difficulties and
actively fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). The Mission is deployed in the
most dangerous peacekeeping mission area. In 2021,
as many as 19 peacekeepers from Côte d’Ivoire, Chad,
Egypt, Togo and other countries lost their lives, which
is saddening. China expresses its condolences to the
relevant countries of the peacekeepers who lost their
lives. It is necessary to identify weak links, improve
rescue and medical capabilities for peacekeepers and use
new technologies to strengthen situational awareness,
improve emergency response and effectively address
the threat of improvised explosive devices.
MINUSMA should allocate its resources and deploy
personnel in accordance with the mandate provided by
the Security Council, keep everything tailored to the
actual situation on the ground and respect Mali’s points
of view. In readjusting their military deployments, the
countries concerned need to strengthen coordination
and cooperation with MINUSMA to avoid an additional
burden on the Mission, while fulfilling its mandate
and avoiding causing a negative impact on the safety
of peacekeepers.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): We also
welcome the participation of the Ambassador of Mali in
today’s meeting.
(spoke in Arabic)
I would like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane,
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), for his comprehensive briefing and
22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

for the efforts undertaken by the Mission to promote
stability and peace in Mali and the wider region. We also
listened carefully to social activist Ms. Adam Dicko.
At the outset, I would like to express our sincere
condolences and sympathy to the families of the victims
of the recent terrorist attacks in Mali, where civilians
continue to bear the brunt of violence. I also want to
pay tribute to all the United Nations peacekeepers who
lost their lives while serving for peace in Mali since the
deployment of troops there in 2013.
In the context of the recent developments in Mali,
we would like to highlight the following points.
First, we stress the need to complete the political
transition process in Mali and make tangible progress
towards the elections process through the continuation
of the transitional Government’s efforts in that regard.
It is also important to coordinate the regional,
subregional and international efforts to support the
political transition process, in line with the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
as its implementation is critical for supporting the
peace process. My country takes note of the outcome of
the Extraordinary Summit of the Economic Community
of West African States held in Accra on 9 January. We
encourage ongoing dialogue to bring stability to Mali,
and we stress the importance of the Security Council’s
support for those efforts.
In parallel, the active, meaningful and full
participation of women in the political transition
process and in the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali must be ensured.
We commend the ongoing efforts to establish an
independent women’s observatory to facilitate
women’s participation in political and peace processes
within Mali.
Secondly, as indicated by the Special Representative,
the security situation in Mali remains critical. Terrorist
groups in the country continue to expand their presence
and operations despite efforts to counter them. We
stress the important role of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel to combat terrorism in Mali and
the Sahel region.
Moreover, achieving stability in Mali requires the
adoption of a comprehensive and integrated approach
to countering the root causes of extremism and building
the resilience of Malians, while also strengthening

S/PV. 8945

the rule of law in Mali and providing economic and
development opportunities for the entire region.
Finally, we emphasize the need to make every effort
to address the security threats related to climate change
in Mali in line with resolution 2584 (2021). We hope
that issue will be considered further in the Security
Council. The United Arab Emirates attaches great
importance to addressing the phenomenon of climate
change and its consequences for international peace
and security, and we look forward to working with our
partners in that regard.
We welcome United Nations efforts to provide
better coordinated in-country programmes for food and
water security. However, we believe that it is important
for development agencies and banks to significantly
increase their programmes within fragile communities
in West Africa and the Sahel. Adopting a set of targets
over the next two years could therefore be an important
starting point to that end.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.
In the interest of time, I will add just a few words
in my national capacity, while the rest of our statement
will be published online.
We are deeply concerned by political, security and
humanitarian developments in Mali, and, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, the
transitional Government — and we as partners — must
address at least three things in a coordinated way. First,
the reported increase in internally displaced persons,
the systematic targeting of civilians and continued
attacks on schools must stop, including in the centre
of the country. Secondly, the Algiers Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali must be respected
as the legitimate foundation for peace and continued
dialogue in Mali. Thirdly, and finally, for the sake of
Mali’s youth, from whom we just heard today, we urge
Mali’s transitional leaders to tread carefully in the use
of the power, which they have taken by force.
The political transition needs a new dynamic.
Security and good governance must go hand in hand.
We ask the Malian transitional Government to heed
the messages from the Economic Community of West
African States.
Developments in Mali affect not only Malians, but
also neighbouring countries. Elections need to be held,
and constitutional order needs to be restored as soon as

22-2272219/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

practically possible, in order to ensure legitimacy and
accountability. That is the only way we can know the
true will of the Malian people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish to again remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by saying that the Government of Mali
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/1117). I would like to thank my dear brother and
friend Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing. I would also like
to take this opportunity to thank my sister Ms. Adam
Dicko for her contribution to today’s debate.
Having listened to members of the Security Council,
I would like to respond on behalf of the Government of
Mali both to the observations of the Secretary-General
in his report and to the remarks I heard today.
I would like to begin with the sociopolitical situation
in Mali, which was marked by the holding of the Assises
nationales de la refondation. All of us have heard that,
throughout the month of December, Malians undertook
an uncompromising diagnosis of their country’s current
challenges. The relevant recommendations that came
out of those meetings constitute a new road map for the
transitional Government.
The political and institutional reforms recommended
will guarantee lasting institutional stability and a better
future for our people. Following those meetings, the
Government of Mali immediately began consultations
with the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) on the transition timetable. However, it
was with amazement that we learned of the adoption of
economic and financial sanctions against Mali. Those
measures come in stark contrast to the Government’s
efforts and its willingness to engage in dialogue with
a view to reaching a compromise with ECOWAS. The
Government of Mali has vigorously condemned those
illegal and illegitimate sanctions taken by the West
African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU)
and ECOWAS in flagrant violation of the founding
texts of those organizations and in contradiction with
the principles of solidarity and the pan-African ideal.

20/22

11/01/2022

I would like to remind the Council that, with regard
to WAEMU, an embargo decided by Heads of State and
Government applicable to a sovereign State constitutes
a clear violation of the WAEMU treaty and the statutes
of the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO).
Moreover, the freezing of the assets of a State or its
public and parastatal enterprises cannot be imposed
by the BCEAO, which remains an independent body
to which each member State has granted its sovereign
right to issue currency.
With regard to ECOWAS, the Government of Mali
has denounced and rejected the following decisions,
which are not based on any Community text: the closure
of land and air borders between ECOWAS countries
and Mali, the suspension of commercial transactions
between ECOWAS countries and Mali, the freezing
of assets of the Republic of Mali in ECOWAS central
banks and the freezing of assets of the Malian State,
public and parastatal enterprises in the commercial
banks of ECOWAS countries.
In his address to the nation on 10 January,
the transitional President of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Assimi Goïta, declared that, despite the illegal,
illegitimate and inhumane nature of certain decisions,
Mali remains open to dialogue with ECOWAS to find
consensus between the interests of the Malian people
and respect for the principles of the organization. On
that occasion, he also called on ECOWAS to review its
interpretation of the situation in Mali by conducting
an in-depth analysis and putting the interests of the
Malian people above all other considerations. Finally,
the transitional President reaffirmed his determination
to do everything possible for a rapid return to
constitutional order and a peaceful and secure Mali.
The Government of Mali is therefore appealing
to the solidarity and support of friendly countries and
institutions. I would like to thank the African peoples
who are showing their support for the Malian people in
this difficult situation.
I would now like to respond to certain observations
made by a number of Council members.
First, in terms of security, it has been noted that the
Government continues to intensify its efforts to recruit,
train and equip the armed and security forces, with a
view to strengthening their operational capacities, and
I can tell members of the Council that those actions are
producing very encouraging results on the ground.

22-22722

11/01/2022

The situation in Mali

In December 2021, the Malian Defence and
Security Forces launched a vast offensive throughout
the country, which continues to this day and is inflicting
heavy losses on extremist groups, including terrorist
leaders. Several arrests took place, and a large quantity
of war material was recovered. Those operations will
continue and intensify with the ultimate objective of
restoring the authority of the State, providing basic
administrative and social services throughout the
national territory and protecting our people and their
property. I salute all the partners who are supporting
Mali in achieving those objectives.
I will take this opportunity to respond to a comment
made by my colleague the Ambassador of France
and certain members of the Security Council who
accuse the Government of Mali of utilizing a private
security company. Those who promote this campaign
of misinformation know full well that Mali has not
contracted any private security company and that there
are no mercenaries present on Malian soil.
For its part, Mali does not seek confrontation — not
at all. My country remains open to all partners who
wish to help it meet the many challenges our people
face. It is in that context that Mali has maintained a
relationship of State-to-State cooperation with the
Russian Federation since 1960. And it is thanks to
that historic and dynamic cooperation that Russian
instructors are currently in Mali to advise and train
Malian soldiers in the use of the equipment acquired
from the Russian Federation.
I wish for my dear friend Ambassador De Rivière
to empathize with and support the people of Mali in
its pursuit of peace and stability. The people of Mali
are committed to the unity, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and secular nature of the Republic of Mali.
In unison, the Malian people say that all partners of
Mali are partners of all the people of Mali. Our people
are opposed to being divided through friendship with
one segment of the population pitted against another
segment. The better we understand that, the sooner we
will be able to reach our common objectives.
I would also like to say a few words to my friend
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield, the Ambassador of the
United States of America. First, I thank her for the
strong message delivered at the end of her statement.
The President of the Transition said it yesterday and
I will repeat it: Mali will never be confrontational

S/PV. 8945

or isolationist with its traditional partners. We have
complex and difficult problems to resolve. We can no
longer bury our wives and children, and neither can
we continue to watch the destruction and burning of
our villages and crops or the destruction of our social
cohesion. We are open to all Council members and
every partner of Mali that is willing to help us restore
peace and constitutional order to Mali. The people of
are Mali are the ones most committed to democracy. I
understand members’ concerns and hope they will be at
our side to accompany us in that process.
On the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on
Mali, I recall that the Government and the signatory
movements remain committed to its diligent and
intelligent implementation. The signatory parties
remain committed to accelerating the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.
The National Refoundation Conference, which I
spoke about just now, strengthened the implementation
of the accord. The Conference recommends the drafting
of a new constitution that would include, among other
major reforms, the creation of a senate.
Under the development chapter of the Agreement,
the Government set up a northern regions development
fund, and I am delighted that the 16 projects selected
in that framework were launched on 21 October, as
noted by the Secretary-General in his report. I appeal
here to Mali’s partners to continue to help Mali finance
that specific development strategy for the regions of
northern Mali.
With regard to the current situation in central Mali,
the Government is working on the implementation
of the integrated management strategy in central
Mali, which focuses on strengthening the security
arrangements in the centre and the planned dialogue
with our moderate compatriots.
On the issue of increasing the personnel of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, to which some Council
members made reference, I am happy to once again
inform the Council that the Government of Mali agreed
to the request of the Government of Chad to deploy
1,000 additional troops to Aguelhok.
In conclusion, I would like to state emphatically
that the people and the Government of Mali reiterate
their appreciation and gratitude for the enormous

22-2272221/22

S/PV.8945

The situation in Mali

contribution of the Security Council to the stabilization
efforts under way in Mali. I pay tribute to all victims
of the Malian crisis — civilian and military, foreign
and Malian — who have fallen on the field of battle
in Mali.

22/22

11/01/2022

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-22722
