S/PV.8925

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8925th meeting

Friday, 10 December 2021, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ousman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(S/2021/1008)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-38652 (E)
*2138652*

S/PV.8925

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2021/1008)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/1008, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Perthes.
Mr. Perthes: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council again on the situation in
the Sudan.
In the past six weeks, the Sudan’s political transition
has been undergoing its greatest crisis to date. That
crisis is not over yet, but discussions on a way forward
have begun.
The military takeover of 25 October and the
arrests of Prime Minister Hamdok, senior officials
and political activists triggered widespread protests
and condemnation. At least 44 people were killed, and
hundreds have been injured as a result of the excessive
use of force by security forces. That has deepened
the crisis and mobilized the so-called “street”, which
continues to organize regular mass demonstrations.
2/17

10/12/2021

Against that backdrop, I cautiously welcomed
the 21 November political agreement between
Prime Minister Hamdok and Lieutenant General
Al-Burhan, which was reached after weeks of
domestic and international efforts to find a way out
of the crisis. The agreement is far from perfect, but
it can help to avoid further bloodshed and provide a
step towards comprehensive dialogue and a return to
constitutional order.
The agreement faces significant opposition from
a large segment of Sudanese stakeholders, including
parties and associations within the Forces for Freedom
and Change, resistance committees, civil society
organizations and women’s groups. I met with those
and other stakeholders. Many feel betrayed by the coup,
and they now reject any negotiations or partnership
with the military.
The resistance committees, in particular, are
determined to continue their protests to reclaim
the revolution and push for civilian rule. While
the overwhelming majority of protesters remain
peaceful, small groups who are using violence have
recently appeared.
The military takeover has exposed and deepened
the mistrust between the military and civilian
components and within the civilian component itself.
The 21 November agreement has not led to a rebuilding
of lost trust. Forthcoming decisions on the formation
of the Government, high-level appointments and the
establishment of transitional institutions will test
the will and the ability of the stakeholders to seek a
common way out of the crisis. In my recent meetings
with Lieutenant General Al-Burhan and the Prime
Minister, I urged that unilateral decisions made in the
aftermath of the coup that go against the Constitutional
Document be reversed or addressed in ways that rebuild
trust among the Sudanese. That includes unilateral
appointments by the military leadership.
Among other things, the 21 November agreement
stipulates the formulation of a political declaration,
which would likely entail constitutional amendments.
There are ongoing attempts within and around some
political parties and movements to reach an inclusive
agreement. Other political forces are open to dialogue,
but not on the basis of the 21 November agreement.
A lack of inclusivity and consensus could cause
further fragmentation. Similarly, while the proposed
formation of a technocratic Cabinet could be a step
21-38652

10/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

towards advancing the transition, it can also create a
constitutional challenge if not based on consultations
with the Forces for Freedom and Change. Those and
other decisions are being discussed against the backdrop
of the ongoing state of emergency that Lieutenant
General Al-Burhan declared on 25 October.
Addressing those and other fundamental issues will
require dialogue and, eventually, consensus. We have
made clear that the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) is
prepared to facilitate an inclusive dialogue, both to
address unresolved issues for the transitional period
and to deal with broader constitutional questions as
part of the constitution-making process. I have been
undertaking extensive consultations to determine the
scope and modalities of our engagement.
The Sudan’s military and political leaders will
primarily have to rebuild trust with their own domestic
public, particularly with the young generation.
Immediate confidence-building measures and a
visible commitment to bringing the country back onto
a democratic transition path will be key. Similarly,
Sudanese authorities will need to take demonstrable
steps to regain financial, economic and political
support from the international community. Progress in
this respect can be measured against a small number
of clear and generally acceptable short- and mediumterm indicators.
For the immediate term, the main indicator has been
the release of all political detainees, cessation of arbitrary
arrests and the guarantee of the right to peaceful protest
and assembly. Almost all civilians arrested since the
coup have now been released, which is a welcome step.
Temporary arbitrary arrests are reportedly continuing,
particularly during ongoing demonstrations.
Both military and civilian leaders have promised
to investigate the use of deadly violence against
demonstrators. Accountability for human rights
violations perpetrated since 25 October will therefore
be seen as a critical indicator for progress and could
help to rebuild confidence. Three important short-term
indicators will be, first, the ability of the Prime Minister
to freely form his technocratic Cabinet according to the
provisions of the constitutional document, secondly,
the lifting of the state of emergency, and, thirdly, the
restoration of the freedom of the press.
Over the next few months, the main indicator
for a return to a democratic transition path will be

S/PV. 8925

the restoration of political space. This is particularly
important in the light of the professed goal by political
and military leaders to hold free and fair elections,
possibly even earlier than originally planned. The
authorities will need to ensure an atmosphere conducive
to credible elections, which the United Nations and
other international actors can then support. Indicators
for such a conducive atmosphere will include the
establishment of an independent electoral commission,
the adoption of an inclusive political parties law,
the freedom of political parties and movements to
organize, campaign and enjoy access to the media, and
the guarantee of human rights.
Recent events have also underlined the lack of
functioning justice institutions and the gap they leave
in addressing and preventing serious human rights
violations. Moreover, the Transitional Legislative
Council — with 40 per cent women, as stipulated in
the Constitutional Declaration — has yet to be formed.
I continue to call upon the Sudanese authorities to
guarantee the meaningful participation of women in the
political process and the yet-to-be-formed Government
as well as all efforts aimed at bringing an end to the
current crisis. My team and I regularly meet with
women’s groups from across the Sudan to hear their
political and security concerns. Their message is clear:
there can be no going back on the hard-earned gains on
women’s rights, and they are asking for the international
community’s support in this regard.
We — UNITAMS — will be closely following all
the foregoing critical indicators and report on them.
Outside of Khartoum, the security situation remains
fragile. I am deeply concerned at the resurgence of
intercommunal conflicts and armed banditry in Darfur,
Blue Nile and the Kordofans. The United Nations has
received reports of a significant rise in the killing of
civilians, destruction of property and displacements,
and sexual violence against women and girls. In Darfur
this year, about eight times as many people have been
displaced than were displaced last year. The persistent
insecurity in Darfur underscores the need to prioritize
the protection of civilians and swiftly implement the
provisions of the Juba Peace Agreement. The formation
and deployment of the joint security-keeping force and
operationalization of the National Plan for Protection
of Civilians should be undertaken without delay.
The situation in the east will also remain unstable if
a political solution is not found soon. It is important
for Sudanese authorities to fulfil their primary

21-386523/17

S/PV.8925

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

responsibility to protect civilians across its territories
irrespective of the political crisis.
In the aftermath of the coup, the decision by donors
to pause international development assistance is having
a significant impact on the livelihoods of the Sudanese
people and risks rolling back the hard-won achievements
of the past two years. Humanitarian activities are
ongoing, although some humanitarian services that
are provided through Government mechanisms, such
as health-related services, have been disrupted. United
Nations development activities remain heavily affected,
thereby deepening vulnerability and humanitarian
needs. One of the key programmes affected is the family
support programme, which was expected to provide
cash transfers to over 11 million vulnerable Sudanese.
Sudanese authorities must of course demonstrate
their commitment to returning to a credible constitutional
order in order to regain the trust of the international
community with a view to resuming international
financial assistance. At the same time, I would like to
urge Council members and the broader international
community to take a balanced approach — not to pause
aid for too long and to consider the speedy resumption
of funding in some areas, particularly support for
health services and livelihoods, so as to ensure that the
Sudanese people do not continue to bear the brunt of
the political crisis.
I thank the Council for its sustained support of
UNITAMS, which continues to discharge its mandate
in the context of the challenges facing the Sudan. The
main areas of the Mission’s effort remain relevant
and, in some cases, have been accelerated. In addition
to redoubling our good-offices efforts, the work of
UNITAMS on human rights and its support for the
protection of civilians are even more critical in this
volatile period and will be strengthened. The Darfur
permanent ceasefire mechanism, which is chaired by
UNITAMS, has been active throughout this period,
with the support, by the way, of both the military
component and the armed groups that have signed onto
the Juba Peace Agreement.
The United Nations in the Sudan also stands ready
to support a credible and inclusive constitutional
process and elections once a road map for these
processes is agreed. Organizing an election in the
Sudan will be a complex undertaking, and the United
Nations looks forward to cooperation and collaboration
with international partners. I wish to underline the
4/17

10/12/2021

importance of continued support for the Mission and
full realization of its field network in order to enable
our efforts across conflict-affected areas of the country.
The Sudanese men and women’s unwavering
commitment to realizing civilian-led democratic
governance cannot be overlooked. They have sacrificed
immensely to realize their aspirations of freedom, peace
and justice enshrined in a civilian-led democratic State.
They have remained — and seem to remain — steadfast
in their resolve. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the continued commitment of UNITAMS
to supporting the Sudanese people to realize these
aspirations and to thank the Security Council for its
support in our endeavours.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Perthes for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Perthes for his briefing and all his and his team’s
work in difficult circumstances over the three-month
period since we previously met (see S/PV.8857). I
would also like to thank Ambassador Jürgenson for
his tireless service as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan.
I will focus my intervention on three issues — the
coup and the 21 November political agreement, the
human rights situation and the Juba Peace Agreement
and the situation in Darfur.
The military coup on 25 October, which we condemn
in the strongest possible terms, jeopardized the hard-won
progress made by the civilian-led Government since the
2019 revolution. Regional organizations and the Council
expressed their serious concern about the event. We
recognize the 21 November political agreement as an
important first step towards restoring the democratic
transition. All parties must take a genuinely inclusive
and consultative approach to delivering the democratic
transition. We encourage the prompt formation of a
cabinet, the Transitional Legislative Council and other
governance institutions as part of setting out plans for
inclusive and credible elections.
We also reiterate our call for the immediate release
of all detainees held since 25 October. Such steps
are a vital part of rebuilding trust and confidence
21-38652

10/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with the Sudanese public and the international
community after the coup. The United Kingdom
commends the continued efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) to support dialogue and the transition
process in challenging circumstances. We welcome the
Mission’s efforts to strengthen relationships with civil
society to build public support for the transition.
The deterioration of the human rights situation
since the coup is deeply concerning. It is essential that
freedoms of expression and assembly be protected
and that people can protest without fear of violence.
We condemn the loss of at least 43 lives — probably
many more — and welcome the Sudanese authorities’
commitment to investigate the deaths of protesters
since 25 October.
The United Kingdom also welcomes the Human
Rights Council’s appointment of Adama Dieng as the
Independent Expert on the situation of human rights
in the Sudan and urges the Sudan to engage with him
in that work. We also urge the Sudan to establish an
effective and independent national human rights
commission in support of restoring the democratic
transition by working closely with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Thirdly, we welcome the establishment of the Joint
High Military Committee for Security Arrangements
and the Permanent Ceasefire Committee in Darfur,
which UNITAMS chairs, as important steps towards
implementing the security provisions of the Juba Peace
Agreement. It is, however, regrettable that the coup
has further delayed progress on the implementation
of the Agreement. We urge all parties to engage in an
inclusive dialogue to rebuild trust among members of
the eastern track of the Agreement and non-signatory
armed groups.
Resurgent intercommunal violence in Darfur and
other parts of the country is deeply concerning. The
United Kingdom deeply regrets the loss of life and
stresses the need for the underlying causes of such
violence to be addressed. We reiterate our call for swift
implementation of the National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians, particularly through the deployment of the
joint security keeping force and related provisions in
the Juba Peace Agreement.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate our solidarity with
the people of the Sudan and assure them of the United
Kingdom’s support in their demands for freedom, peace

S/PV. 8925

and justice. The hard-won gains achieved since the 2019
revolution must be protected. We urge the Council and
international partners to continue to shine a spotlight
on the Sudan and press for progress.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes for his
insightful briefing. I also welcome the participation in
this meeting of the representative of the Sudan.
When Estonia joined the Security Council almost
two years ago, the Sudan was in a very different, hopeful
place. Throughout our membership, we saw the Sudan
slowly but steadily make progress towards the goals of
the revolution. Unfortunately, all that progress was put
in jeopardy when the military decided to seize power.
Estonia condemns in the strongest terms the
military coup of 25 October, which seriously threatens
the democratic, peace and economic gains that the
Sudan has made in recent years. Therefore, it is
important to restore the democratic transition without
delay before more harm is done. It is important to win
back the trust of Sudanese people.
The signing of the 21 November political agreement
was a step in the right direction. However, more needs
to be done. We call on all stakeholders to immediately
and fully implement the political agreement and
continue a meaningful and inclusive dialogue, which
would facilitate national reconciliation. In order for that
to happen, the use of excessive force against peaceful
protesters must stop. Thorough investigations need
to be conducted into the deaths and injuries resulting
from the excessive and disproportionate use of force by
military and security forces.
Estonia also calls for the release of all people who
have been arbitrarily arrested for political reasons since
25 October. In order to respond to the aspirations of
Sudanese people, the prompt formation of a civilian
cabinet, the Transitional Legislative Council and other
transitional governance and oversight institutions
should also remain a priority. We call for the early
publication of a credible timetable for elections.
We are concerned about the impact of political
instability on the situation in Darfur, where attacks
against civilians have increased. Efforts must be
redoubled to ensure the safety of civilians, including
women and children. Estonia calls for the swift
operationalization of the National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians. We also urge all parties to the Juba Peace

21-386525/17

S/PV.8925

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Agreement to accelerate its implementation. Making
progress in those areas will be critical to building a
better future.
In conclusion, Estonia hopes that, despite the recent
setbacks, the Sudan will be able to continue its path to
achieve full democracy as envisioned by the revolution
of 2019. We hope that the Sudan and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
will continue to strengthen their cooperation with the
purpose of making tangible progress, including in the
areas of democratic transition, peace, human rights and
civilian protection. I reiterate Estonia’s full support
for the Sudanese people to achieve democracy, peace
and prosperity.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and
Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(A3+1). We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2021/1008) highlighting the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the recent
developments in the country.
We also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and Head of
UNITAMS, Mr. Volker Perthes, for his comprehensive
briefing. We welcome the participation in this meeting
of the representative of the Sudan.
Our briefing today takes place a few days before
the third anniversary of the December 2019 revolution
in the Sudan, which ended decades of dictatorship
and initiated a democratic transition to lead to the
holding of free elections in 2023. It takes place against
the backdrop of the recent developments, which saw
the democratic transition interrupted on 25 October
but resumed on 21 November following the political
agreement between Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah
Al-Burhan and Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok.
The A3+1 welcomes that political agreement and
the commitments contained therein, which represent an
important step towards resolving the constitutional and
political crisis in the Sudan and a return to constitutional
order, as set out in the Constitutional Document and
the Juba Peace Agreement. We remain convinced that
succeeding in the political transition and responding
to the Sudanese aspirations for democracy, freedom
and justice remain the only viable way to preserve
6/17

10/12/2021

and consolidate the unity of the Sudan and ensure a
peaceful and prosperous future for its population.
In that regard, we encourage all transition partners
to continue engaging in dialogue and making timely
efforts to effectively address unresolved issues and to
fully and swiftly implement the political agreement in a
climate of peace and national reconciliation.
The A3+1 reiterates its full support for the United
Nations, UNITAMS, the African Union, the League
of Arab States and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development for their good offices and mediation
efforts to facilitate dialogue and support the democratic
transition in the Sudan.
We welcome the release of political detainees and
the commitment to investigate deaths and injuries
among protesters during the incidents that have taken
place since 25 October. We emphasize the importance
of ensuring transparency, accountability and justice
and call for full respect for human rights, including the
rights to life and the freedoms of expression and peaceful
assembly. We also express our deep condolences to the
families of the victims and wish those who were injured
a full recovery.
While welcoming those steps, we recognize that
many challenges lie ahead. We strongly believe that
those political, security, economic and humanitarian
challenges highlight the need to see all Sudanese
stakeholders show wisdom and prioritize national
interests in order to consolidate the gains made since
2018 and avoid the derailing of the peace process.
The A3+1 encourages all parties to accelerate
the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement in
order to consolidate trust and confidence among the
non-signatory armed groups and avoid the risk of
setting the country back on a path of violence. In that
regard, we encourage the resumption of talks with the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North Abdelaziz
Al-Hilu faction and urge both parties to build on initial
progress and advance a constructive framework for
addressing their remaining differences.
We commend UNITAMS for its contribution to
facilitate those talks as part of its efforts to support
the peace process and the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement. We also urge those that have not yet
joined the peace process to do so to give sustainable
and inclusive peace in the Sudan a chance.
21-38652

10/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The A3+1 remains concerned by sporadic
intercommunal violence. Those incidents attest to the
need for continued efforts to address the root causes
of the conflicts. The establishment of the Joint High
Military Committee for Security Arrangements and the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee in Darfur constitute
significant steps towards the implementation of the
security arrangements stipulated in the Juba Peace
Agreement. In that regard, we call on the Sudan’s
partners to provide the Committee with adequate,
timely and sustainable logistical and financial support
to fulfil its critical task.
The A3+1 welcomes the Sudanese Government’s
efforts to provide protection to civilians through the
implementation of its National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians, as well as the promotion of dialogue and
reconciliation among the different ethnic communities.
We also encourage all parties to ensure gender
equality in decision-making structures and the rightful
participation of women in mediation efforts to resolve
the current political crisis. In that regard, we commend
the support provided by UNITAMS to the Sudanese
authorities to strengthen women’s participation and
inclusion in the peace process.
On the economic front, the Sudan is facing huge
challenges to mitigate the impact of economic reforms
and the burden of external debt. The A3+1 calls on the
international community to renew its commitment in
solidarity with the Sudan and not shy away from the
commitments made at the Paris conference on the
Sudan held in May. Economic recovery remains a key
component of the transition process that will propel
the realization of peace in the country as it prepares
for regular and free elections based on a democratic
consensus. Such elections represent the only path
towards putting a definitive end to institutional turmoil
in the country and ensuring its sustainable development.
The already dire humanitarian situation in the
Sudan has been further aggravated by the economic
crisis, food insecurity, the increase in cases of the
coronavirus disease — with only 3 per cent of the
population of 47 million fully vaccinated — the adverse
effects of climate change, intercommunal violence,
the prolonged displacement of populations, the recent
refugee crisis in eastern areas and heavy rains.
Despite the complicated regional context and the
latest developments in the country, the Sudan continues
to host hundreds of thousands of refugees and share

S/PV. 8925

its resources with them. That difficult situation, which
affects more than 10 million people, calls on us to
demonstrate our responsibility and solidarity with
the Sudan with a view to mitigating the impact of the
humanitarian situation on the current peacebuilding
dynamics in the country.
The A3+1 reiterates its support for UNITAMS in
the implementation of its mandate. In that regard, we
commend the various support and training activities
undertaken within its mandate to assist the political
transition, facilitate the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement and support the Sudanese-led
efforts in peacebuilding, the protection of civilians
and restoring the rule of law. Our special thanks go to
Mr. Perthes for his mediation efforts aimed at reaching
a negotiated political settlement.
In conclusion, the A3+1 reiterates its position
rejecting all acts that may jeopardize the stability
and unity of the Sudan. It reaffirms its solidarity
with the people of the Sudan and its full support for
a peaceful transition to democracy, paving the way
for a prosperous and peaceful future, not only in the
Sudan but throughout the entire region. We hope that
close cooperation with UNITAMS and the country
team, as well as strong support from the international
community behind a unified Security Council, will
help the Sudan to address those challenges.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank Special
Representative Perthes for his very valuable briefing
and all the good and important work he and his team
are doing on the ground. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Estonia for the report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan. We also welcome
the participation in this meeting of the representative
of the Sudan.
Less than three months ago, Norway co-hosted a
high-level event at the General Assembly to support
the Sudan’s democratic transition. We said then that the
Sudan was back and that there could be no return to the
past. It is therefore with deep concern that we have now
seen the exact opposite.
On 25 October, military leaders set aside the
Constitutional Declaration, introduced a state of
emergency and dissolved the civilian component of
the transitional Government. Next came the arbitrary
arrest and detention of political opposition leaders,
members of civil society, lawyers, journalists and

21-386527/17

S/PV.8925

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

peaceful protesters. As we heard from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, more than 40
people were killed.
We continue to hold the security forces responsible
for protecting civilians and respecting human rights,
including the freedom of expression and the right to
peaceful assembly. The unlawful detention of people for
their political beliefs and hindering access to hospitals
are unacceptable. We repeat that all remaining political
detainees across the country must be released and that
deaths and injuries must be investigated independently
and transparently. While the Sudan is going through a
difficult period, we strongly believe that it is not too
late to get the transition back on track. That should be
our common purpose.
We encourage everyone to learn from the lessons
of the recent past. Political processes are more likely
to succeed when decision-makers bring different
perspectives to the table. In this next phase, we expect
to see more direct participation of the Sudanese women
and youth in political talks. The United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) can play an important role in facilitating
an inclusive dialogue.
The political arrangement between Prime Minister
Hamdok and Chairperson Al-Burhan was an important
first step. The swift appointment of a new Government
is now needed to move towards the next phase, and it is
also essential for re-engagement with the international
community. In addition, unfettered humanitarian access
remains a priority and a guiding principle. Displaced
people and other civilians, including children, remain
at extreme risk. The recent violent attacks in Darfur,
with scores of people killed and thousands displaced,
are cause for major concern.
It is critical that the protection of civilians be
meaningfully pursued and that the National Plan for the
Protection of Civilians be updated to reflect the realities
faced by the population. National authorities bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
and preventing conflict across the country. UNITAMS
has an important supporting role in preventing conflict
and protecting civilians, in line with its mandate.
The current political crisis in the Sudan is adding
to an already dangerously unstable situation in the
Horn of Africa. Particularly worrisome are reports of
renewed clashes in the contested border areas between
the Sudan and Ethiopia. We strongly encourage both
8/17

10/12/2021

countries to show the utmost restraint. Preventing
further armed conflict and the proliferation of non-State
armed actors must be the highest priority for all. We
welcome the work of the United Nations to facilitate
dialogue, and we encourage the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
step up their efforts, including by extending their good
offices to support a process that can bring the Sudan’s
transition back on track.
We call on all parties to redouble their efforts to
address unresolved issues, and to do so in an inclusive
manner in order to rebuild trust and meet the aspirations
of the Sudanese people.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Volker
Perthes for his detailed briefing on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). I thank Ambassador
Jürgenson of Estonia for his briefing as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan. I also
welcome the representative of the Sudan to our meeting.
The recent developments in the Sudan have
reminded us of the inherent challenges in the democratic
transition that began nearly three years ago. However,
the 21 November agreement between the Chairperson
of the reconstituted Sovereign Council and the Prime
Minister have raised hopes again. It is reassuring
that the 2019 Constitutional Document continues to
be the basis of the transitional period. We hope that
the Sudanese leadership will consolidate the positive
gains made and advance further towards the holding of
elections by July 2023. We also look forward to more
inclusive dialogue among all stakeholders in order to
advance the transition.
In that regard, it is important that all parties remain
strongly committed to the ongoing transition. Any
effort to undermine it, such as the action of 25 October,
will jeopardize the progress made on the political
and socioeconomic fronts. We also underscore the
importance of the comprehensive implementation of the
Juba Peace Agreement. We welcome the establishment
of the Joint High Military Committee for Security
Arrangements and the Permanent Ceasefire Committee
for Darfur. We also underscore the importance of the
early establishment of the Transitional Legislative
Council, the Supreme Judicial Council and the Supreme
Council of the Public Prosecution to the transition
21-38652

10/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8925

process. We encourage the Sudanese leadership to
expeditiously resolve issues concerning that.

also like to welcome the representative of the Sudan to
today’s meeting.

On the economic front, recent developments have
forced the international community to revisit the positive
decisions taken to support the economic recovery of the
Sudan. Now that the transition process is back on track,
we hope that the international community and the
partners of the Sudan will reconsider those decisions.
The Sudan needs our collective support.

The past quarter offers a glimpse of the fragile
political balance in the Sudan and of the need, today
more than ever, for the parties to endorse and sustain
their commitment and efforts towards dialogue. The
response of the Sudanese people to the October coup
has been unequivocal — overwhelmingly in support of
a civilian-led transitional Government that guarantees
the promotion and protection of the rights of all
Sudanese people and ensures that the Sudan remains on
a democratic path.

On the security front, the Sudanese authorities have
continued to make efforts to provide physical protection
in Darfur through the deployment of joint Government
forces to de-escalate violence and calm tensions. These
are positive developments that reflect a broadening of
governance structures and the sustained commitment
of the authorities to implement the National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians. In that regard, we would
like to make special mention of the noteworthy steps
taken to improve child protection legislation. We would
also urge all parties to remain focused on fighting the
scourge of terrorism in the Sudan as well as in the Horn
of Africa.
The support of UNITAMS to the Sudan will be
critical in the coming months, particularly with regard
to the political transition, the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement and peacebuilding efforts. We expect
UNITAMS to focus on the implementation of its core
mandates, in close partnership with the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
India has long-standing relations with the Sudan
and its people. Over the years, India has assisted the
Sudan through several projects, including through
concessional lines of credit, capacity-building and
humanitarian assistance. We wish to see the Sudan
emerge as a peaceful and stable country in the coming
years. India will continue to support the Sudan and its
people in these critical times.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Volker Perthes
for his briefing, and especially for his good offices over
the past few months. Mexico also thanks the Permanent
Representative of Estonia for his contribution to the
Sudan in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan. My delegation greatly
appreciates the information they shared today and
their stewardship at such a volatile juncture. I would

Mexico therefore views the 21 November political
agreement as a first step towards the full restoration of
constitutional order and a transitional Government. But
it is critical that the transition continue to be guided
by the Constitutional Document and the Juba Peace
Agreement. In other words, the November political
agreement is not enough on its own.
I would like to stress the importance of the
Security Council following up on several issues in a
timely manner.
First, I reiterate that the full implementation of the
21 November agreement must be inclusive, effective
and aimed at fostering an atmosphere of peace and
national reconciliation. In addition, the conduct of the
Constitutional Conference to discuss the modification
of the Constitutional Document must be a transparent,
peaceful and democratic process, with the full
participation of women.
Secondly, the re-establishment of the transitional
Government, including the formation of a civilian
Government composed of independent national experts,
must reflect the plurality of voices in the Sudan and
invariably include the participation of women. The
partnership between the civilian and military branches
should be seen only as a temporary source of stability
until the peaceful transfer of power to a democratically
elected civilian-led Government takes place. In that
regard, the attention given to the organization of the
elections will be crucial.
Thirdly, the commitment of the Sudan’s authorities
to release all political prisoners must also include those
detained after the military coup of 25 October, including
journalists, activists and human rights defenders. It is
a priority to conduct the relevant investigations on the
disproportionate use of force, alleged human rights

21-386529/17

S/PV.8925

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violations, as well as the deaths and other incidents
that occurred in the context of the demonstrations.
Accountability, transparency and strengthening the rule
of law are principles on which the Sudan’s democratic
transition must continue to be built.
Fourthly, we must stress that there are still four
cases in which the handover of the accused to the
International Criminal Court is still pending. Mexico
calls for the authorities to hand over Mr. Al-Bashir,
Mr. Hussein and Mr. Harun, who are already detained,
as a matter of priority and in line with the commitment
to cooperate with the Court expressed by the authorities
of the Sudan.
The developments in Khartoum should not, and
must not, divert attention from the deplorable situation
in Darfur. Since November, more than 10,000 people
are reported to have been displaced by violence in Jebel
Moon, west of Darfur, as well as to the north of that
region. Of those, 2,000 people, mostly women and girls,
have crossed the border into Chad seeking of refuge.
Dozens are reported dead, entire villages burned,
incidents of sexual violence and disappeared children.
The tensions continue, and the risk of a spillover effect
on the rest of the region is high.
While recognizing the actions of local authorities to
address this situation, we urgently call for a hastening
of efforts to reduce tensions, investigate incidents and
prevent a resurgence of violence. We must also recall
the need to expedite the full implementation of the
National Plan for the Protection of Civilians, as civilian
protection is the sole responsibility of the Sudan,
despite the turbulent situation it is experiencing.
I conclude by expressing Mexico’s full support for
the work being done by the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan and underscore
the importance of coordinating subregional, regional
and international efforts to support the Sudan’s
democratic transition and the aspirations of the
Sudanese people for a future that is inclusive and
peaceful and in which there is full respect for human
rights, whose declaration — the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights — was adopted on this day in Paris
and is celebrating another anniversary.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank Special
Representative Perthes for his briefing and for the
valiant and tireless work we know he is doing in very
complex circumstances. I also thank Sven Jürgenson
for his report and his excellent stewardship over the
10/17

10/12/2021

past two years. I am delighted to welcome our colleague
from the Sudan with us this morning.
When we last came together in this Chamber to
speak about the Sudan (see S/PV.8887), the Sudan’s
democratic transition had received a huge blow. Since
then there has been a welcome step back from the brink,
in particular as a result of the 21 November agreement
between Prime Minister Hamdok and Lieutenant
General Al-Burhan. Most civilian leaders — but not
yet all — have been released, and the Prime Minister
has been reinstalled. The reality, however, is that the
agreement does not entirely reverse the steps taken since
25 October to dismantle the transitional framework
and institutions.
In our view, the future of the transition — and
indeed of stability in the Sudan — still very much
hangs in the balance. And as Special Representative
Perthes said himself this morning, the next steps will
be crucial. We need to see a return to constitutional
order as soon as possible. To get there, we now need to
rebuild trust and create an enabling environment for a
genuine political settlement. To achieve that, we see the
following steps as critical in the short term.
First, the state of emergency should be lifted.
Secondly, Prime Minister Hamdok should be allowed to
freely exercise his powers as Prime Minister. Thirdly,
we need to see the release of all political detainees
and a halt to the campaign of arrests. Fourthly, there
needs to be respect for human rights, an end to the
communication blockade and full respect for the right
to freedom of assembly and peaceful protest. And
fifthly, the violence against civilians, which we have
seen escalate across the Sudan since the coup, including
against peaceful protesters — that is something we
have to highlight — cannot continue. Accountability
for this violence will be needed. Attacks by the security
forces — for example, on hospitals, the wounded and on
doctors — must cease.
Ultimately, we want to see a return to the
constitutional order. The people of the Sudan themselves
have made clear, time and again, their desire for an
open and free political environment. To get there, we
will need a broadening of the political consultation
on the future of the transition and a truly inclusive
political settlement. The voice of the people is at the
heart of the transition. They should be fully heard in
future negotiations.
21-38652

10/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Crucially, women should be involved at all levels,
and in particular in high-level decision making. Women
have been at the core of the transition in the Sudan, and
they are vital to its eventual success. To repeat a phrase
that I say often in this Chamber: they should be in the
room and at the table.
In the longer term, we need to see decisive security
sector reform, a framework for effective transitional
justice and the holding of inclusive and democratic
elections. That is in the Sudan’s own interest and,
certainly, it is in the interest of the people of the Sudan.
The current political violence is taking place in the
context of a new wave of violence and mass displacement
in Darfur, including very worrisome reports of dozens
of people being killed in West Darfur just this week,
and we are seeing rising humanitarian needs across the
country. Promises made on the protection of civilians
in Darfur cannot be forgotten. The National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians should be implemented as a
matter of the utmost urgency.
The Juba Peace Agreement remains vital to building
peace and addressing the underlying causes of conflict
in Darfur and throughout the Sudan. In our view, the
undertaking of the parties to the agreement to extend
full and unlimited cooperation to the International
Criminal Court is particularly critical.
We have also recently seen reports of renewed
border clashes in Al-Fashaqah, with numerous deaths.
At a delicate time for the region, the last thing we need
is for an intensification of Ethiopia-Sudan tensions.
Cool heads should now prevail for the benefit of the
people of both the Sudan and Ethiopia, as well as for
regional stability.
Ireland stands fully behind the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
and, most important, the Sudanese people, in the task
of restoring the democratic transition in the Sudan. The
Security Council should be ready to use the tools at our
disposal to create the space needed to achieve that. We
will continue to monitor progress in the coming months.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Special
Representative Volker Perthes for his comprehensive
briefing. I also thank Ambassador Sven Jürgenson,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan, for his and his teams efforts during the past two

S/PV. 8925

years. I welcome the participation of the representative
of the Sudan in today’s meeting.
Viet Nam continues to closely follow the
developments in the Sudan. We welcome the recent
efforts to promote stability in the country, in particular
the agreement reached on 21 November, which restored
the position of the Prime Minister and stipulated that
the 2019 Constitutional Document would continue
to form the basis of the transitional period. At the
same time, we note that the situation in the Sudan in
general, and in Darfur in particular, continues to face
many challenges, such as economic and humanitarian
difficulties, intercommunal violence, natural disasters
and the coronavirus disease pandemic. In that regard, I
wish to highlight the following points.
It is imperative that all Sudanese parties continue
to exercise restraint and refrain from violence and
any action that could further escalate tensions and
jeopardize the peace process and the safety and security
of the population. We urge the relevant parties in the
Sudan to put in their best efforts to promote dialogue
and national reconciliation in order to advance the
transition process in line with the 2019 constitutional
decree and the Juba Peace Agreement.
First, in that connection, we reiterate our strong
support for the full, active and meaningful participation
of women, as well as young people, in all stages of that
process and other aspects of the society.
Secondly, we call on the relevant authorities of
the Sudan to ensure the protection of civilians, as
well as essential services for the civilian population,
particularly vulnerable groups, such as women and
children. At the same time. It is critical to maintain
stability and security in Darfur and avoid any negative
impact of the recent developments in the Sudan on
the region. It is therefore critical to ensure the full
implementation of the National Plan for Protection of
Civilians and address the root causes of intercommunal
violence in Darfur, including through reconciliation
among the different groups, tribes and communities.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to support the Sudanese authorities in
addressing the current humanitarian and socioeconomic
challenges. More than 6 million people continue to be
severely affected by food insecurity. Heavy rains and
floods have affected the population in 14 out of the 18
states. In that regard, we hope that international partners

21-3865211/17

S/PV.8925

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

10/12/2021

will continue to provide further humanitarian support
to the people of the Sudan at this challenging time.

in the interests of ensuring security and stability and
achieving national accord.

Fourthly, we reaffirm our support for the efforts
of the United Nations, including the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS), and regional and international partners,
especially the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in promoting dialogue
between the Sudanese parties and overcoming the
current difficulties. We call on the authorities in the
Sudan to continue to ensure the safety and security of
UNITAMS personnel and to engage actively with the
Mission and United Nations agencies in addressing the
challenges in the country. We also call for efforts by the
Sudan and countries of the region towards cooperation
and friendship for common interests.

We welcome the signing of a political agreement
on 21 November, which was the outcome of intensive
negotiations between the Sudan’s military leaders and
various civil groups and community and tribal leaders,
with the effective mediation of a number of Arab and
African countries and regional organizations. We
believe the notion set out in the political declaration
that a partnership between the Sudan’s military
leadership and civil society representatives is a
guarantee of stability and security in the Sudan to be
particularly important.

Finally, as this is probably the last time that Viet
Nam will speak under this agenda item, we would like
to reiterate our consistent position that sanctions should
be a tool employed by the Council only in a temporary
and case-by-case manner to facilitate the maintenance
of international peace and security. Such measures and
their implementation should not adversely affect the
livelihoods of the people or the legitimate development
of the country concerned. They should be subjected to
review in accordance with developments on the ground
and should be adjusted and lifted when conditions
so warrant.
In conclusion, we would like to once again reaffirm
our commitment to supporting the Sudanese people in
their pursuit of sustainable peace, stability, development
and prosperity.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
for his briefing on the situation in the Sudan. We
welcome the participation of the Charge d’affaires a.i.
of the Sudan at this meeting.
We have taken note of the most recent quarterly
report (S/2021/1008) on the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
Russia is carefully following developments in
the Sudan, which is going through a complex period
in its current history. We are convinced that the
existing differences in Sudanese society can, and
should be, addressed only through dialogue with the
participation of all major political forces in the country
12/17

The agreements reached with the Sudanese
leadership are a significant step towards resolving the
acute internal crisis in that country. We trust that their
implementation will help to stabilize the situation in
the Sudan and create favourable conditions for further
progress during the transition period.
We view positively the statement made by the
Chairperson of the Sovereign Council of the Sudan,
Lieutenant General Al-Burhan, declaring his intention
to hold general elections in July 2023 and reiterating
his commitment to the peace agreement between the
transitional Government of the Sudan and a number of
rebel groups signed in Juba on 3 October 2020.
We await the outcome of the ongoing consultations
on the formation of a technocratic Government in
the Sudan. We trust that the interests of the Sudan’s
provinces will also be taken into account.
We believe that UNITAMS should continue to
provide the necessary assistance to the Sudanese
leadership in a number of key areas, including resolving
the Darfur issue, carrying out the relevant economic
reforms, maintaining internal peace and the rule of law
and working with donors in order to ensure sustained
financial assistance to the country. In the current
situation, depoliticized communication with all sides,
free of blatant external interference, remains essential.
We cannot fail to express our regret regarding
the terminology used in the Secretary-General’s
report, which could undermine trust between the
United Nations and the authorities of the Sudan. We
call on them to engage in a mutually respectful and
constructive dialogue.
The Russian Federation cannot agree with the
political pressure and blatant economic blackmail
21-38652

10/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

applied against the Sudan. Attempts to undermine the
Sudanese “street” risk further destabilizing the country.
The external imposition of dubious socioeconomic
solutions and universal democratizing templates on the
Sudanese authorities, as well as the politicization of
economic and financial assistance, has already divided
Sudanese society. It has provoked instability and a new
round of destabilizing trends.
We also believe that the special session of the
Human Rights Council held on 5 November at the
initiative of a number of Western countries to discuss
the situation in the Sudan was untimely. We oppose
establishing a mandate for a Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on the Sudan.
Regarding the sanctions regime against the Sudan,
we believe that any sanctions regime must be reviewed
and adapted to the situation on the ground. We trust
that concrete parameters for lifting the sanctions on the
country will soon be drawn up.
In conclusion, we are convinced that the Sudanese
can, and should, resolve their domestic problems and
determine the course of their country’s sovereign
development on the basis of their national interests. We
believe that the main task of the Security Council and
the international community is to support such efforts.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would also like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Volker Perthes for his briefing. I
welcome the presence of the representative of the Sudan
here among us.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, the Sudan’s institutions must be re-established
and consolidated in order to move the transition in the
country forward. France welcomed the reinstatement
of Mr. Abdalla Adam Hamdok as Prime Minister.
International support for the Sudan is based first and
foremost on the foundation of a transition to civilian
governance in line with the democratic aspirations of
the Sudanese people. The military coup of 25 October
undermined the gains of the transition. A new stage
must now begin with the rapid formation of a civilian
government, and efforts must resume to implement the
provisions of the August 2019 Constitutional Document
and prepare for free and transparent elections.
France reiterates its call for the immediate release
of all political detainees arrested since 25 October
2021. Respect for the right of the Sudanese people to

S/PV. 8925

peacefully express their opinions and for the freedom
of the press is paramount. To shed light on the incidents
that occurred during the recent demonstrations, France
also encourages a rigorous, transparent and independent
investigation, as provided for in the 21 November 2021
political agreement.
Secondly, efforts must resume to fully implement
the Juba Agreement. Progress has been made with the
establishment of the Joint High Military Committee
for Security Arrangements and the Darfur Permanent
Ceasefire Committee. Further progress is expected,
including the operationalization of the independent
commissions on corruption, peace and transitional
justice. Appointments to vacant positions in the
judiciary must also take place. And the full participation
of women must be ensured, as they have played a
historic role in promoting the civil transition.
France is concerned about the situation in Darfur,
where intercommunal conflicts have resumed in recent
weeks. The protection of civilians must be the priority,
with the rapid implementation of the dedicated national
plan and the acceleration of the deployment of the
joint force. To meet the needs of the population, full,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access must be
guaranteed. France reiterates its call for the successful
conclusion of peace negotiations between the Sudanese
authorities and the Abdelaziz Al-Hilu and Abdel Wahid
Al-Nur factions.
Thirdly, the support of the United Nations and
international partners must continue to support the
transition. France salutes the action of the United
Nations in the extremely difficult conditions of the
last few weeks. Assistance from the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) must continue, and its deployment in
Darfur must be accelerated.
Progress has been made in mine action with the
opening of a regional training centre in Omdurman,
which has been supported by UNITAMS. In the fight
against terrorism, the European Union will continue
to provide support, as will the Office of CounterTerrorism, which must continue.
Finally, the States of the region must create the
conditions for a successful transition in the Sudan. The
crisis in northern Ethiopia has led to the arrival of some
60,000 Ethiopian refugees in the Sudan. In close liaison
with its partners, France supports the efforts led by the
African Union High Representative for the Horn of

21-3865213/17

S/PV.8925

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Africa, Mr. Obasanjo, to facilitate a political solution
to the situation in Ethiopia. France also encourages
the States concerned to resume discussions under the
auspices of the African Union with a view to settling
the disputes surrounding the Renaissance Dam.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his briefing and welcome the representative
of the Sudan to our meeting today.
The Sudan is an important country in the African
and Arab regions. Stability and prosperity in the
Sudan serve the common interests of the international
community. We must fully respect the Sudan’s
sovereignty and leadership, support the Sudan on
its chosen development path, which suits its national
conditions, and provide constructive assistance in
accordance with its needs.
I would like to highlight the following three points.
First, the political transition in the Sudan has
continued to make progress. The Chairperson of
the Sudan’s Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General
Al-Burhan, and Prime Minister Hamdok signed and put
into implementation the political agreement to restore
the military-civilian power-sharing arrangement and
gradually establish transitional institutions. They
have stated that the elections will be held on time.
The Sudan’s political transition is back on the right
track. China welcomes this development, which fully
demonstrates that as long as the parties concerned put
the interests of the country and its people first, stay
committed to dialogue and consultation and make
necessary compromises, a proper solution can be found.
China calls on all parties in the Sudan to continue
to implement the Political Agreement to maintain the
good momentum of political transition. All parties
in the Sudan should make their demands within the
constitutional and legal framework, avoid resorting to
violence or causing casualties, and create conditions
favourable to the political transition. The international
community should adopt a neutral and balanced stance
in the mediation process perceived from the Sudan’s
reality on the ground, respect the Sudan’s choices and
avoid imposing solutions from outside.
It needs to be pointed out that democracy can be
realized in multiple ways. There are no fixed models,
and neither should there be. The road to, and the form
of, democracy each country chooses should be in line
14/17

10/12/2021

with its national conditions and development realities
and should be explored and developed by the country
itself. It has been repeatedly proved by past practices
that imposing the so-called democratic plan from
outside is merely using democracy as a banner while
taking the opportunity to interfere in the internal
affairs of other countries. In effect, it is depriving the
country concerned of its democracy and the betrayal of
the democratic spirit. That is not true democracy.
Secondly, the economic reform measures adopted
by the Sudanese authorities have achieved some results.
However, the overall situation is still unsatisfactory.
The inflation rate has exceeded 300 per cent. For a
long time, issues concerning people’s employment
and livelihood have remained serious, and public
dissatisfaction has grown. This is one of the root causes
of the Sudan’s turmoil. Without satisfying people’s
needs for food and shelter, it will be difficult to achieve
stability and development. Under these circumstances,
the suspension of debt relief and economic assistance
by some financial institutions and countries has
increased the Sudan’s development burden and
exacerbated the plight of the Sudanese people. China
urges the international community to maintain its
economic support and assistance to the Sudan, inject
positive energy for the country to be able to overcome
its difficulties.
At the eighth ministerial meeting of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation, held recently, Chinese
President Xi Jinping announced that we would provide
1 billion doses of vaccines to Africa, strive to reach
$300 billion total imports from Africa in the next
three years, and work with Africa to implement nine
programmes in such fields as health, poverty reduction,
trade and investment. This will inject a new impetus
into the development of African countries, including
the Sudan.
Thirdly, the Sudan’s security capacity-building
still needs to be further strengthened to properly
handle such issues as intercommunal conflicts and to
better implement the National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians. The Security Council must carefully
study the impact of the arms embargo on the Sudan’s
security capacity-building and take effective measures
to eliminate such impacts. Resolution 2562 (2021)
requires that clear and feasible benchmarks for adjusting
the Sudan’s sanctions be established no later than
15 September 2021. Regrettably, the relevant process
was not completed within the time frame set by the
21-38652

10/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Security Council. We hope that the actions requested
by the Security Council in resolution 2562 (2021) can
be implemented as soon as possible.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes
for his comprehensive briefing. Let me echo others in
thanking him and his team for their committed work
during a difficult time period in the Sudan. Let me also
take a moment to thank Ambassador Jürgenson and the
Estonian delegation for their work leading the Sudan
Sanctions Committee these past two years. It is always
good to see our good colleague, the Chargé d’affaires
from the Sudanese Mission, in the Chamber today.
The United States fully supports the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) and its mandate to assist in the Sudan’s
democratic transition as laid out in the Constitutional
Declaration and in the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement. We too are encouraged by the 21 November
agreement between Sudanese actors to reinstate
Prime Minister Hamdok to office, but, as others have
noted, this agreement is only a first step. We urge all
parties to live up to their commitments made in the
21 November agreement and to renew their focus on
completing the Sudan’s transition to democracy by
implementing the transitional tasks that are outlined
in the 2019 Constitutional Declaration and the Juba
Peace Agreement.
To provide political space for that to occur, the
military must release all political detainees, lift the
state of emergency and refrain from any and all violence
against peaceful demonstrators. We continue to
encourage an inclusive Sudanese process to implement
the important transitional tasks, including creating the
Transitional Legislative Council, judicial structures,
electoral institutions and a constitutional convention.
We also continue to press for sustained humanitarian
access to all conflict-affected and displaced populations
to facilitate life-saving assistance. We must ensure the
progress made since 2019 in reaching those in need. The
United States remains committed to the people of the
Sudan and helping them achieve a successful democratic
transition. We look forward to close collaboration with
our fellow members of the Council, UNITAMS, the
African Union and other key stakeholders to achieve
that objective.
Regrettably, intercommunal violence in Darfur,
as we have heard, continues to persist, and clashes

S/PV. 8925

between security forces and former armed opposition
groups have increased in recent weeks, highlighting the
urgent need to consolidate peace. Together with others,
we condemn the recent killings and displacement
in Darfur and elsewhere in the Sudan, and we are
concerned about the heightened risk of violence for
civilians amid such clashes.
Let me just add that, last February, the Council stated
(see S/2021/136) its intention to establish benchmarks
to guide us in reviewing sanctions measures on the
Sudan. Although we were not able to reach agreement
on the benchmarks by our self-imposed deadline, the
United States has not given up on trying to establish
such benchmarks, based on the recommendations of
the Secretary-General and the continued evolution of
the situation in the Sudan. We will continue to closely
monitor the situation and discuss further action in
response to developments in the Sudan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS), for his comprehensive briefing before the
Security Council today.
This briefing is being held as developments are
being witnessed in the Sudanese political arena that are
linked not only to the path of political transition leading
towards democracy, freedom, peace and justice, but also
to shaping the future of the Sudan in order to maintain
our statehood and pave the way for governance that
guarantees the values embodied in the slogans of the
glorious December revolution.
To that end, actors in the Sudanese political arena
from the military and civilian components must play
their role in ensuring the success of the transition
by operationalizing the mechanisms and methods
guaranteed by the Constitutional Document and Juba
Peace Agreement, as well as political tools and means
to prevent any reversal of the gains made by the young
men and women of the Sudan who have sacrificed their
precious lives to create the bright future that they and
our country deserve.
The political transition in the Sudan has faced
many challenges since the formation of the transitional
Government over two years ago. Some of those

21-3865215/17

S/PV.8925

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

challenges have been linked to the complications
of the heavy political legacy passed down since the
independence of the Sudan, but they are also connected
to the dynamics of the civilian-military partnership and
the nature of the flexible formation of civilian forces
participating in the transition, as well as the security
challenges in the country, whether in Darfur, the eastern
Sudan or certain areas in the South Kordofan region.
The measures taken by the Chair of the interim
Sovereign Council on 25 October are among the
challenges facing the delicate political transition in the
Sudan. We can understand them only in the context
of the internal political circumstances and the need
to maintain the gains made by our country over the
past two years, as well as the repercussions of the
geopolitical situation in the Sudan and the unrest in the
region, with all its repercussions on our country.
On 21 November, the Sudanese political leadership
successfully overcame that challenge through national
efforts, which have prioritized the greater interest of the
country as its primary concern. The 14-point political
declaration was signed by the Chair of the Sovereign
Council and the Prime Minister. In that regard, I note
that the final challenge of addressing the political
transition in the Sudan has strengthened the conviction
of both the civilian and military transition partners that
they must ensure the success of the transition period
leading to free and fair elections.
The Chairperson of the Sovereign Council has
repeatedly stressed this same issue over the past
few days, as set out in his letter to the Council dated
30 September, in which he says:
“As we have repeatedly emphasized, we
are committed to overseeing and protecting the
transition in the Sudan until we reach the goal of
holding free and fair elections that genuinely reflect
the will and aspirations of the Sudanese people.
We will work to prevent any attempt, from any
quarter, to hinder the transitional process. We will
also continue to promote and defend democratic
change until power is handed over to an elected
civilian Government. We will work to build a free
and stable Sudan at peace with itself, its neighbours
and its regional and international environment, a
Sudan whose people can enjoy freedom, justice and
peace — all of which were demands of the December
revolution. We need hardly state that we remain
committed to the provisions of the Constitutional
16/17

10/12/2021

Document agreed upon by the stakeholders in the
transition.” (S/2021/832, para. 1)
The challenges I have just mentioned have led Prime
Minister Abdalla Hamdok to call for a comprehensive
national initiative, entitled “The Road Ahead”, which
includes seven themes: the economy, justice, security
sector reform and peace, dismantling the legacy of the
Al-Bashir regime and combating corruption, foreign
policy, national sovereignty and security, and the
formation of the Transitional Legislative Council. The
initiative was welcomed by the Security Council.
The preamble of the political agreement signed
on 21 November includes a few of the challenges
confronting the transitional process in the Sudan.
The preamble stresses that the crisis is mostly a
political one that requires a degree of wisdom and
the shouldering of national responsibilities. The two
signatory parties pledge to work together to complete
and adjust the path towards democracy in order to serve
the higher interest of the Sudan, prevent any relapse
into the unknown and insecurity, while successfully
completing the transitional period, leading to an
elected civilian Government. That will be achieved
only through the unity of the political and revolutionary
forces, our young men, girls and women, the resistance
committees, nomads, internally displaced Sudanese
persons and refugees.
The Prime Minister expressed the same at the
signing of the agreement. He stressed that the signing
had come about as a result of the dangerous situation
in the country. He emphasized that the main challenge
at this critical moment is to implement the political
agreement and achieve a democratic transition and
civilian rule. In that regard, it is my pleasure to say
before the Council that practical steps have been taken
to implement the provisions of the political agreement.
Those who were detained have been released, while we
continue to implement the Juba Peace Agreement. We
have also appointed a Chief Justice and an Attorney
General. All partners will continue to implement the
provisions of the political agreement to ensure the
success of the transitional process.
The international community has responded to the
aspirations of the Sudanese people for freedom, peace
and justice, which undoubtedly will ensure the success
of the transitional process in the Sudan. I look forward
to the continued support of the international community
for that process. We will work with our partners during
21-38652

10/12/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the transitional period to reach the desired goals and
implement the provisions of the Juba Peace Agreement,
in particular the security arrangements that require
international support, which will lead to achieving
peace, security and stability in Darfur, which is facing
security challenges that the relevant authorities are
working to address radically through close cooperation
with various partners inside and outside the country.
The positive engagement of our friends and
international financial institutions is also necessary
to alleviate the impact of the economic reforms and
external debt burden and to address the economic
structural defects that we have inherited. In that regard,
it is necessary to continue to support social protection
programmes in order to address some of the social
situations and implement economic reforms so that
their objectives can be achieved. The international
community needs to provide all aspects of humanitarian
assistance to the hundreds of thousands of refugees who
have come to the Sudan from neighbouring countries in
the region.
I would like to sincerely thank all the members of
the Security Council for their support for my country
during and after the glorious December revolution. I
also thank our friends who continued to make efforts
leading up to the signing of the 21 November political
agreement. We call on the Council to continue to
support the agreement, which represents an important
step that has diffused much of the tension, as we heard
earlier from Mr. Perthes, and to support the stability of
the Sudan at this critical time.
The region does not need any more conflicts. I
call for continued support to UNITAMS so that it can
carry out its tasks and contribute to the success of
the transitional process in the Sudan, leading to fair
elections that will pave the way towards sustained
civilian democratic rule and meet the aspirations of our
people, who yearn for freedom and good democratic
governance.
In conclusion, I emphasize that the partners in the
transition period will pursue their efforts to ensure its
success. In that regard, I reiterate that we will continue to
work with the international community to overcome all
challenges during the transitional process in the Sudan
and achieve our desired goals. I recall the statement
that the Secretary-General made at a press conference
last week, in which he stressed the need for common
sense to prevail and accept the 21 November political

S/PV. 8925

agreement to ensure a peaceful transition towards
democracy. I agree with the Secretary-General’s
assertion that questioning the solution set forth in the
political agreement will have dangerous repercussions
not only for the Sudan, but also the entire region.
I thank Council members for their statements, in
which they mostly stressed the fact that the Council
stands ready to ensure stability and development
in the Sudan. I reiterate once again that the political
agreement requires further support from the Council
and its members, as the representatives of their
respective countries and of the Council. The Sudan
also needs constructive and realistic engagement that
takes its current situation and political developments
into account, along with the specificities of political
practices throughout the region. The Council must
take into consideration the regional political situation
while taking realistic steps to ensure our success. We
should not look for ideals; otherwise our efforts will go
to waste.
That is what we expect from the Council. We once
again thank everyone for their statements, whether
they were critical or encouraging. We look forward to
the Council playing a constructive role in ensuring the
success of the transitional period in the Sudan, leading
to the holding of free and fair elections and democratic
governance commensurate with the aspirations of our
great people, as expressed by the glorious December
revolution.
I also welcome Mr. Volker Perthes and once again
thank him for his comprehensive briefing, including his
call on the Council to take a balanced stance and continue
to provide economic assistance. He also stressed that
UNITAMS will continue to engage constructively to
guarantee the success of the transitional process in the
Sudan. Regarding the political situations in some of the
areas outside the capital, especially Darfur, I stress that
the Government has taken practical measures and has
deployed forces to end the unfortunate tribal fighting
and maintain security and stability. The situation is now
completely under control. We express our condolences
for those who lost their lives and wish those who are
injured quick recovery.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

21-3865217/17
