UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

NEW

31 OCTOBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2493)

1

..,,*,a..,.,,.,,..,..........*.*...*

Adoption of the agenda . . . , , , . , , , . . , q. , . . . . . . , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation between Iran and Iraq

,..,.*,....,,..,..,,...............I

1
1

WPV.2493 and Corr. I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Of$cial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2493rd MEETING
Held
President:

in New York on Monday,

Mr. Abdullah SALAH

31 October

(Jordan).

for this reason that the death of every soldier, injury to
every citizen and the destruction of every home, village
and city produces a sense of persona1 loss and agony in
every citizen of Pakistan throughout the length and
breadth of the country.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

5. The deep anguish of the people of Pakistan has been
reflected in the continuous efforts which the President of
Pakistan has made, both at the personal level and as a
member of the Islamic Peace Committee, to bring about a
resolution of the conflict. Neither the passage of time nor
the lack of progress in our peace efforts so far has made us
give up hope or abandon our quest for conciliation and
peace between the two Islamic countries. We remain as
fervently committed today as we were at the beginning of
the conflict to seeking an end to this tragedy. We are
encouraged by the trust and confidence which the two
countries have reposed in us to persevere in our search for
peace undaunted by the difficulties in our path.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2493)
1. Adoption
2.

1983, at 11 a.m.

of the agenda

The situation between Iran and Iraq
The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

6. Since the beginning of the war, the Security Council,
the Islamic Peace Committee, the Movement of NonAligned Countries and individual peacemakers have been
making efforts to bring about an end to this tragic conflict.
None of these initiatives has been attended by success.

The situation between Iran and Iraq
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Arabic): Members of the Council have before them document S/16092,
which contains the text of a draft resoluton submitted by
Guyana, Togo and Zaire. I understand that the Council is
prepared to take a vote on that draft resolution. Unless 1
hear an objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

7. The Council first considered the Iran-Iraq conflict in
late September 1980 [2247th meeting], when a presidential
statement [S/14190] was followed by the adoption of a
resolution [resolrcrion479 (1980)] calling upon the two parties to observe a cease-fire and settle their dispute through
peaceful means. Since then, the Council has adopted two
resolutions [resolutions 514 (1982) and 522 (1982)] and
three presidential statements [S/14244, S/15296 and
S/15616]. Simultaneously, mediation efforts have been
made by Prime Minister Olaf Palme of Sweden on behalf
of the Secretary-General.

2. I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
3. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): The fratricidal conflict between Iran and Iraq, which has just entered its
fourth year, has claimed the lives of thousands of innocent
men, women and children, and inflicted savage punishment on scores of population centres on both sides. The
unremitting hostilities spell disaster for the fragile economies of the two countries, and, if continued much longer,
will mortgage their future to the vagaries of history’s incalculable forces.

8. The magnitude of the issues involved in the conflict
has, however, dwarfed the efforts reflected in the Council
resolutions and the appeals in the presidential statements.
One of the major reasons for the failure of the international bodies, in particular the Council, to take effective
measures to bring about a cease-fire and terminate this
tragic conflict has been Iran’s perception of a lack of
proper understanding of its point of view by the Council.
The inability of the Council adequately to respond to
Iran’s concerns and misgivings, particularly during the
early stages of the conflict, has caused Iran to form a
somewhat impetuous judgement about the Council’s
capacity to play an effective role as a peacemaker.

4, Pakistan has been profoundly moved by this tragic
conflict. The pangs of anguish at the prolongation of this
war are made more poignant for us, not only by our geegraphical proximity to the centre of hostilities, not only by
the ties of tradition and history, but, especially, because
the flow of our Islamic heritage and ideology can be traced
directly to the fountains of culture and religion which cascaded in these two great countries many centuries ago. It is
1

presenl. It is, therefore, imperative for the States of the
region, in particular for Iran and Iraq themselves, to demonstrate sensitivity to this gmve situation, and hasten to
make peace in the interest of their own survival and
independence.

9. While the capacity of the Council to influence the
course of events in the Iran-Iraq conflict thus remains
impaired, the fratricidal war continues not only to take a
heavy toll of life and property on both sides, but to
approach a flashpoint which could spark off a wider conflagration, with far-reaching consequencesfor world peace
and security. In such an eventuality, the belligerent countries themselves and their neighbours in the region would
be the greatest sufferers and the biggest losers.

15. Mr, GAUCI (Malta): As we have stated on so many
occasions and in every forum open to us, the Maltese
Government views with great concern the outbreak of hostilities between Iraq and Iran, both countries staunch
friends of Malta. On every single day, indeed practically at
every single hour since the unfortunate outbreak of hostilities, it has been Malta’s constant endeavour to encourage
reconciliation between the two parties through a cease-tire
and negotiations. We were therefore encouraged that both
sides responded with detailed and written observations to
the working paper which had been the focus of concentrated attention in rhe Council in the course of the informal consultations over the past two weeks or so. We have
stated our position in the informal consultations and we
wish to confirm our reasoned position publicly today,

10. When the Council addressed itself once again to this
issue in its current session, it was our hope that a serious
attempt would be made to evolve a resolution that would
engage both parties in a processcombining the virtue of an
immediate containment of hostilities with the prospect of a
comprehensive peace settlement to follow. The alternative
was, as in the past, to adopt a resolution which the Council, in its judgement, deemed fair and necessary, even if it
left one party to the conflict as disenchanted and aggrieved
as ever. Resolutions of the ‘btter category already exist,
and the addition of another of that kind would hardly
have a meaningful impact on the war.

16. As members no doubt would be .aware, my delegation took the objective stand that the main concern of the
Council at this stage should be to build on the initial
responses received and to undertake urgent and energetic
efforts to bring the two sides together in an open attempt
to initiate, through the good offices of the Council, a constructive and, we would hope, positive dialogue. We
believe that this approach would offer better possibilities
than the mere passage of a draft resolution, even though it
would undoubtedly be more time consuming, Since we
know that one side has not considered that it has been
given a reasonable hearing and sufficient consultation by
the Council during its current consideration, we naturally
favoured a prolongation of the exercise under way in the
Council. Others, unfortunately, felt otherwise and pressed
for a vote. It the vote will help reconciliation between the
parties and bring about a cessation of hostilities, nothing
would give my country greater pleasure, But for the reasons stated, we have misgivings and therefore, while not
opposing the draft resolution, my delegation will have to
abstain in the voting on it.

11. In order to contain and bring to an end this threeyear-old conflict, what is required above all is to promote a
peace process in which both the parties become fully
engaged. Given the great objective before us, that of restoring peace and tranquillity in a most sensitive area of the
world, we need to summon all our resources of patience
and courage to help us remain fully committed to this
noble goal.
12. We regret the loss of an opportunity during our informal consultations when a sustained effort might have succeeded in getting the two parties involved in the process of
‘consultations with the promise of a meaningful outcome.
Instead of devoting more time to exhaustive consultations,
we are hastening to adopt a document which is not fully
matured and which lacks consensus. It is not likely to serve
the objective we have in view. We must now wait for
another propitious combination of circumstances for a
renewed effort to activate a peace process.
13. It is as much for those reasons as for our concern for
the preservation of Pakistan’s impartial role as a member
of the Islamic Peace Committee that we shall abstain from
voting on the draft resolution which, nevertheless, has
many positive features, such as the call for a cessation of
hostilities, the emphasis on the continuing role of the
Secretary-General, the affirmation of the right offree navigation in international waters in the region of the Persian
Gulf, the call addressed to the belligerents to respect the
integrity of other littoral States and the emphasis on the
need for all States to exercise the utmost restraint and to
refrain from any act which may lead to further escalation
and widening of the conflict.

17. We remain opeq, within our modest means, to exercise renewed efforts to bring about the cherished hope of
reconciliation and the cessation of the conflict between
Iraq and Iran. This we pledge to both parties and to the
Council. We hope that the time will soon come to bring
about constructive negotiations with the continued and
dedicated assistance of the Secretary-General.
18. Mr. TINOCO

FONSECA

(Nicaragua)

(interpreta-

tion from Spanish): We should like to speak before the

draft resolution on the situation between Iran and Iraq,
sponsored by Guyana, Togo and Zaire [S/1609z], is put to
the vote.

14. The prolongation of the Iran-Iraq conflict in a region
which harbours so many other combustible issues exposes
it to the danger of great-Power intervention. The everoresent threat of great-Power confrontation in that vital
,egion has never been so imminent, nor the ability of the
rnited Nations to avert a catastrophe so impaired as at

19. Notwithstanding the efforts to reconcile the various
views of the members of the Council, it has not been possible to produce a consensus document. We would have
preferred that, in this matter of such special importance
and delicacy, the actions of the Council be guided by a
2

conciliatory
approach which woutd include the stand
taken by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on this
question. For various reasons it has not been possible fur
that approach, the only one that, in our opinion, can truly
contribute to a solution of the problem, to prevail. We
have friendly relations with Iran and Iraq, sister countries
that are involved in a fratricidal and senselessstruggle. Our
friendship with both countries by virtue of the principles of
non-alignment
lead us to believe that there are better
methods for dealing with this delicate and complex
situation.
20, The draft resolution before us does not provide them.
That js why we very much doubt that it will achieve the
desired results, As we said in the informal consultations,
should the draft resolution reflect the views of the majority
of the members of the Council, we cannot object to the
Council taking such action as it deems necessary in this
situation, But we cannot endorse by an affirmative vote a
decision which lacks any guarantee of effectiveness and
even casts doubt on the ability of the parties to the controversy to bring about a relaxation of tension.
21. That is why we shall have to abstain in the voting on
the draft resolution.
22. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
shall now put to the vote the draft resolution submitted by
Guyana, Togo and Zaire [ibid.,].
A vote was taken by show of hands.

Infivour: China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Netherlands,
Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Zaire, Zimbabwe.
Against:

None.

Abstaining: Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan.
The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none, with
3 abstentions [resolution 540 (1983)].

23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
shall now call on members of the Council wishing to make
statements after the voting.
24. Mr. MEESMAN (Netherlands): It is on the Security
Council that the Members of the United Nations have
conferred the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Confronted with acts
of aggression or a breach of the peace, it is our collective
duty to make constructive and objective recommendations
and, if necessary, to take collective measures in order to
bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law, the adjustment
or settlement of the conflict.
25. The cruel war between Iran and Iraq has now already
lasted for more than three years, More than eight months
have elapsed since the Council issued its last presidential
statement on the conflict [S/25616], which now threatens

to escalate even further into the region of the Gulf. Surely,
if it is to live up to its special responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations, the Council simply cannot
remain silent.
26. We should, however, recognize thal past decisions of
the Council have failed to bring about conditions leading
to a peaceful settlement of the conflict in conformity with
the principles of justice and international law.
27. If we are to achieve favourable conditions leading to
an end of this war it is, in our opinion, essential for this
Council not only to be as objective and balanced as possible in its assessment of the conflict but also to secure the
agreement of both parties to co-operate with the decisions
of the Council. It was with these important objectives in
mind that the Netherlands delegation took an active part
in the consultations which led to the draft resolution submitted by Guyana, Togo and Zaire. Because we are not
dissatisfied with the result, the Netherlands voted in favour
of the draft resolution.
28. However, as on previous occasions when the Council
dealt with the situation between Iran and Iraq, one of the
problems facing the Council remained how to secure the
compliance of both parties with a resolution. I repeat that,
for Council decisions to have any real impact on this
serious and bitter conflict, a certain measure of cooperation on the part of both parties is indispensable. We
seem to have been nearer to this important ob.iective than
on any previous occasion and we, for our part, therefore,
regret that it has not been possible to explore the possibilities which might have presented themselves to the very
end.
29. In conclusion, we wish to express the hope that this
new resolution will serve as a first step to a more meaningful involvement of the United Nations in the search for a
comprehensive, just and honourable settlement of the conflict in all its aspects that is acceptable to both sides. The
important role which the Secretary-General could play to
this end is underlined in paragraph 1 of the resolution,
which requests him to continue his mediation efforts. If the
belligerents were to heed the calls for the immediate cessation of all military operations against civilian targets and
for the ending of all hostilities in the region of the Gulf, as
expressed in paragraphs 2, 3 and 5, this could l~clp to bring
about the more favourable conditions required to end this
bitter war by peaceful means. Last, but nl,t least, we
whole-heartedly agree with the call reiterated in palngrdpl
6 for al1 other States to exercise the utmost restraint and to
refrain from any act which might lead to a ftrrthcr es&>tion and widening of the conflict.
30. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation fvum Xussilm): Today’s meeting
of the Council reflects the profound concern of the overwhelming majority of Members of the Orgariization in
connection with the continuing armed conflict between
Iran and Iraq, ‘This concern is whole-heartedly shared by
the Soviet Union, which cannot fail to take an interest in
eliminating dangerous hotbeds of tension in regions which
are in the immediate vicinity of its li-omiers.

33. On the basis of these considerations, the Soviet delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution [S/16092].

31. Ever since this conflict broke out, the Soviet Union
has consistently taken a clear and definite position-which
is that it is essential to bring about an early cessation of
military actions between the parties and the political settlement of the controversial issues by peaceful means. On the
basis of this position of principle, and guided by its desire
to promote efforts to end the tragic war between Iran and
Iraq, the Soviet Union supported the previous unanimous
decisions of the Security Council on this subject. Our country also expressed its support for the mediation mission of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
other constructive international efforts aimed at moving
the conflict on to the path of a political settlement.

34. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation has all along maintained
that the war between Iran and Iraq should be settled by
peaceful means, The Chinese delegation further holds that,
in the present circumstances, the question of how to bring
about the participation of both sides in the process of
peaceful negotiations is an extremely important one. The
Council should give serious consideration to this point
when it decides to take action.
35. The draft resolution that has just been put to the
vote, in which the Council calls for a cease-fire and
requests the Secretary-General to continue with his mediation efforts and other positive factors, is consistent with
China’s position that the conflict between the two sides
should be settled by peaceful means,

32. The Soviet Union has consistently and categorically
opposed, and continues to oppose, any attempts on the
part of external forces to exploit the Iran-Iraq conflict for
intervention in the internal affairs of States in that area. It
is the sovereign right of those countries and peoples to
provide for their own security and to dispose freely of their
own natural resources. Any armed intervention in this
area, no matter what the pretext-including
that of ensuring freedom of navigation in the Persian Gulf-is absolutely inadmissible. It must be absolutely clear to everyone
that such intervention could have extremly dangerous consequences for the fate of peace in this region and throughout the world.

36. For this reason, the Chinese delegation
favour of the draft resolution.

voted in

37. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The
Council has concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

4

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout the
world, Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Units sent en vente dans les Iibrairies et les agences depositaires
du munde entier. Informez-vous
auprEs de votre libraire ou adressez-vous 1~ : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Gcneve.
ICAK

llO.JIYYl4Tb

M3.4AHMII

OPTAHMSAIJAW

OE;‘J&~MHEHHLIX

M3naHliR
O~TaIiM3LWiM
O6~efliWeHHblX
HausR MONKHO KyITUTb
M~reI~Tc.r~~XB~BcCXp~~Ol~~XM~pa.~a~onllTeC~paBK~OEi~3~~~i~~XBBaUl~MKHU)I(IIOM
MaraSUHe
MJIH nw.~rIre
no anpecy:
OpraHENiUm
O6'benHHeIiHh~X
nponame
usnamti,Hbro-Mopx
H~II XeHeBa.

B KHM)KHblX

COMO

UNIDAS

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

HauHU,

HAUMti
Mara3MHaX
CeKuMw

n0

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mtmdo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Venhs,
Nueva York o Ginebra.
