General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

92

(f) Rules relative to the behaviour of combatants;
(g) Measures intended to reinforce the implementa-

tion, in armed conflicts, of existing intemational humanitarian law;
3. Expresses the hope that the second session of
the Conference of Government Experts will malee
recommendations for the further development of international humanitarian law in this field, inclucling, as
appropriate, draft protocols to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, for subsequent consideration at one or more
plenipotentiary diplomatic conferences;
~- Calls upon States parties to the existing international instruments to review, as a matter of priority,
any reservations they may have made to those instruments;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To transmit his Iatest report,42 together with
any further observations received from Governments
as well as the records of relevant discussions ,and
resolutions of the General Assembly, to the Intemational
Committee of the Red Cross for consideration as
appropriate, by the Conference of Government Experts
at its second session;
( b) To report to the General Assembly at its
!Wenty-seve1!th session on the progress made in the
rmplementation of the present resolution;
. 6. Decides !º consider this question again, in all
1ts aspects, at 1ts twenty-seventh session.

2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2854 (XXVI). Protection of journalists engaged
in dangerous missions in areas of armed
conflict

The Ge,reral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2444 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 conceming, in particular, the studies to be
undertaken by the Secretary-General in consultation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other appropriate international organizations
with regard, inter alía, to the need for additional
humanitarian international conventions or for other
app~opriate ~e~~l instru1;I1ents to ensure the better protection of c1vihans, pnsoners and combatants m all
armed conflicts,
Recalling also its resolution 2673 (XXV) of 9 December 1970, in which it expressed its conviction
that there was a need for an additional humanitarian
inte~nation~ instrument to ensure the better protection
~f 1ourn~sts engaged in dangerous missions, particularly m areas where an armed conflict was taking
place,
Being aware that the provisions of the humanitarian
conventions at present in force do not cover sorne
categories of journalists engaged in dangerous missions
and do not correspond to their present needs,
Noting Commission on Human Rights resolution 15
(J:C~VII) of 24 March 1971,43 in which the Comm1ss1on expressed its conviction that there was an
urg~nt ne~d to examin~ the question of the protection
of Journahsts engaged m dangerous missions, both on
42 A/8370 and Add.l.

. 4 ~ See O{fi_cial Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Fiftleth Sesswn, Supplement No. 4 (E/4949), chap. XIX.

humanitarian grounds and in order to enable journalists
with due respect for the law to seek, receive and
impart information fully, objectively and faithfully in
the spirit ~f the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the Uruted Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights concerning freedom of information,
N oting Economic and Social Council resolution
1597 (L) of 21 May 1971 in which the Council
deci~e~ to transl!llt to .the 'General Assembly the
prehmmary draft mternational convention on the protectio~ of jo'!rnalists engaged in dangerous missions,
subnutted to 1t by the Commission on Human Rights,
as well as the relevant records of the Commission and
of the Council, as a valid basis for the discussions
of the Assembly at its twenty-sixth session,
.N_oting the r~p?rt of the Secretary-General44 contammg the prehmmary draft international convention
o~ t~e protection of j_ournalists engaged in dangerous
m1ss1ons, the observations received from Govemments
concerning the preliminary draft and the observations
of the C?nference of Government Experts on the
Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, which
was held at Geneva from 24 May to 12 June 1971
at the invitation of the Intemational Comrnittee of
the Red Cross,
Noting wit~ appreciation the report45 of the Working
Group estabhshed by the Secretary-General in accordance with Commission on Human Rights resolution 15
(XXVII), ~d the annexed. draft protocol relating to
the compos1tion and functions of the International
Professional Committee for the Protection of J ournalists
Engaged in Dangerous Missions referred to in article 3
of the aforementioned preliminary draft convention,
Having considered the observations submitted by
sorne Member States in accordance with Commission
on Human Rights resolution 15 (XXVII) and the
observations of the Conference of Government Experts
as well as the discussions on the item and the altemate
draft convention submitted during the debate at the
twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
. 1. Be~ieyes that it is necessary to adopt a conven!Ion prov1dmg for the protection of journalists engaged
m dangerous missions in areas of armed conflict·
2. Invites the Economic and Social Coun~il to
request the Comn_iis~ion o~ Human R_ights to consider
as ª. ~atter of pnonty at 1ts twenty-e1ghth session the
pr~hmmary draft convention contained in Council resoIution 1597 (L), taking into consideration the draft
conventions sub_mitted by Australia46 and by the United
States of Amenca, 47 and the observations of Governments,48 as well as ali subsequent documents including
the draft protocol49 prepared by the Working Group in
ac_co~dance with resolution 15 (XXVII) of the Comm1ss10n;
. 3. Further requests the Commission on Human
R1ghts to transmit its report on its twenty-eighth session
to the C<;Jnference of Government Experts on the
Reaffirmation and Development of Intemational Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts at its
sec~md session !º be convened in 1972 by the Internat10nal Comm1ttee of the Red Cross, in arder that
44 A/8371
4 " A/8438

and Add.1 and 2.
and Add.1.
40 _Officia! Records of the Genaal Assemb!y, Twentv-sixth
Sesswn, Annexes, agenda item 49 document A/8589 para 26
4 1 /bid .. para. 27.
'
' ' · ·
4 ~ A/8371, annex II; A/8371/ Add.1 and 2.
411 A/8438, annex.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the International Committee may submit its observations to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session;
4. Invites Governments to transmit their observations on that part of the report of the Commission
on Human Rights on its twenty-eighth session relating
to this question;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
replies received and an analytic report on those replies
to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;
6. Decides to examine this question as a matter
of the highest priority at its twenty-seventh session,
taking into consideration the recommendations transmitted to the General Assembly by the Economic and
Social Council.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2855 (XXVI). United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund, 11º
Recognizing that, in countries assisted by the Fund,
children and adolescents represent about half of the
total population, and that their number will increase
by nearly a third in the decade of the 1970s,
~onvinced of the importance of ensuring that
children and adolescents receive their due share of
attention and investment in the developing process
of developing countries,
Recognizing the valuable role the Fund is playing,
in co-operation with Governments, the relevant technical and other agencies of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations, in furthering the
objectives of the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
W elcoming the efforts of the Fund to bring the
needs of children ·and adolescents in developing countries to world-wide attention and the practica! aid
the Fund gives to developing countries to enable them
to provide services for children and adolescents within
a unified approach to economic and social development,
Noting with approval the prompt and effective assistance that the Fund has provided in natural and other
disasters to meet the urgent needs of mothers and
children, who are particularly vulnerable and constitute
the large majority of those affected by disasters,
1. Commends the United N ations Children's Fund
for its very substantial and significant achievements
?uring its .t":enty-five years of operation, and expresses
1ts apprec1ation to all who helped contribute to those
achievements;
2. Endorses the policies of the Fund;
3. Requests the Fund to continue and expand its
co-operation with countries for the protection of the
younger generation and their preparation for future
responsibilities;
4. Appeals to Governments and other donors to
make every effort to increase their contributions to
the Fund, so as to enable it to reach its target figure
of $100 million by 1975.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
IIO Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8403), chap. VIII, sect. F.

93

2856 (XXVI). Declaration on the Rights of
Mentally Retarded Persons

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the pledge of the States Members of tbe
United N ations under the Charter to take joint and
separate action in co-operation with the Organization
to promote higher standards of living, full employment
and conditions of economic and social progress and
development,
Reaffirming faith in human rights and fundamental
freedoms and in the principies of peace, of the dignity
and worth of the human person and of social justice
proclaimed in the Charter,
Recalling the principles of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Intemational Covenants on
Human Rights, the Declaration of the Rights of the
0ñld and ~e ~tandards alr~ady set for social progress
m the constitutions, conventions, recommendations and
resolutions of the Intemational Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund and other organizations concemed,
Emphasizing that the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development has proclaimed the necessity of protecting the rights and assuring the welfare and rehabilitation of the physically and mentally disadvantaged,
Bearing in mind the necessity of assisting mentally
retarded persons to develop their abilities in various
fields of activities and of promoting their integration
as far as possible in normal üfe,
Aware that certain countries, at their present stage
of development, can devote only limited efforts to this
end,
Proclaims this Declaration on the Rights of Mentally
Retarded Persons and calls for national and intemational action to ensure that it will be used as a common
basis and frame of reference for the protection of
these rights:
1. The mentally retarded person has, to the maximum degree of feasibility, the same rights as other
human beings.
2. The mentally retarded person has a right to
proper medical care and physical therapy and to
such education, training, rehabilitation and guidance
as will.enable him to develop bis ability and maximum
potentlal.
3. The mentally retarded person has a right to
economic security and to a decent standard of living.
He has a right to perform productive work or to
engage in any other meaningful occupation to the
fullest possible extent of bis capabilities.
4. Whenever possible, the mentally retarded person should live with bis own family or with foster
parents and participate in different forms of community life. The family with which he lives should
receive assistance. If care in an institution becomes
necessary, it should be provided in surroundings and
other circumstances as close as possible to those of
normal life.
5. The mentally retarded person has a right to
a qualified guardian when this is required to protect
bis personal well-being and interests.
6. The mentally retarded person has a right to
protection from exploitation, abuse and degrading
treatment. If prosecuted for any offence, he shall
