United Nations

A/RES/63/153

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 February 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 55 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/424)]

63/153. Follow-up to the implementation of the International Year
of Volunteers
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/134 of 16 December 2005 on the follow-up to the
International Year of Volunteers,
Noting that the momentum created by the International Year has contributed to
the vibrancy of volunteerism globally with the involvement of more people, from a
broader cross-section of societies,
Recognizing that volunteerism is an important component of any strategy
aimed at, inter alia, such areas as poverty reduction, sustainable development,
health, disaster prevention and management and social integration and, in particular,
overcoming social exclusion and discrimination,
Recognizing also that volunteerism makes significant contributions to
development and that appropriate policies are needed to ensure that this potential is
realized,
Acknowledging the existing contribution of the organizations of the United
Nations system to supporting volunteering, especially the work of the United
Nations Volunteers programme around the world, and acknowledging also the
efforts of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to
promote volunteerism throughout its global network,
Bearing in mind the need for an integrated and coordinated follow-up to the
International Year to be pursued in the relevant parts of the United Nations system,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General; 1
0F

2.
Reaffirms the need to recognize and promote all forms of volunteerism as
an issue that involves and benefits all segments of society, including women,
children, young persons, older persons, persons with disabilities, minorities,
migrants and those who remain excluded for social or economic reasons;

_______________
1

08-47997

A/63/184.

A/RES/63/153

3.
Recognizes the importance of supportive legislative and fiscal
frameworks for the growth and development of volunteerism, and encourages
Governments to enact such measures;
Welcomes the work of Governments, the United Nations system and other
4.
stakeholders to create a supportive environment for the promotion of volunteerism;
5.
Takes note of the actions by Governments to support volunteerism, and
reiterates its call upon them to continue such action;
6.
Acknowledges the importance of civil society organizations for the
promotion of volunteerism, and in that respect recognizes that strengthening the
dialogue and interaction between civil society and the United Nations contributes to
the expansion of volunteerism;
Encourages Governments to establish partnerships with civil society in
7.
order to build up volunteer potential at the national level, given the important
contribution that volunteerism makes to the fulfilment of the internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration; 2
1F

8.
Welcomes the expanding involvement of the private sector in support of
volunteerism, and encourages Governments to support this trend;
9.
Invites Governments to mobilize and support the research community
globally to carry out more studies on the subject of volunteerism, in partnership
with civil society, in order to provide sound knowledge as a foundation for policies
and programmes;
10. Recognizes that greater efforts are needed to ensure that climate change
and the environment feature on the volunteerism agenda of Governments and the
United Nations;
11. Calls for the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to integrate volunteerism in its various forms into their policies, programmes
and reports, and encourages the recognition and inclusion of volunteer contributions
in future United Nations and other relevant international conferences;
12. Reaffirms its recognition of the work of the United Nations Volunteers
programme as the focal point for the follow-up to the International Year of
Volunteers, and requests it to continue to raise awareness of the contribution of
volunteerism to peace and development, to act as a convener on the subject for the
various interested stakeholders, to make available networking and reference
resources and to provide technical cooperation to developing countries, upon their
request;
13. Invites the Commission for Social Development to consider
“volunteerism for development” in the context of its theme of social integration at
its forty-seventh and forty-eighth sessions, in 2009 and 2010 respectively;
14. Decides that, on or around 5 December 2011, the International Volunteer
Day for Economic and Social Development, two plenary meetings of the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly shall be devoted to follow-up to the International
Year and the commemoration of its tenth anniversary, under the item entitled
“Social development”;
_______________
2

2

See resolution 55/2.

A/RES/63/153

15. Invites Governments, with the active support of the media, civil society
and the private sector, as well as development partners and the relevant
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to carry out activities
focused on marking the tenth anniversary of the International Year, in 2011, at the
regional and national levels;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution under the item
entitled “Social development”.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2008

3
