S/2021/700

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 August 2021
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2576 (2021)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2576
(2021), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since my previous
report of 4 May 2021 (S/2021/426) and the briefing to the Security Council by the
Special Representative for Iraq and Head of UNAMI on 11 May 2021.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
Preparations for the parliamentary elections scheduled for 10 October 2021
were a key focus during the reporting period. In a televised address on 13 May, the
Prime Minister, Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, stated that his Government’s primary goal was
to “conduct fair and just elections, consistent with the will of the people”. The Prime
Minister also announced that he would neither take part in the elections as a candidate
nor support any political party. He highlighted the ongoing work of h is Government,
including anti-corruption efforts, economic reforms, measures to bring weapons
under State control, efforts to implement the Sinjar agreement, steps to improve
regional relations, and the ongoing strategic dialogue with the United States of
America. He further noted that work had begun on a budget for the period 2022 –2024.
3.
Following a meeting between the President, Barham Salih, and the Prime
Minister on 18 May, the Presidency issued a statement emphasizing the need to
maintain security and stability and create conditions in order to ensure that “the
outcome of the election reflected the Iraqis’ will”. The Supreme Electoral Security
Committee, the Chair of the Independent High Electoral Commission and governorate
electoral officials met to discuss ongoing preparations to provide security for the
elections. In a statement issued on 24 May, the President again emphasized the
importance of “optimal conditions” for the elections, including “protection and equal
opportunities” for candidate participation. In an address on 20 June, he also noted the
need for electoral monitoring, stating that sovereignty began with “respect for the
right to vote”. On 29 June, Mr. Salih, members of the board of the Independent High

21-09976 (E)

060821

*2109976*

S/2021/700

Electoral Commission and the Prime Minister’s adviser on elections called for the
intensification of the biometric registration campaign and recommended that the
results be counted manually and electronically, with the counting process widely
covered in the media and the results announced within 24 hours.
4.
The higher committee to promote and monitor women’s electoral participation,
established in March 2021, launched its workplan on 17 June. Activities include the
monitoring of violations against female candidates, capacity-building for women to
fully participate in electoral processes, and advocacy for legislation promoting
women’s political participation. Among other initiatives, the committee intends to
launch public awareness campaigns to discourage hate speech and attacks against
female candidates in order to enable their full and active participation in the elections.
Other advocacy efforts by civil society groups to ensure women’s participation in the
elections, including calls upon religious and community leaders to engage in
awareness-raising campaigns, are also ongoing.
5.
The killing of activist Ehab al-Wazni in Karbala’ on 9 May highlighted once
again the challenging pre-electoral security situation and led to protests in the city
from 9 to 11 May. The Prime Minister condemned the killing of Mr. al-Wazni on the
same day and called upon the Ministry of Interior to identify the perpetrators and
bring them to justice. The killing of Mr. al-Wazni was also widely condemned by civil
society groups, which demanded a safe electoral environment. Statements were issued
in which concern was expressed over the continued killings of activists and the
Government’s inability to hold perpetrators to account.
6.
In the same context, protests were held on 25 May, with several thousand Iraqis
gathering in Tahrir Square and other areas in Baghdad. Protesters demanded justice
for the victims and an end to impunity for attacks against activists. Two protesters
died from bullet wounds, and a number of protesters and members of the security
forces were injured. The next day, the Government issued orders to open a transparent
investigation and confirmed the Prime Minister’s support for peaceful protest and the
protection of demonstrators.
7.
On 26 May, the Security Media Cell under the Office of the Pri me Minister
reported the arrest in Baghdad of a commander of the Popular Mobilization Forces.
After the arrest, elements of the Forces reportedly deployed within the former
International Zone and demanded his release. In a statement issued on 27 May, the
President condemned “civil unrest and infringing upon the authority of the State and
upon its right to make security and military decisions” and emphasized that “offenders …
responsible for killing the peaceful protesters, activists and journalists must be …
brought to justice, judicial proceedings must be supported … and optimal conditions
for a secure and transparent vote must be ensured”. On 9 June, the Supreme Judicial
Council issued a statement indicating that the arrestee had been “charged with murder
of the activist Ehab al-Wazni … but the investigation court did not find evidence
proving his involvement” and that “he was released after he had been arrested for 12 days”.
8.
The Government continued its efforts to curb the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. On 11 May, the Joint Operations Command announced that a 10-day full
lockdown would come into effect from midnight on 12 May to cover Eid al -Fitr, in
accordance with the decision of the Council of Ministers on 4 May. However, on
13 May, the Supreme Committee for National Health and Safety announced its
decision to change the measure from a lockdown to a partial curfew. In addition,
Government institutions (excluding health and security services) were closed from 17
to 20 May. A partial curfew remains in place. On 29 May, the Ministry of Health
announced that the unstable epidemiological situation did not allow for its lifting. As
further vaccines arrived, efforts continued to encourage the Iraqi public to enrol for
vaccination.
2/15

21-09976

S/2021/700

9.
On 17 May, at the Prime Minister’s direction, the General Secretariat of the
Council of Ministers announced that it had filed a lawsuit with the Federal Supreme
Court against several provisions of the Federal Budget Law of 2021, stating that the
law contradicted the government programme. A ruling was therefore sought with a
view to expediting the implementation of the Law.
10. The Kurdistan Regional Government discussed a regional budget for 2021. In
an extraordinary meeting of that Government on 24 May, the Prime Minister of the
Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Masrour Barzani, stated that the Kurdistan Regional
Government would reflect the economic situation of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
increase transparency and outline long-term goals. The last budget law for the
Kurdistan Region of Iraq was passed in 2013.
11. Among efforts to combat corruption, the President announced, on 23 May, that
he had sent to the Council of Representatives a draft law on the recovery of funds
“lost to corruption”. He explained that the draft law outlined accountability provisions
as well as practical measures to recover funds smuggled out of Iraq and lost because
of corruption. The President said that the legislation would seek to recover the funds
through cooperation with other Governments and international bodies. In this regard,
he repeated the country’s call for an international anti-corruption coalition.
12. The Council of Representatives resumed legislative sessions on 29 May.
Subsequent sessions were postponed owing to the lack of a quorum. On 27 June, the
Speaker of the Council of Representatives held a meeting with the heads of political
blocs to discuss “the sustainability of the work” of the Council, deciding to hold
successive sessions during the following week. The Council subsequently co nvened
a session on 29 June, in which it approved the membership of the Federal Court of
Cassation and discussed recent security developments as well as the performance of
the Ministry of Oil.
13. In a speech at a high-level conference organized by the University of Kurdistan
Hewlêr in Erbil on 19 May, the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Nechirvan
Barzani, announced that his office would initiate the drafting of a Kurdistan regional
constitution, in cooperation with the Kurdistan Regional Govern ment and the
Parliament of the Kurdistan Region. He emphasized that the goal of a regional
constitution was to ensure that “all components of the Kurdistan Region feel safe in
this country and feel that they and next generations have a better future”. Duri ng the
same conference, Prime Minister Barzani highlighted the need for the regional
constitution to reflect “diversity, peaceful coexistence and religious tolerance”. The
Speaker of the Parliament, who was also present at the conference, added that the
regional constitution was necessary “to reform our institutions”.
14. On 18 May, the Parliament of the Kurdistan Region approved the appointment
of Muna Yukna Yaqu as the new head of the Independent Human Rights Commission
of the Kurdistan Region. She is the first woman to hold the position.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
15. Following the adoption of the Federal Budget Law of 2021 on 31 March, the
federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments continued discussions on its
implementation. The Deputy Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, Qubad
Talabani, led a delegation of the Kurdistan Regional Government to Baghdad, from
31 May to 2 June, to discuss the implementation of the Law. According to article 11
of the Federal Budget Law, the Kurdistan Region of Iraq will receive 12.67 per cent
of its budget share in monthly increments in return, inter alia, for submitting 250,000
barrels of crude oil per day, or their monetary equivalent, to the State Oil Marketing
Organization. On 15 June, Prime Minister Barzani announced in a statement that he

21-09976

3/15

S/2021/700

and Mr. Al-Kadhimi had agreed to resume federal budgetary transfers to the Kurdistan
Regional Government, backdated to January 2021. On 22 June, the spokesperson for
the Council of Ministers confirmed the Council’s decision of 15 June to transfer funds
to the Kurdistan Regional Government but highlighted technical difficulties. During
a televised interview on 25 June, Mr. Al-Kadhimi clarified that the payments were
aimed at providing for the salaries of civil servants of the Kurdistan Regional
Government and would be deducted from the actual budget transfers.

C.

Security situation
16. Attacks conducted by Da‘esh continued, primarily in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala,
Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salih al-Din Governorates. Iraqi security forces continued their
counter-terrorism operations in response.
17. On 24 May, the Security Media Cell reported that one rocket had been launched
against the Ayn al-Asad airbase in Anbar Governorate. The spokesperson for the
international counter-Da‘esh coalition noted, on the same day, that there had been no
casualties and that the incident was under investigation. No claims of responsibility
were made. On 6 June, the spokesperson for the coalition reported that one rocket had
struck near a diplomatic facility of the United States within Baghdad International
Airport, causing no casualties. The coalition spokesperson stated that the attack was
under investigation by the Iraqi authorities. On the same day, the Cell reported that
two unmanned aerial vehicles had been shot down above the Ayn al-Asad airbase. On
9 June, the Cell reported that three rockets had targeted the Balcad airbase, north of
Baghdad, without casualties. The following day, it reported that Baghdad
International Airport had also been targeted on 9 June by three unmanned aerial
vehicles, one of which had been shot down. The next day, the coalition spokesperson
confirmed the attack at Baghdad International Airport on 9 June. On 20 June, the Cell
reported that a rocket had been fired towards the Ayn al-Asad airbase but had not
exploded, adding that security forces were investigating the incident.
18. On 26 June, the counter-terrorism services of the Kurdistan Regional
Government reported that, on the same day, three unmanned aerial vehicle-borne
improvised explosive devices had targeted locations north-east of Erbil, causing
material damage. The services stated that investigations were under way. No claim of
responsibility was made. The Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional Government
issued a statement the same day, stating that “there must be a response to this act of
aggression”.
19. From 11 May to 30 June, more than 29 attacks involving improvised explosive
devices were reported to have targeted trucks of Iraqi companies contracted to carry
supplies for the coalition, in Anbar, Baghdad, Babil, Basrah, Dhi Qar, Muthanna,
Qadisiyah and Salah al-Din Governorates.
20. The Ministry of National Defence of Turkey reported ongoing operations
against targets of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) in northern Iraq. On 17 May,
the President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, reported the death of a senior PKK
leader during a Turkish operation in northern Iraq. PKK refuted the death of its leader
in a statement published on 18 May.
21. On 5 June, a Turkish air strike took place near Makhmur, south-east of Mosul.
On 6 June, Mr. Erdoğan indirectly referred to the attack on social media and stated
that the “senior manager of the PKK terrorist organization and general manager of
Makhmour was neutralised”.
22. In a statement issued on 5 June, the Ministry of Peshmerga Affair s of the
Kurdistan Regional Government reported that an attack in northern Iraq had “resulted

4/15

21-09976

S/2021/700

in the death of five Peshmerga soldiers and wounded four others”, attributing the
attack to PKK. The same day, the Presidency of the Kurdistan Regional Government
condemned the attack by highlighting the need to end the “PKK’s aggression against
the Kurdistan Region”. The spokesperson for the Iraqi Commander-in-Chief also
condemned the attack in a statement on 5 June and stated that security forces were
investigating the incident. Similarly, the federal Ministry of Defence issued a
condemnatory statement, noting that “Peshmerga forces are integral parts of our
armed forces, and any attack on these forces is rejected and unacceptable”. In a press
statement on 6 June, the Ministry of National Defence of Turkey condemned the
attack and noted that Turkey “stands by … Iraqi brothers in their fight against
terrorism and is ready to support them”. On 5 June, the PKK issued a statement
denying its responsibility.
23. In a statement on 6 June, the Presidency of Iraq condemned the attack against
Peshmerga the previous day. It also noted the “unlawful presence” of the PKK on
Iraqi territory and that the “Iraqi Constitution stipulates that Iraq will not allow its
territory to be used as a staging post for any hostile action against any of its
neighbours”. Referring to the Turkish air strike near Makhmur as a “dangerous
escalation”, the Presidency also called for an end to “Turkish incursions and
violations of Iraqi sovereignty” and affirmed that the “Turkish military presence in
the Kurdistan Region and Mosul … should be withdrawn”. In the statement, the
Presidency also stressed the importance of enhancing Iraqi-Turkish cooperation to
resolve cross-border and security issues.
24. On 31 May, the federal Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture
and Water of the Kurdistan Regional Government issued a joint statement in which
they denounced acts of deforestation in northern Iraq and called upon the Government
of Turkey to put an end to those activities.
25. The Ministry of National Defence of Turkey issued a statement on 4 July
affirming that the Turkish Armed Forces continued to fight against terrorism “in
Turkey and across the border” in accordance with internation al law and that they
“display maximum sensitivity so that innocent civilians, the environment, historical
and cultural assets are not harmed”.
26. On 27 June, the Press Secretary of the United States Department of Defense
announced that United States forces had conducted “defensive precision airstrikes”
against facilities that, it reported, had been used to launch “unmanned aerial vehicle
attacks against US personnel and facilities in Iraq” and that the air strikes constituted
an “unambiguous deterrent message”. The Press Secretary noted the intention of the
President of the United States to protect United States personnel and that, “as a matter
of international law, the United States acted pursuant to its right of self -defense. The
strikes were both necessary to address the threat and appropriately limited in scope”.
27. The Government of Iraq condemned the United States air strikes in statements
issued on 28 June by the Presidency, the military spokesperson for the Prime Minister,
the National Security Council and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
28. On 5 July, the coalition spokesperson reported that three rockets targeting the
Ayn al-Asad airbase had landed on its perimeter without causing injuries. On 6 July,
the spokesperson reported that one unmanned aerial vehicle had struck in the vicinity
of Erbil airbase. He stated that initial reports indicated no casualties or damage. On
7 July, the spokesperson reported that 14 rockets had landed on and within the
perimeter of the Ayn al-Asad airbase and that “force protection defensive measures”
had been activated. He later confirmed that two personnel had sustained “minor
injuries”, adding that a damage assessment was under way. Responsibility for the
strike was claimed by a group calling itself the “Revenge f or Muhandis”. On 7 July,
the spokesperson for the Iraqi Commander-in-Chief condemned both incidents as a
21-09976

5/15

S/2021/700

“terrorist attack” perpetrated by “enemies of Iraq”, pledging that they would be
prosecuted.

D.

Regional and international developments
29. On 17 May, the Prime Minister spoke by telephone with the President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani. The Office of the Prime Minister stated
that they discussed joint counter-terrorism efforts and ways to jointly achieve and
support regional peace, security and sustainable economic development.
30. Security issues also shaped international engagement. The Deputy Minister of
Defence of Saudi Arabia visited Baghdad on 11 May and met separately with the three
presidencies. On 18 May, the Prime Minister received the Assistant Secretary-General
for Operations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). In a statement, the
Prime Minister noted that he had stressed the Government’s efforts to strengthen
bilateral relations and highlighted that future relations would be “confined to
non-combat fields” in line with the Government’s needs.
31. On 20 May, the Prime Minister received the Commander of the United States
Central Command, General Kenneth McKenzie. In a statement, the Prime Minister
reported their agreement to hold the first meeting of the specialized technical
committee to develop mechanisms for implementing the outcomes of the third round
of strategic dialogue. Subsequently, the Security Media Cell reported that the first
meeting had taken place on 5 June in Baghdad, where the two parties agreed on a
framework to discuss the long-term, bilateral security relationship. According to the
spokesperson for the Iraqi Commander-in-Chief, the parties also agreed that, before
the next meeting, a plan would be developed to implement decisions made during the
strategic dialogue, including “specific mechanisms and timings to complete the
redeployment of coalition combat troops”.
32. In addition, the chair of the French parliamentary commission on national
defence and the armed forces, Françoise Dumas, visited Iraq between 21 and 25 May,
travelling to Baghdad and Erbil as part of a fact-finding mission on stability in the
Middle East and prospects for military cooperation between France and Iraq.
33. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan, Makhdoom Shah Mahmood Hussain Qureshi,
arrived in Baghdad on 28 May for a three-day visit, during which he met separately
with the President, the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Defence
and Interior. Discussions covered security cooperation, including on countering
terrorism and violent extremism; economic cooperation; the combating of crime and
drug trafficking; and the strengthening of cultural ties.
34. On 1 and 2 June, respectively, the World Bank Vice President for the Middle
East and North Africa, Ferid Belhaj, met with Mr. Al-Kadhimi and Mr. Salih in
Baghdad. Discussions were focused on conducting economic reforms, reinvigorating
investments, countering corruption and restructuring public service delivery.
Mr. Belhaj commended the Government’s white paper on economic and financial
reforms.
35. On 4 June, the Prime Minister received a telephone call from the President of
France, Emmanuel Macron. In a statement, the Office of the Prime Minister rep orted
that the Prime Minister had “praised France’s role and support for Iraq against ISIL”
and highlighted economic and cultural fields as two important areas for bilateral
cooperation. For his part, Mr. Macron “praised the balanced diplomacy led by the
Iraqi Prime Minister creating the conditions for dialogue and stability”, including by
facilitating regional dialogue in Iraq.

6/15

21-09976

S/2021/700

36. On 6 June, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark, Jeppe Kofod,
inaugurated the new Danish embassy in Baghdad and met wit h the President, Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister. Discussions touched upon bilateral relations,
including cooperation in the economic, health and security fields, and on the fight
against terrorism.
37. On 8 June, the three presidencies and the Minister for Foreign Affairs met
separately in Baghdad with the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Dominic Raab. In their discussions, they highlighted
cooperation in the security, economic, cultural and health fields, as well as the
forthcoming elections. The Prime Minister reported the signing of a bilateral
“strategic political cooperation document”, described in a statement from the
President’s office as a memorandum of understanding that would also benefit regional
security and stability. In a statement, the United Kingdom reported the signing of a
“strategic partnership” that would “further deepen and strengthen … friendship”
between the two countries. It added that the Foreign Secretary had also met with
senior military officials from the international counter-Da‘esh coalition and NATO.
The following day, the President of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq received Mr. Raab
in Erbil.
38. In a statement marking World Environment Day on 5 June, the President
described the impact of climate change on Iraq and highlighted its economic and
social risks. He called for unity in addressing climate change and for a national
programme to deal with the urgent need for climate adaptation and to use it as an
opportunity to diversify the economy, promote renewable energy and increase the
resilience of vulnerable areas. He also noted the ratification in January of the law to
accede to the Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
39. On 14 June, the Foreign Minister arrived in Doha to attend consultative and
emergency meetings of foreign ministers of the League of Arab States Council.
According to the readout of the Foreign Ministry, the Foreign Minister requested the
League of Arab States to send electoral observers “to monitor the progress of the
upcoming electoral process”. On the sidelines of the meeting, the Foreign Minister
participated in a tripartite coordination mechanism meeting with his Egyptian and
Jordanian counterparts.
40. On 19 June, the President, the Prime Minister and the Speaker extended their
congratulations to the President-elect of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ebrahim Raisi,
on his election. The President and the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
also congratulated the President-elect.
41. On 21 June, the Foreign Minister attended a meeting of the Foreign Affairs
Council of the European Union in Luxembourg. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
reported in a statement on the same day that the Foreign Minister had stresse d his
country’s keenness to receive the “support of the European Union member states to
monitor the upcoming elections”.
42. On 27 June, the Prime Minister and the President hosted the President of Egypt
and the King of Jordan for the fourth tripartite summit. In a joint communiqué
released after the summit, they outlined their aim to enhance trilateral cooperation in
the security, political and economic fields and, regionally, to shape “a common vision …
through cooperation and coordination”. Egypt and Jordan also affirmed their support
for transparent and fair elections in Iraq.
43. On 29 June, Mr. Al-Kadhimi arrived in Brussels for a two-day visit, during
which he met with the Prime Minister of Belgium, the Presidents of the European
Commission and European Parliament, the Secretary General of NATO and the
21-09976

7/15

S/2021/700

permanent representatives of NATO member States. Discussions were focused on
support for stability in Iraq and the region, free and fair Iraqi elections, reconstruction
efforts and economic reforms, as well as bilateral cooperation with Iraq.
44. On 2 July, Mr. Al-Kadhimi met with the Prime Minister of Italy, Mario Draghi,
in Rome. They discussed bilateral cooperation on security, including countering
terrorism and organized crime, and on investment, energy and culture. On the same
day, he met with Pope Francis in the Vatican. The two sides “recalled the Pope’s
historic apostolic visit to Iraq in March” and stressed the need for national dialogue
to foster stability in the region.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
45. The Special Representative continued regular engagement with the three
presidencies, political party leaders, parliamentarians, the Independent High Electoral
Commission, religious and community leaders, activists and protest groups, with a
focus on electoral preparations, anti-corruption measures, justice and accountability.
She stressed the importance of all political actors in Iraq contributing to a conducive
environment for the elections. Concerning electoral preparations, she highlighted the
enhanced technical support provided by UNAMI to the Independent High Electoral
Commission. The Special Representative also reiterated that the integrity of the
electoral process, which would allow broad participation, was the primary
responsibility of Iraqi stakeholders. Responding to calls to boycott the elections, she
encouraged all voters to participate in the elections, as that was the best way to make
their voices heard and promote an electoral process that was and would be perceived
as credible and inclusive.
46. In parallel, the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance also engaged regularly with the Board of
Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral Commission, political
interlocutors, the higher committee to promote and monitor women’s electoral
participation, and the international community on preparations for the upcoming
elections. She reiterated the support of UNAMI for a gender-responsive electoral
process, acknowledging the challenges faced by candidates, including women.
47. In her engagements with community leaders, protesters and activists, the Special
Representative listened to their aspirations for a civil, moderate, sovereign, just, safe
and stable State, free of corruption. She underlined that the public reports issued by
UNAMI were aimed at engaging government institutions through fact-based
recommendations, accountability and progress measurement. In addition, she
discussed with government officials the pattern of attacks against demonstrators and
political activists and urged the Government to increase its efforts to end impunity.
48. On 24 June, the Special Representative visited Karbala’ and met with the family
of killed activist Ehab al-Wazni. She expressed her condolences and explained the
efforts of the United Nations to promote justice and accountability. She also met with
the Governor of Karbala’ and underlined the need to hold perpetrators to account.
49. On 19 May, the Special Representative participated in a conference organized
by the University of Kurdistan. In her speech, she highlighted the strength and
resilience of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, which arose from its diversity. She
emphasized the need for intra-Kurdish unity and stressed that sustainable democratic
societies required patience and compromise, noting that the ultimate concern of the

8/15

21-09976

S/2021/700

political leadership should be the delivery of reliable services to the people.
Furthermore, while acknowledging the added value of adopting a regional
constitution, she underlined that any outcome document should “fit hand-in-glove”
with the federal Constitution.
50. During a visit to Erbil, the Special Representative met with Kurdistan Regional
Government leaders and Kurdish civil activists and journalists. While recognizi ng
unique domestic, regional and international circumstances, the Special
Representative underscored that transparency and accountability were vital. She
emphasized that compliance with legal procedures and international human rights
standards was essential for any democratic society. She also visited Sulaymaniyah,
where she met with the leaders of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Movement
for Change to discuss intra-Kurdish and Baghdad-Erbil relations.
51. On 31 May, the Special Representative travelled to Moscow, where she met with
the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation as part of her outreach in
support of Iraq. She discussed, inter alia, the situation in Iraq in the context of the
early parliamentary elections, the role of the United Nations in support of the electoral
process, and the initial efforts undertaken by Iraq for the repatriation of certain Iraqi
families from the Hawl camp in the Syrian Arab Republic to Iraq.
52. During her visits to Basrah and Kirkuk on 24 May and 10 June, respectively, the
Deputy Special Representative held a series of meetings, including with local
government, tribal leaders, civil society, governorate offices of the Independent High
Electoral Commission and security leaders, to discuss issues relate d to the political
situation, elections and security. She underlined the importance of holding elections
in an inclusive, transparent and secure way with broad participation.
53. On 17 June, the Deputy Special Representative attended the launch of the
workplan of the higher committee to promote and monitor women’s electoral
participation. She underscored the commitment of the United Nations to support
efforts to advance women’s political participation. She also urged the Government to
do more to enable the safe, meaningful and fair participation of women in the
elections, and beyond in reaching decision-making positions.

B.

Electoral assistance
54. UNAMI continued deploying additional electoral advisers as part of its
strengthened technical electoral assistance project in support of ongoing electoral
preparations by the Independent High Electoral Commission. As at 1 July, 31
international electoral advisers and 54 national electoral officers provide the
Commission with technical assistance and advisory support in areas including
management and legal advice, operational planning and coordination, training and
procedures, logistics, procurement, information technology, election security,
communications and public outreach, gender, electoral complaints and COVID-19
mitigation measures during elections. Electoral teams deployed to five UNAMI
regional hubs continued to engage with governorate electoral offices. UNAMI is
planning the deployment of more than 30 additional staff within the framework of the
project.
55. In response to Security Council resolution 2576 (2021), UNAMI, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS),
developed a project proposal that entails the phased deployment of an additional 130
international electoral experts of the United Nations in advance of and on election
day. The experts will be deployed to Baghdad and regional hubs to achieve the widest
geographical coverage possible. The project also foresees the establishment of a
dedicated communications team to implement the strategic messaging campaign of

21-09976

9/15

S/2021/700

the United Nations, which is aimed at informing Iraqi voters of electoral preparations
and United Nations activities in support of the elections. The S ecretariat is supporting
the recruitment of experts through the electoral single roster, in coordination with
UNAMI and UNOPS.
56. The Independent High Electoral Commission achieved significant progress in
its electoral preparations, including in candidate registration. At the close of the
candidate nomination period on 1 May, more than 3,500 candidates, of which 982
(28 per cent) were women, had submitted nomination papers to contest the elections.
In line with the electoral law, the Independent High Electoral Commission sent the
documentation of the candidates to the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific
Research, the Ministry of Interior and the Accountability and Justice Commission for
vetting before the certification of the final list of candidat es.
57. The Commission initiated the recruitment of more than 350,000 staff to carry
out polling and counting duties. UNAMI provided technical advice on the recruitment
process, the staff training methodologies and the review of regulations and procedures
for polling, counting and transmitting results. It also advised the Commission’s
committee that follows up on the planning and implementation of COVID-19 safety
measures for election day. Similarly, UNAMI advised and supported the Commission
on the results management audit process and the procurement of electoral materials,
including ballot papers and other printed forms.
58. The Independent High Electoral Commission has also achieved considerable
progress in cross-checking the registration records of the 25.1 million eligible voters
in the registry and confirming the number of polling stations required on election day.
The distribution of voter cards continued across all governorates. UNAMI advised
the Commission on the use of voter cards and on improving p rocedures to allow for
wider enfranchisement of voters, including those who may still be internally displaced
or are living in secondary displacement locations.
59. The Commission followed up with embassies and international organizations on
its invitation to observe the 10 October 2021 parliamentary elections. Registration
guidelines for observation and accreditation forms were made available and shared
with the entities that had indicated an intention to deploy electoral observers.
According to the European Council readout of 21 June, the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy announced a European
Union decision to deploy an “EU election observation mission” for the forthcoming
elections in Iraq, following an invitation by the Government of Iraq. As mandated by
the Security Council, UNAMI will assess support to third-party international
observers, as appropriate and pending available resources, on the basis of their
deployment plans and specific needs.

C.

Human rights and rule of law developments and activities
60. UNAMI continued to document concerns over the rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly. On 23 May, in Nasiriyah, Dhi Qar Governorate, a
protester was injured after an improvised explosive device detonated on his vehicle,
the fifteenth such attack targeting protesters in Dhi Qar in recent months, according
to information verified by UNAMI. On 25 May, as reported above, protesters gathered
in Baghdad to call for an end to impunity for the killing of demonstrators and activists.
According to information verified by UNAMI, two protesters had been killed by live
ammunition.
61. On 30 May, UNAMI released a public report entitled “Update on demonstrations
in Iraq: accountability for human rights violations and abuses by unidentified armed
elements”. In the report, UNAMI focused on the steps taken by the Iraqi authorities

10/15

21-09976

S/2021/700

to ensure accountability for human rights violations and abuses in the context of
demonstration-related violence and encouraged greater efforts to end impunity for the
attempted or actual targeted killing, abduction, torture or disappearance of protesters,
activists and critics by “unidentified armed elements”. In the recommendations of the
report, UNAMI emphasized the need for further efforts in the areas of investigation,
accountability and protection.
62. On 12 May, UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights released a joint report entitled “Freedom of expression in the
Kurdistan Region of Iraq”. In the report, they documented allegations of unlawful
restrictions of the rights of those expressing criticism of the authorities or p olicies of
the Kurdistan Regional Government. They note that, between March 2020 and April
2021, journalists, activists and others were subject to arbitrary arrests and violations
of procedural guarantees, unfair trials, the use of threats or other forms o f pressure,
and intimidation.
63. After the enactment of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law on 1 March, the
Council of Ministers established a General Directorate of Yazidi Survivors Affairs
under the federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs in May and appointed a Yazidi
female lawyer as Director General. Furthermore, in accordance with article 11 of the
Law, the General Secretariat of the Council of Ministers, supported by the
International Organization for Migration, initiated the development of by -laws to
facilitate its implementation, including by ensuring that the law prioritizes the needs
of survivors.
64. Insecurity and violence continued to affect civilians. Between 1 April and
30 June, UNAMI documented 72 incidents resulting in at least 151 civili an casualties
(36 deaths, including 6 boys and 2 women, and 115 injured, including 12 boys, 2 girls
and 1 woman). A total of 75 civilian casualties (20 deaths and 55 injuries) were
attributed to Da‘esh, 29 civilian casualties (5 deaths and 24 injuries) to unidentified
armed groups operating outside State control and 22 civilian casualties (3 deaths and
19 injuries) to armed elements. Aerial operations by Turkish forces targeting PKK
continued. Between 1 April and 30 June, UNAMI recorded 4 civilians injured (3 men
and 1 boy) during military operations by Turkish forces in Dahuk Governorate. In
addition, UNAMI received credible reports of the displacement of civilians and
damage to agricultural lands. In a press release issued on 30 May, the Ministry of
National Defence of Turkey stated that, in determining targets, the “utmost sensitivity
and attention is accorded to protect the properties and lives of the civilian population
and the environment”.
65. Following the reimposition of a curfew in May to contain the spread of COVID-19,
UNAMI continued its social media campaign illustrating the impact of the pandemic
on human rights. The campaign is also aimed at reducing stigma and encouraging
compliance with COVID-19 prevention measures.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
66. As at 29 June 2021, the Iraq humanitarian response plan was 24 per cent funded,
having so far received $143 million out of the $607 million required. In June,
approximately 1.2 million people were still living in displacement in Iraq, including
180,000 people hosted in 25 camps administered by the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and
11,000 people in four camps in other parts of Iraq. Sixteen camps have been closed
or reclassified since the end of 2020.
67. The Government of Iraq conducted initial repatriations of certain Iraqi families
from the Hawl camp in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 25 May, a first group of 93 Iraqi
families (a total of 382 persons, comprising 98 women, 39 men, 124 girls and 121

21-09976

11/15

S/2021/700

boys), who were trapped by or fleeing Da‘esh and therefore living in a special section
of the camp, were relocated to the Jeddah 1 camp in Ninawa Governorate. After a
stabilization period and an assessment of their home communities, the families will
be supported in returning to their areas of origin. The United Nations country team
has been providing post-return humanitarian assistance, including through camp
management support and service delivery, to the Ministry of Migration and
Displacement. Modalities for further returns continue to be discussed with the
Government.
68. As part of efforts to address the documentation needs of internally displaced
persons and returnees, during the months of May and June, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) processed a total of 12,839
applications, issuing 1,461 civil status identity cards and 5,421 Iraqi nationality
certificates. In this context, UNHCR also supported government visits to
displacement sites in Ninawa and Anbar to facilitate t he issuance of documentation.
69. In May, at the request of local authorities in Dahuk Governorate, humanitarian
partners provided water, food and non-food items to 60 families (approximately 500
people) displaced from three villages affected by Turkish military operations.
70. During the month of June, UNHCR supported 5,806 internally displaced
families (32,513 individuals) with emergency cash assistance, while 6,500
households (28,190 individuals) continued to benefit from monthly cash grants. In
the same month, UNHCR provided emergency COVID-19 cash grants to 7,200
returnee and 18,000 refugee households (40,320 and 78,064 individuals,
respectively).
71. To facilitate returns to areas of origin, the Funding Facility for Stabilization of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) continued to implement
infrastructure rehabilitation, livelihood and social cohesion projects in Anbar, Diyala,
Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al-Din. In addition, the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat) carried out rapid assessments of destroyed houses in areas
of Ninawa and assisted 2,190 families whose houses were destroyed with registering
compensation claims. UN-Habitat continued to issue occupancy certificates to Yazidi
returnees in Sinjar.
72. Meanwhile, in May, the World Food Programme (WFP) launched “food
assistance for assets” activities in Anbar, Ninawa, Salah al-Din and Dhi Qar
Governorates, supporting 94,044 smallholder farmers through the provision of
equipment and capacity-building activities. The Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations expanded its support to 70 households, including returnee
households, producing livestock in Ninawa to mitigate the impact of drought and
increasing green fodder production and feed availability. In support of vulnerable
households in urban settings, WFP also carried out activities to improve the
livelihoods of 1,700 beneficiaries, including the provision of cash assistance to small
and medium-sized businesses in Ninawa and Basrah Governorates.
73. The World Health Organization (WHO) continued to work closely with the
Government of Iraq in the rollout of vaccines obtained through the Government’s
self-financed COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility programme. Iraq
has received a total of 1,727,000 vaccine doses, including 865,000 through the
COVAX Facility. As at 28 June, a total of 976,052 doses have been administered (4.22
per cent of the population), of which 644,193 were first and 331,859 second doses.
74. UNOPS continued to run the Iraq Information Centre on behalf of the
humanitarian country team to help beneficiaries to address basic needs. Through its
free and confidential hotline, the Centre provides beneficiaries with critical
information about humanitarian assistance available to the Iraqi population as well as
12/15

21-09976

S/2021/700

with a mechanism for reporting issues related to humanitarian assistance or the abuse
of power. From 12 May to 29 June, the Centre received 25,599 calls, of which 18,121
(71 per cent) were from refugees with concerns over protection issues, including
registration and cash assistance.
75. On 10 May, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, in collaboration with the Ministry of Youth and Sports,
launched the 2030 national youth vision initiative to implement an evidence-based
governmental response to youth employment needs in Iraq. Meanwhile, the
International Labour Organization (ILO) supported private sector development and
job creation through a partnership with the Central Bank of Iraq and commercial
banks. The ongoing initiative, which targets 700 beneficiaries in Dohuk and Ninawa
Governorates, is aimed at supporting young people and existing businesses in
accessing financial services. ILO continued to support the Ministry of Labour and
Social Affairs in developing a national employment policy.
76. Under its security sector programme, UNDP continued to conduct specialized
courses to improve the effectiveness of local policing for approximately 140 officers,
mostly selected from Anbar and Ninawa Governorates. Model police stations were
piloted in Anbar, Baghdad, Basrah and Ninawa Governorates. In parallel, UNDP
provided technical advice to the Office of the National Security Advisor on revising
the national security strategy.
77. The Mine Action Service cleared 370,000 m 2 of agricultural land in areas of
Anbar and Ninawa that had been contaminated with improvised explosive devices
during the Da‘esh occupation. Explosive ordnance risk education was provided to
5,200 returnees and 3,500 individuals affected by explosive threats in those areas.
Five Iraqi teams, trained in survey and clearance operations through a capacity
development programme, began operations in areas of Ninawa Governorate.
Following the removal of explosive threats by the Service, the construction of a greenspace park in the Old City of Mosul was also completed in June, providing a safe
space for young people.
78. As at 31 May, 1,091 children (including 43 girls) remained in detention on
national security-related charges, including 35 foreign children (of whom 28 were
girls). In addition, 137 foreign children (including 62 girls) were detained with their
mothers, although not on national security-related charges. In May, the United
Nations in Iraq verified five grave violations against children (five girls), in most
cases the killing and maiming of children. Explosive remnants of war were the
predominant cause of child casualties. Two verified violations were attributed to
Da‘esh, while others remained unattributed.
79. UNFPA, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women (UN-Women), UNDP and UNAMI supported the Government of Iraq
through capacity-building activities to strengthen laws, policies and strategies that
contribute to the prevention of and response to gender-based violence and protect the
rights of survivors, including access to essential gender-based violence services. In
addition, UNFPA, in partnership with other members of the United Nations country
team, provided technical support to the Government in drafting the anti-domestic
violence law, which holds perpetrators of gender-based violence to account.
80. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) provided technical and vocational education and training courses in the
construction sector to 325 young people in Ninawa and Basrah Governorates. In
addition, 115 course graduates gained employment in that sector. From May to July,
UNESCO trained 2,416 teachers in Ninawa Governorate on crisis contexts, mi ne risk
education, positive discipline and psychosocial support and 1,450 students on mine
risk education. It further provided vocational training to 750 students.
21-09976

13/15

S/2021/700

81. UNESCO, in collaboration with UNHCR, the Norwegian Agency for Quality
Assurance in Education and the Iraqi Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific
Research successfully piloted the UNESCO Qualifications Passport system in Iraq.
The pilot provided 24 Syrian refugees with secondary education credentials that they
had lost during their flight.
82. Within the cooperation framework between the Ministry of Culture and
UNESCO, the rehabilitation of historical landmarks in Mosul continued under the
“Revive the spirit of Mosul” initiative.

IV. Security and operational issues
A.

Update on security arrangements
83. The Department of Safety and Security monitored developments throughout
Iraq and implemented risk management measures to enable United Nations
operations. Regular security advisories and alerts, including broadcasts related to the
pandemic, continued to be disseminated to keep United Nations personnel informed
of the precautionary measures in place.
84. The Department supported an average of 24 field missions per day across the
country, with assessed risk levels ranging from medium to high. Its close coordination
and engagement with the host Government continued to ensure the proper flow of
information and the necessary security support for United Nations operations, in
particular movements and access authorizations in regions still affected by COVID-19
containment restrictions.

B.

UNAMI facilities, logistics, aviation, financial and legal issues
85. The Mission continued refurbishment and construction projects in the United
Nations Integrated Compound in Baghdad, regional offices and the Forward Support
Base while maintaining strict health and security protocols.
86. UNAMI continued to provide administrative and logistical support to the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da‘esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the delivery of its mandate.
87. In collaboration with WHO, UNAMI continued its COVID-19 vaccination
campaign for United Nations personnel and dependants in Iraq. As of the end of June,
the Mission had administered about 2,200 first or second doses of COVID-19
vaccines.

V. Observations
88. The elections scheduled for 10 October 2021 should provide an opportunity for
all eligible Iraqis to exercise their democratic right to freely choose their
representatives. In this context, I welcome the continued progress on the electoral
preparations. For the electoral process to be successful, the Independent High
Electoral Commission needs the full cooperation and support of all stakeholders. In
addition, all Iraqis, including the Government of Iraq, political blocs, security forces
and civil society, have a responsibility to work to establish conditions that enable an
inclusive and credible contest to be held in a secure environment free from fear and
intimidation. The Government has a central role to play in protecting fundamental

14/15

21-09976

S/2021/700

rights, such as freedom of expression and assembly, and in ensuring accountability
for the use of violence and for any violations of electoral rules and procedures.
89. As UNAMI and UNDP expand their technical electoral assistance activities
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2522 (2020), the United Nations is strongly
committed to providing the broadest possible electoral assistance to the Government
of Iraq and the Independent High Electoral Commission. I would also like to
encourage the other international partners of Iraq to consider positively the calls of
the Government for electoral observers.
90. The ongoing attacks on diplomatic facilities and the international coalition are
a matter of great concern. I reiterate my call for concerted efforts by the Government
of Iraq to deal with security breaches in a firm and swift manner. It is incumbent upon
all security actors to cooperate with the Government in its efforts to establish effective
State control over weapons and security.
91. The effective implementation of the Federal Budget Law is a prerequisite for
the functioning of the Iraqi State. I therefore encourage the federal and Kurdistan
Regional Governments to expedite the implementation of the budget without f urther
delay, and I reiterate my call for institutionalized, regular and structured dialogue to
reach durable agreements on other outstanding issues.
92. I welcome Iraqi engagement aimed at maintaining security and stability in the
region through diplomatic means. I call upon the regional and international partners
of Iraq to support this stance while also promoting security and stability in the country
through cooperative bilateral and multilateral negotiations and dialogue.
Transboundary threats and terrorism should be addressed with respect for the
territorial sovereignty of the States concerned and on the basis of the principle of
good-neighbourly relations. In addition, all States need to uphold their responsibilities
under international humanitarian law to ensure the protection of civilians.
93. Impunity for human rights violations continues to undermine the legitimacy of
the State. I encourage the Iraqi authorities to act decisively and hold to account those
responsible for the killing of activists and peaceful demonstrators and the targeting
of human rights defenders and civil society activists.
94. After strong engagement and advocacy by the United Nations on safe, voluntary
and dignified returns, I was heartened by the Government’s agreement to tra nsfer the
first group of families from the Hawl camp back to Iraq. I urge all countries concerned
to follow the example of Iraq and others who have already taken steps to assume
responsibility for their own citizens in the Hawl camp.
95. The COVID-19 pandemic, protracted displacement and economic uncertainty
have increased vulnerabilities in Iraq. I am encouraged by the efforts of the
Government and health-care workers to address the pandemic and raise public
awareness of this global health challenge. Some 2.4 million people are now in acute
need of humanitarian assistance, compared with 1.8 million people in 2020. I urge all
Member States to ensure that the humanitarian response plan is funded to meet the
needs of the 1.5 million people targeted.
96. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, and the United Nations staff in Iraq for their continued dedication to
implementing the Organization’s mandate during extraordinary times and under
challenging circumstances.

21-09976

15/15
