S/PV.8347

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8347

th meeting
Tuesday, 11 September 2018, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28115 (E)
*1828115*

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Tribute to the victims of the attacks of
11 September 2001
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
We sit here today on 11 September. Seventeen years
after the attacks of 11 September 2001, it hurts us as
much today is it did on the day it happened. I was at
the 9/11 memorial ceremony this morning. They started
reading the names. As we start this Security Council
meeting, they are still reading the names of those who
were lost. We lost thousands of people on that day. We
lost mothers and fathers. We lost sisters and brothers.
We lost sons and daughters. We lost friends. We saw
heroism at its best. We saw friends helping friends. We
saw those helping the disabled. We saw first responders
go back into burning buildings, knowing that they
might not come back out. It was the true testament of
courage, sacrifice and patriotism.
But that day taught us a lot of lessons. It taught
us the lesson that we can never let our guard down. It
taught us the lesson that evil exists. And it taught us
the lesson that we should never stop trying for peace
and security in this world. And so, when we look at
Americans and we see the United States of America
that stands today, we see that we fight harder, we defend
more passionately and we love more strongly because
we know what pain and sacrifice are. But we also know
that we will never forget.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I ask members of the Council to stand and observe
a minute of silence.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.
2/18

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

11/09/2018

begin

its

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are marking a sad date today, and we
have just come from memorializing the unfortunate
victims who died in that terrible tragedy. Across the
street from the Russian Mission in New York are a
police station and a fire station whose employees took
part in rescuing people on 11 September 2001. Today I
went up to the fire station chief to offer my sympathy
and appreciation for the heroism of the firefighters and
police who helped in that rescue.
I also want to remind the Council that on that day
of 11 September, President Putin was the first of the
foreign leaders who called President George W. Bush
to express his condolences, support and readiness
to help combat the monstrous phenomenon that we
were witnessing. Russia is familiar with international
terrorism, and not merely by reputation, unfortunately.
We continue to reach out to every country and to
believe that it is our duty to fight this evil together, as
our proposal to create a genuinely broad international
coalition to combat international terrorism testifies.
Seeing the interest that has been shown in the
third summit of the Astana format guarantor countries,
held in Tehran on 7 September, we have decided
to speak about its main conclusions in the forum
of the Security Council. The meeting was a major
milestone on the road to the restoration of peace and
the establishment of a durable long-term settlement in
the Syrian Arab Republic. Together with our Iranian
and Turkish counterparts, we have circulated the
concluding joint statement as an official document of
the Security Council. The three Presidents’ addresses
to the summit, and their press conference and joint
statement, send a clear message to the international
community that Russia, Iran and Turkey are ready to
do everything in their power to continue to contribute
to the final destruction of terrorism on Syrian soil,
putting an end to civilian suffering and establishing
post-conflict reconstruction and real progress with
the political process, enabling the Syrians themselves
to determine their future. It is also important that the
guarantor countries reaffirmed their commitment to
Syria’s sovereignty, unity, political independence and
18-28115

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

territorial integrity as the basis for all their actions in
the context of this crisis.
There was a substantive discussion in Tehran of the
situation in Idlib, where tens of thousands of militants
from Jabhat Al-Nusra, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other groups that the Security Council
has declared outlawed as terrorists are concentrated.
It was with that in mind that Russia, Iran and Turkey
expressed their shared determination to completely
eliminate these remnants of terrorism all over Syria that
are threatening the security of the region, while giving
maximum attention to preventing civilian casualties.
We should not pass up the chance of reconciliation for
those who are ready for dialogue, and we hope that
those in Idlib will hear that call. We are demanding
that the armed groups stop shelling peaceful towns and
villages, something that is going on regularly. Just the
other day, nine people, including children, were killed,
and dozens injured in a rocket and mortar attack on the
town of Muhradah in northern Hamah province, and
three people died when several rocket missiles were
fired at the neighbouring town of Al-Suqaylabiyah.
The joint statement noted the urgent need to
dissociate the members of the armed opposition that
have chosen the path of a political settlement from
the terrorists. In the view of the summit participants
that separation will be decisive in ensuring the safety
of the civilian population. That is why those in Tehran
have appealed to all the members of the international
community with the ability to influence the armed
groups in Idlib to cooperate in separating them from
the terrorists. At the same time, we cannot allow the
terrorists to indefinitely hold hundreds of thousands
of civilians in Idlib hostage and use them as human
shields. As every United Nations resolution stipulates,
there can be no coexisting with terrorists, and it is
impermissible to let them off the hook. After all, these
are all offshoots and varieties of the same Al-Qaida that
we all launched a joint fight against in the wake of the
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, and from which
we can expect the worst possible brutalities anywhere
in the world. We are remembering those tragic events
this very day.
The Tehran summit again affirmed the fact that
there can be no alternative to a political settlement
in Syria. We hope that the three guarantor countries’
message will be heard by all. That position takes on
special significance today against a backdrop of threats
to resort to military intervention in Syria and strike

S/PV. 8347

Government facilities in the guise of a response to claims
of Damascus’s use of toxic substances and allegations
that President Al-Assad has ordered the use of chlorine.
The Syrian authorities are not about to do this. They
have no chemical weapons. We are once again asking
the Council to listen: from a military point of view
there is no justification for the use of chemical weapons
by Damascus, while both militarily and politically it
would be damaging insofar as it would be an invitation
to the Western troika to strike at Syria, which they
are threatening to do on that same pretext of the use
of chemical weapons. Meanwhile, there is a strong
possibility of provocations from those of Damascus’s
opponents who are counting on the forceful support
of their foreign patrons, and we have incontrovertible
evidence of preparations for that.
The third Astana summit contrasted such
dangerous and vain military attempts with the work
of activating a political process led and implemented
by the Syrians themselves, without dictation or
pressure from outside. In accordance with instructions
from their three Presidents, high representatives of
Russia, Iran and Turkey were to hold consultations on
10 and 11 September with Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, with the
goal of establishing the most representative possible
constitutional committee in Geneva as soon as possible,
capable of reflecting the interests and aspirations of
every Syrian and of beginning work in accordance with
the decisions of the Congress of the Syrian National
Dialogue, held in Sochi on 30 January, and with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Much attention in Tehran was focused on the work
of post-conflict reconstruction in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The conditions are ripe. The people’s acute
humanitarian needs are enormous, from food problems
and humanitarian mine clearance to the restoration of
basic infrastructure facilities. But none of this should
involve the political blackmail that many Western
capitals openly invoke. Promises of bread and butter in
exchange for political regime change in Damascus do
no honour to those who talk about Syria’s humanitarian
problems at donor conferences but obstruct the provision
of genuine assistance to the Syrian people and maintain
unilateral sanctions.
An important item on the summit’s agenda was
the three guarantor countries’ discussion of the
issues related to facilitating the mass return of Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons to their

18-281153/18

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

original homes. As we know, the Syrian Government
has given the relevant security guarantees, and there is
great interest in this on the part of Syria’s neighbours.
We definitely think that at a suitable point a major
international conference, to be developed by Russia,
Iran and Turkey, will be convened for the purpose of
making a significant contribution to that task.
The unanimous acceptance of the effectiveness
of and need for the Astana format was one of the
most results of the Tehran summit. Russia, Iran and
Turkey have shown — not in words but in deed — that
we can compromise on the most difficult situations
when required. Our interaction has enabled us to stop
large-scale violence in Syria, provide for long-term
stabilization, create the conditions necessary for a
genuine start to the settlement process, and achieve a
political transformation that would benefit all Syrians.
In Tehran, it was stated very clearly that work of that
kind will continue and cover the broadest possible
range of issues in Syria. The next summit will be held
in Russia.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
personally, Madam President, for your impressive
words in commemoration of the victims of 9/11. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands has stood and will stand in
full solidarity with the United States. Our thoughts are
with all those who lost loved ones on that terrible day
17 years ago.
Let me thank the Russian delegation for providing
us with an update on the results of the third trilateral
summit of Astana guarantors in Tehran. I will focus on
three points: first, the risk of rapid escalation; secondly,
the responsibility of the Astana guarantors; and, thirdly,
the need to protect civilians.
First, the risk of rapid escalation involving regional
and international players is great. The potential
consequences of an escalation of violence are horrific.
In our view, there is an urgent need for a real shift of
focus towards diplomacy at the negotiating table, with
the goal of bringing a non-military solution closer.
Only a political solution, in line with resolution 2254
(2016), can end the conflict in a sustainable and
peaceful manner.
Secondly, with regard to the responsibility of the
Astana guarantors and the need for a complete cessation
of hostilities, frankly speaking the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is disappointed with the results of the
Tehran summit. It is our view that it is the responsibility
4/18

11/09/2018

of the Astana guarantors to uphold the ceasefire
and de-escalation arrangements to which they have
previously agreed, and to protect civilians as a matter
of priority. During the Tehran summit, the Astana
guarantors reiterated their pledge to seek a negotiated
solution to Syria’s seven-year conflict, but in practice
we see that two of the three guarantors are instead
getting ready for a full-scale military offensive in Idlib.
On the day of the summit and over the weekend, we saw
escalation instead of de-escalation. It is a continuation
of the well-known pattern of fighting in de-escalation
zones that reminds us of eastern Ghouta and Dar’a
earlier this year.
If the Russian Federation and Iran are serious about
a non-military solution and de-escalation, they need to
cease further military build-up around Idlib and stop
the aerial attacks immediately. It is crucial that the
de-escalation zone be upheld. There needs to be an
immediate and complete ceasefire. We share Turkish
concerns about escalating violence in Idlib and an
imminent humanitarian catastrophe. Turkey already
hosts 3.5 million Syrian refugees. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands appreciates and respects that and fully
shares Turkish concerns.
Thirdly, with regard to the urgent need for the
protection of civilians who encounter terrorism, in
our view all parties involved should exercise utmost
restraint, put the protection of civilians first and allow
unhindered humanitarian access. Civilians are not the
ones who should leave Idlib. We are sceptical about the
concept of corridors or protected evacuation routes,
not in the least because of the enormous number of
civilians in Idlib. For example, if medical evacuations
are attempted, they must be in line with the minimum
standards for humanitarian evacuations that have been
circulated by the United Nations. Parties need to uphold
international humanitarian law throughout Syria, and
in particular in Idlib.
Any measure to counter terrorism must comply with
obligations under international law, in particular human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law. Combating terrorism is no excuse
for attacking without distinction or proportionality.
Recent peaceful protests by the civilian population in
Idlib against violence and extremism show that Idlib is
not a hotbed of terrorism. That also became very clear
during the Arria Formula meeting last Friday, at which
Bassma Kodmani stated that civilians are a strong
asset in countering terrorism. As Special Envoy De
18-28115

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8347

Mistura stated last Friday, there must be — and there
is — another way than all-out military escalation.

an extremely difficult one, but we also believe that a
solution is possible.

There are alternatives. We can and should prevent
a terrible tragedy and, at the same time, allow the issue
of Security Council-designated terrorist groups to be
addressed. We call on all actors to use their influence
on the warring parties in Idlib to put the protection
of civilians first. If separating Al-Nusra from armed
groups is the central issue in Idlib, then we need to
listen to the Special Envoy on how to operationalize it.
If the Astana guarantors want international support for
their efforts in that regard, then guarantors must also
be transparent about what exactly they are planning. I
repeat, any plan must put the protection of civilians first.

Despite calls from the international community,
the number of which is unprecedented in recent history,
the Tehran meeting did not lead to a firm commitment
on the part of Russia and Iran to preserving the
de-escalation that they themselves had guaranteed. In
the wake of the Tehran summit, millions of Syrians in
Idlib remain uncertain that their lives will be spared.
On the contrary, in the wake of the Tehran summit the
Russian air force resumed its aerial bombardment in
support of the regime.

Let me also stress the importance of unimpeded
United Nations humanitarian aid and the protection of
hospitals, schools and humanitarian aid workers. We
are shocked by reports of White Helmets being targeted
once again over the weekend in so-called double-tap
strikes. Over the weekend, three hospitals were struck.
Two Syrian civil defence centres and an ambulance
system were hit. Their coordinates were well known
and deconfliction had taken place. Such developments
and actions are of extreme concern to us.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
its efforts to achieve accountability for such crimes.
Impunity cannot prevail. In our view, referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court
remains the best option.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of France, allow me to begin by conveying the
solidarity of my country and all French citizens with
our American friends and the United States, as a
whole, as we remember the tragedy that took place on
11 September 2001. I also hope that the spirit of unity
that prevailed on 9/11, which I myself felt very deeply
as I was in the United States at the time, could provide
genuine inspiration for our work.
I thank the American presidency of the Council and
Russia for convening today’s meeting as an extension of
the meetings held late last week. My statement will be
relatively brief. I will focus on two priority issues that
France believes are complementary and inextricably
linked: first, preventing a military offensive in Idlib,
which would open one of the bloodiest chapters of the
Syrian tragedy and lead to dire consequences; and,
secondly, creating genuine momentum for a political
settlement to the conflict. We all know that the path is

Let us be clear: our common priority continues to
be combating terrorism, and it could, and should, bring
us together. As Council members are aware, France
is fully playing its part in that regard. But that fight
cannot justify indiscriminate attacks against civilians
or serious violations of international humanitarian
law. Such attacks constitute a humanitarian tragedy as
well as a strategic absurdity, in that they fuel the very
terrorism they purport to combat. Hence, Syria has
become the pre-eminent breeding ground for terrorism.
Among the 3 million people who are being held hostage
in Idlib — a number greater than the population of
Paris — many of them took to the streets peacefully
last week to say how unfairly they are being targeted,
to express their rejection of terrorism and to recall
their legitimate aspirations for the rule of law in Syria.
Those massive demonstrations, whose images we have
seen, show the faces behind the numbers.
We know — and it was extensively detailed last
Friday (see S/PV.8345) — how a major offensive in
Idlib would have disastrous consequences for the
country and the region, in humanitarian, security and
political terms.
On the humanitarian front, several tens of
thousands of people have begun to reach northern Idlib
to flee the bombing. They are only the first in what
could be a new and unprecedented migration crisis, of
which Turkey, which already hosts nearly 15 per cent of
the Syrian population who fled the regime’s massacres
since 2011, will be the first to be impacted. We must do
everything possible to ensure safe, full and unhindered
humanitarian access to the entire population in need. In
that regard, I commend the heroic role being played by
the White Helmets in going to the aid of civilians under
bombardment, at the risk of their own lives and in the
midst of the ruins and rubble.

18-281155/18

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

France also reiterates that it will not tolerate any
new use of chemical weapons. Along with our close
partners, we stand ready to respond in the event of
a chemical attack. Our most senior officials have
unambiguously spoken on that point.
Maintaining the ceasefire and protecting civilians,
including humanitarian personnel, must be the first
priority for actors on the ground. That is why Russia
must become involved. I welcome the involvement
of the United Nations in deterring escalation and
preparing to deal with it in the event. We must do
everything possible to prevent civilians from being
targeted. We therefore have a collective responsibility
to leave no stone unturned — to turn off our automatic
pilot — so as to find areas of agreement and together
explore every possible solution, including the most
creative, to avoid military escalation and open up the
way for a political settlement. Such a solution, if we
succeed in coming together, could be at hand tomorrow.
That is why we need to allow time for dialogue so that
solutions emerge. That is our first priority today. At the
moment, the guarantors’ task is to avert the irreversible
and to take the time needed to find an agreement by
working together with us all.
Let us be clear as well that the situation in Idlib is a
further illustration, were there a need for one, of three
facts that everyone must clearly bear in mind: Syria
is in not a country that is returning to normalcy, quite
the opposite is true; the Syrian tragedy is not behind
us, indeed the worst could be ahead in the event of a
major offensive in Idlib; and the total military retaking
of Idlib, in which the regime and its supporters are
engaged, will not make it possible to stabilize the
country and will produce only more chaos, which is
to say that the same causes produce the same effects.
Therefore, and I say it again, the only real and lasting
way out of the conflict is a negotiated political solution
that is acceptable to all. There is no solution other than
recourse to the demanding path of negotiation.
And therefore our values, interests and realpolitik
demand that we come together to fully and collectively
support the efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy
to relaunch the Geneva process. That includes the
establishment of a constitutional committee as soon as
possible, which could be the key to at last clearing the
path to a political solution. Its work could begin without
delay, in a truly independent way, under the auspices of
the United Nations.
6/18

11/09/2018

Resolution 2254 (2015) provides the elements for a
broader political solution, namely, a constitution, free
and transparent elections in which all Syrians, including
displaced persons and refugees, can vote, and the
establishment of a safe, secure and neutral environment,
guaranteed by confidence-building measures. We
are two weeks away from the commencement of the
general debate at the General Assembly, where our
leaders will all be gathered. Let us take advantage of
that opportunity before us.
The road map we are proposing is clear: strong
commitment by the parties to a ceasefire in order to
spare the civilian population of Idlib; speeding up the
political process, with the first step being collective
support for the launch of the work of a constitutional
committee; and the joining together by the members
of the Security Council in support of a constructive
political agenda at the General Assembly to force
destiny and seize a concerted, peaceful resolution to
the conflict. The reconstruction of Syria is conceivable
only on that basis — when an irreversible, credible and
inclusive political transition gets under way.
I say again to Russia that the ball is in its court.
It should assume clear and firm commitments to avoid
the irreparable in Idlib and reassure the civilians there,
afford more time for dialogue to identify a solution for
Idlib, and come together with us to chart the challenging
course towards peace in Syria. France stands ready to
contribute to that end without losing a minute. Let us
all get to work.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is a special day for remembering. I would first of all
like to convey my profound condolences for the victims
of the 9/11 incident, and to the families our sympathy.
The international community stands firmly together in
our battle against terrorism.
I thank you, Madam, President for convening this
meeting. I also wish to thank Ambassador Nebenzia for
his briefing.
China welcomes the summit of the leaders of
Russia, Turkey and Iran that took place on 7 September
and culminated in a joint statement. China commends
the tireless efforts of the three countries to push for a
diplomatic solution to the Syrian issue. The SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for Syra, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, is currently stepping up his engagement with
the parties concerned with regard to the establishment
of a Syrian constitutional committee. We believe
18-28115

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that those developments will play and important and
positive role in improving the situation in the Syrian
town of Idlib and in advancing a political settlement of
the Syrian question.
There is no alternative to a political settlement for
Syria to achieve peace and stability. All parties should
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and other universally recognized,
basic norms of international relations; fully respect
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity; and avoid the use or threat of use of force as
a reflex.
The international community should join forces
to continue its fight against terrorism and consolidate
the counter-terrorism achievements made thus far. All
parties should take measures to spare innocent civilians
any harm. We call on the international community
to increase humanitarian assistance to Syria. The
international community should continue to leverage
the role of the United Nations as the primary mediator,
support the Geneva talks and the Astana process in
playing their due roles, and encourage the Syrian
parties to find a progressive solution that is in line with
reality and addresses the concerns of the parties by
adhering to the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process
and implementing Council resolution 2254 (2015).
We hope the discussions on the creation of a Syrian
constitutional committee, facilitated by Special Envoy
De Mistura, will serve as a new starting point for
launching the political process. That places a burden on
all parties concerned to meet one another halfway and
contribute together to that end.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to convey my country’s
profound condolences, sympathy and friendship to the
people of the United States on this very significant day,
and underline the importance of standing shoulder to
shoulder in the quest for peace.
First, I would like to thank the Russian representative
for his briefing, which is very timely.
Last week, during and after the meeting we
expressed our alarm over the signs of a possible military
offensive in north-western Syria, as it would risk
leading to catastrophic humanitarian consequences,
which are avoidable and must be avoided. We are deeply
concerned, however, by the recent escalation of violence
on the part of Syria and Russia in Idlib and surrounding
areas. We reiterate that all parties in Syria must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law

S/PV. 8347

to protect civilians and civilian objects and to comply
with the principles of distinction, proportionality and
avoidance of unnecessary suffering.
We have said before and repeat now that Idlib is
different from other areas as there is nowhere to flee.
There are 3 million civilians living there, including
many children and internally displaced persons. Idlib
is a de-escalation area established by the Astana
guarantors, and that is why we all looked to their
meeting last Friday with some hope. It is key that they
step up efforts to immediately implement their own
de-escalation agreement in Idlib, ensure humanitarian
access and the protection of civilians, and avoid further
military escalation.
It is urgent for them to act now to avoid the
enormous humanitarian catastrophe that would unfold
before our eyes in a large-scale military offensive.
This is not hypothetical, as we have witnessed all
de-escalation areas turning into escalation areas over
the past year. The responsibility and ability to avoid a
catastrophe and allow time for dialogue lies with Syria
and Russia. The Council, however, should also explore
all meaningful options to prevent military escalation
and find a peaceful solution to Idlib, in accordance with
international law.
Last Friday, Special Envoy De Mistura presented
some ideas that merit consideration. We need to explore
any concrete, meaningful suggestions and proposals
over the coming days to ensure that the Council
collectively shoulders its responsibility. We remain
available to explore all options for preventive action by
the Council. We reiterate our full support for the Special
Envoy, including his efforts to swiftly establish a
constitutional committee. A United Nations-facilitated
political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
is the only way to ensure a sustainable solution to the
crisis, to end the suffering and to address the legitimate
concerns of all Syrians.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
this day, as we commemorate the tragic events of
11 September 2001, I once again convey my country’s
solidarity with the Government and the people of the
United States.
My delegation thanks the Russian Federation
for calling for this briefing, which sheds light on
the conclusions of the third tripartite summit of the
guarantors of the Astana process, held in Tehran on
7 September, which also addressed the situation in Idlib

18-281157/18

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

province. The meeting took place in a context marked
by concerns about the imminence of a large-scale
offensive by the Syrian armed forces against the rebel
strongholds in Idlib governorate.
Côte d’Ivoire has consistently expressed its
disapproval of the use of force by any actor and has
reiterated, along with all observers of the Syrian
conflict, that such an armed confrontation would
cause an unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe in a
province that is home to some 3 million people, more
than half of whom are internally displaced. Those fears
are compoumded by the threat of the use of chemical
weapons, for which the belligerents are already
denying responsibility.
In the context of growing tensions, the Tehran
meeting was a real source of hope both for the
people of Idlib and for the international community.
Unfortunately, it does not seem to have provided
reassuring answers to concerns about the fate of Idlib
province, in particular with regard to the protection
of civilians and the humanitarian repercussions of
the conflict, the Astana guarantors having insisted
only on the need to combat “terrorism and the right of
Damascus to recover its entire territory”.
The numerous calls for restraint by the Security
Council and the international community did not prevent
the recent escalation of violence, which, according
to the spokesman for the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
Mr. David Swanson, resulted in the displacement of
more than 30,000 people. Again according to OCHA,
between 1 and 9 September 30,542 women, children
and men were displaced from the south and south-west
of Idlib, as well as from the north and north-west of
neighbouring Hama province.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that there is still
time to give peace a chance. It therefore urges all parties
involved to immediately implement a ceasefire and to
pursue negotiations, in the spirit of resolution 2254
(2015), in order to prevent an even larger humanitarian
tragedy in Syria.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): This
morning’s meeting coincides with the commemoration
of the terrorist attacks that took place on 11 September
2001, claiming thousands of innocent victims among
the friendly American people. We would like to convey
once again our condolences to the American people
and the families of the victims, and to express our
8/18

11/09/2018

solidarity with them on this day. We also reiterate our
commitment to working with our partners and allies
to eliminate the scourge of terrorism, which threatens
international peace and security. We too pledge to
pursue our efforts as a member of the Global Coalition
to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
I thank the representative of the Russian Federation
for his briefing to the Security Council on the outcome
of the summit held in Tehran on Friday among the
Astana guarantors. The summit addressed the situation
in Syria generally and in Idlib specifically. In that
regard, we call on the parties concerned to pursue
the dialogue process at all levels in order to reach a
peaceful resolution to the situation in Idlib.
The State of Kuwait reiterates what we have
noted in previous meetings, namely, that any
military escalation in Idlib would have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences. It is the most vulnerable
of the society — women, children, the elderly and the
sick — who would pay the heaviest price. We have seen
what happened in other parts of Syria, some of which
were designated de-escalation zones.
We have closely followed the recent reports of some
international organizations on the situation in Idlib and
the surrounding areas. We would like to voice our deep
concern in the light of the information that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
has reported on the displacement of more than 30,000
persons from Idlib during the past few days as a result
of the recent escalation there.
We also followed the press conference that the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, held yesterday in Geneva, during
which he called upon the international community to
address the crisis in a way that would prevent Idlib in the
months ahead from becoming the worst humanitarian
catastrophe, with the heaviest loss of lives, in the
twenty-first century. I reiterate that warning by saying
that if a comprehensive military operation were to
take place in Idlib, which must draw the attention of
the Security Council, then we would indeed face the
worst humanitarian catastrophe, with the heaviest loss
of lives, in the twenty-first century.
We remind all parties of the need to honour their
commitments under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and to uphold
the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution, as well as of the protection of civilians
18-28115

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and civilian sites. Military attacks targeting groups
categorized as terrorist groups by the Security Council
absolutely do not give any party to the conflict cause
to violate its obligations under international law. Let us
remember that wars have rules, and that in Idlib there is
one terrorist for every 100 civilians, most of whom are
women and children.
We reiterate our support to for Secretary-General
António Guterres, who in a statement of 29 August,
urgently appealed to the Syrian Government and all
parties concerned to exercise restraint. He also called
on the Astana guarantors to step up efforts to find
a peaceful solution to the situation in Idlib and to
devote more time and attention to diplomatic efforts
in order to avoid further bloodshed. In this context,
we hope that the meetings held today and yesterday in
Geneva by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, will find ways to save the lives
of innocent civilians.
This is the fourth meeting that we have held
on Syria in less than one week. We hope that these
meetings will draw attention to Idlib and contribute
to sustaining the diplomatic efforts of us all in order
to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe and maintain
the commitment to implementing Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2401 (2018), which
calls for a ceasefire, for humanitarian aid to reach those
who are in need, and for the protection of civilians
and health-care and civilian facilities. We hope that
the messages that come out of our meetings will reach
the parties concerned and make them aware that the
Security Council will closely follow the situation in
Idlib and is ready to take the measures necessary to
shoulder its humanitarian and legal responsibilities
towards the inhabitants of Idlib.
In conclusion, we underscore once again that the
best and most sustainale solution to the Syrian crisis
is a political solution under the auspices of the United
Nations and in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Our hearts still go
out to all the victims and families of the unforgettable
and unforgivable terrorist attack of 9/11. We send our
prayers and profound condolences to all those families
that lost loved ones at the World Trade Center. In the
aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, people all over the world,
including Kazakhstan, stood shoulder to shoulder in
mourning, solidarity, sympathy and friendship with

S/PV. 8347

the people of the United States. This day is not only
to commemorate but also to make sure that it never
happens again anywhere else in the world. Our resolve,
collective effort and unity against terrorism is the
way forward.
We thank the delegation of the Russian Federation
for initiating this open briefing to discuss the outcome
of the Tehran summit, which has great implications
for the current phase of the Syrian crisis. Kazakhstan
welcomes the trilateral summit of the Heads of the
guarantor countries of the Astana process in Tehran,
which resulted in the adoption of a joint statement
and further cooperation among the three countries to
resolve the Syrian crisis.
As we know, the guarantor States of the Astana
process — Russia, Iran and Turkey — have met for the
third time, with very constructive outcomes of a turning
point for the Syrian people. The summit was held under
the common understanding of the unacceptability of
any provocations. The Heads of the guarantor States
also confirmed the commitment to preserving the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. The summit also clearly demonstrated the
positive role of the Astana process in coordinating
international activities related to the Syrian peace
process, including preserving the political unity and
integrity of the country.
We welcome the most notable parts of the text,
referring to cooperation against terrorist groups such
as Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida, and the
importance of distinguishing between terrorists and
armed opposition groups participating in the ceasefire.
The statement also emphasizes the political process, the
creation of a constitutional committee, humanitarian
assistance, the repatriation of asylum-seekers and
the organization of an international conference on
refugees and internally displaced persons. Kazakhstan
believes that this will contribute to the final formation
of a constitutional committee and undoubtedly have
a positive impact on the political processes and
preparations to hold free elections in Syria.
The summit proved once again that urgent
international tasks can be solved only on the basis
of respect, trust and constructive cooperation. My
delegation notes with satisfaction that a ceasefire in
Idlib was facilitated, thereby creating new opportunities
for the political process. In that vein, we are convinced
that the world community should direct its joint efforts

18-281159/18

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

11/09/2018

towards creating the conditions for the settlement
of the intra-Syrian conflict by exclusively peaceful
means, rebuilding the ruined country and addressing
the complex humanitarian situation. We also need to
support the creation of conditions for the return of
numerous Syrian refugees. In that regard, the idea
of convening an international conference on Syrian
refugees could be a first step towards a collective
solution of the problem.

have committed. We also recognize the right of the
Syrian Government to safeguard its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, but we stress that in no case does
that justify new massacres of civilians.

Kazakhstan commends Moscow, Tehran and
Ankara for their agreement to exert all efforts to
protect the population and improve the humanitarian
situation, in particular by restoring the economy
and infrastructure to address acute social problems.
Another important point was the emphasis on the
political process, conveying that there is no military
solution to the crisis and the parties concerned should
sit down at the negotiating table.

We commend the tireless work of Mr. De Mistura in
bringing the parties together and finding a way to avoid
a new humanitarian tragedy. We support in particular
his proposal to promote an effective separation between
civilians and terrorists. We recognize that is a highly
complex task, but we believe we must commit to it.

It would be wrong to suggest that the trilateral
summit produced an ultimate formula to resolve the
Idlib crisis. We are sure that the unresolved issues will
take time and further efforts to settle. In that context,
we look forward to the next meeting of the guarantor
countries of the Astana process in Moscow to discuss all
issues related to the recent developments on the ground.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
reiterate our solidarity with the United States and the
families of the thousands of victims claimed by the evil
hands of terrorism on 9/11 — a phenomenon against
which we stand united.
We appreciate the convening of this meeting
and the statement delivered by the representative of
the Russian Federation on the meeting held by the
guarantors of the Astana process in the city of Tehran.
We take careful note of the information provided, as
well as of the joint statement issued by the Presidents of
Iran, Russia and Turkey. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing cooperation among the Astana guarantors and
underline the need for them to prevent a new escalation
of violence and suffering in Idlib.
We must nevertheless express our alarm and
regret at the intensification of the attacks in recent
days, which have resulted in numerous fatalities, new
internally displaced persons and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure. All of that must cease.
Peru condemns terrorism and believes that terrorist
groups must be held accountable for the crimes they
10/18

We believe that the Astana guarantors, because
of their influence on the ground, have a special
responsibility in the current delicate scenario, all the
more so when Idlib is one of the de-escalation zones
agreed upon by those guarantors.

We hope that the meeting held yesterday among the
Special Envoy and the Astana guarantors and the one to
be held this week with the other countries involved in
the Syrian crisis will lead to firm commitments to the
political process based on resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
We would like to commend the valuable efforts
being made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its staff to provide a
humanitarian response in such difficult circumstances.
We conclude by stressing the need for the
Council to send a strong message to the international
community that it will not tolerate impunity with
regard to the continuing violations of international
law and international humanitarian law. The Council
cannot once again be a mere bystander in the face of
scenes of horror. It is our chief responsibility to prevent
those tragedies and to protect the civilian population.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurnational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We join in commemorating
and in expressing our condolences and solidarity to
the people of the United States and to the relatives of
those persons who lost their lives in the 11 September
2001 attacks. The fight against terrorism is a task that
is shared by the entire international community.
We would like to thank the United States presidency
of the Security Council for convening this important
meeting. We thank the Russian delegation for the
briefing it provided on the outcome of the tripartite
meeting of the Astana guarantors that took place in Iran
on 7 September. Having listened very carefully to that
briefing, we feel compelled to reiterate our hope that
18-28115

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the violence in this conflict, which has raged for more
than eight years, can be reduced across Syria, especially
in densely populated areas. We therefore welcome the
meeting held in Tehran and its joint outcome statement,
because it served to confirm support for the provisions
of the Astana agreement, which led to the establishment
of crucial de-escalation zones, which we view as one of
the international initiatives that have helped to reduce
violence and facilitate peace and stability in Syria.
We call on the parties to work towards the full
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) and highlight
the local agreements that contributed to reducing
violence and that allowed for the evacuation of
persons in need, including persons belonging to armed
groups and their families, and facilitated the entry of
humanitarian assistance. We hope that those agreements
will continue to be upheld in order to allow the civilian
population to return to their places of origin. We recall
that any return must be voluntary, unhindered, in full
dignity and in safe conditions.
Against that backdrop, we believe that the common
denominator in this conflict must be adoption of
measures to reduce violence on the ground, to build
confidence among the parties, to alleviate humanitarian
suffering and to advance initiatives, such as those
previously mentioned, aimed at finding a political and
peaceful solution to the conflict in general. However,
the current priority is to take measures to protect the
2.9 million civilians who live in Idlib province and the
surrounding areas. We eagerly await the outcomes of
yesterday and today’s meetings, which are taking place
in Geneva, among Special Envoy Staffan De Mistura
and the Astana guarantors.
We believe that any effort undertaken or any measure
taken within the framework of resolution 2401 (2018)
aimed at combating terrorist groups designated by the
Security Council or armed groups in order to separate
them from the civilian population must also take into
consideration the protection of civilian lives within
the context of international law. Along the same lines,
we believe the political process needs to be bolstered
on the basis of the Sochi outcome document and the
establishment of a constitutional committee, a process
that needs to be facilitated by the United Nations within
the framework of the Geneva process and in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). We recall
that the principles agreed upon in the Sochi statement
do not only reinforce the political process, but they also
serve to defend and uphold the rule of law and respect

S/PV. 8347

for people’s rights and to combat the threat of terrorism
and violent extremism, which lead to terrorism.
We emphasize that the Tehran meeting served to
foster dialogue aimed at promoting the protection
of civilians and the provision of humanitarian
assistance to them, including the 6.2 million internally
displaced persons throughout Syria and specifically
the 1.4 million who are located in Idlib province. We
underscore the initiative to convene an international
conference on Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons, as well as the need to keep the issue of the
release of detainees and the identification of missing
persons on the agenda.
Finally, we express our rejection of any attempt to
fragment Syria or to divide it along sectarian lines. On
the contrary, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and with respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country, we
insist that the conflict in Syria has no military solution
and that the only way to resolve it is through an inclusive
political process of dialogue and consensus, led by and
for the Syrian people, that allows for a peaceful and
lasting solution to the current situation.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): As we commemorate
today the anniversary of the 11 September 2001 terrorist
attacks, I would like to join others in conveying our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims of
those attacks and our solidarity with the American
people. The vivid memories of this day 17 years ago,
which was especially important in this city, New York,
should unify all of us in the fight against terrorism.
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting, and I thank Russia for its important briefing.
Poland is deeply concerned about the current
developments in Syria, in particular with regard to
the escalation of hostilities in Idlib province, resulting
in new displacement during the past few days of over
30,000 women, children and men and scores of civilian
deaths. That region is one of the de-escalation zones in
Syria, established and overseen by the guarantors of the
Astana process with a view to assuring a ceasefire and
humanitarian access, in accordance with international
law, including international humanitarian law.
The most recent escalation is again impacting
civilians in a dramatic way. Poland shares the fears that
the worst may be ahead of us. The safety and protection
of approximately 2.9 million civilians residing in Idlib

18-2811511/18

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

and the surrounding areas is at risk. That includes about
1.4 million internally displaced persons, the majority of
whom are women and children who came to the region
from other areas
We are deeply alarmed by the fact that the
ceasefire-related commitments and obligations are not
respected by the Astana guarantors. We are disappointed
that the meeting of the guarantors in Tehran ended
without tangible conclusions. We call on Russia, Iran
and Turkey, as well as on other actors with influence on
the ground, to redouble their efforts in order to protect
the civilian population of Idlib. In that context, the
reported attacks on targets in Idlib that were carried
out this past weekend are highly disquieting.
Any use of force, even against pockets of terrorists,
cannot justify indiscriminate attacks on innocent
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including medical
and educational facilities. It will be civilians — innocent
men, women and children — who will bear the brunt
of hostilities if the scenario of an extensive military
operation plays out in Idlib governorate. All sides
must fully respect and comply with the principles of
international humanitarian law, particularly with
respect to the protection of civilians.
Let me stress the responsibility of the Council to
prevent this potential tragedy. We cannot lose time
and must act now in order to avoid mass casualties
and yet another wave of displacement. The parties
involved in Syria must take all the necessary steps to
ensure the cessation of fighting, adequate protection
for the Syrian people and, finally, urgent humanitarian
access to Idlib and the necessary medical evacuations.
We would also like to reiterate that refugees need to
be provided with an opportunity affording them a
safe, free and dignified return to their homes. A major
military operation in Idlib governorate may hinder that
goal, and consequently create a new wave of refugees.
Furthermore, civilians who feel that their lives are at
risk during the conflict must be able to leave freely at
any time. Such movement must always be based on the
free choice of each and every individual.
In conclusion, let me stress once again that there
is no military solution to the conflict. Any attempt
to bring peace by force will be counterproductive to
achieving an inclusive and credible political process
under the auspices of the United Nations.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I begin my statement by expressing our
12/18

11/09/2018

solidarity and that of our Government to the Government
and the people of the United States of America and the
families of those who heroically died as a result of the
barbaric terrorist attacks on the Twin Towers and other
sites in the country, which we are commemorating on
today’s anniversary. We convey to you, Ambassador
Haley, our most sincere sympathy.
My delegation is grateful for the convening of
this meeting, justified by the intense international
attention that Idlib has drawn and the urgent need for a
coordinated response so as to avoid an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis. We are grateful to the Russian
Federation for its briefing and to the three Astana
guarantors who, in holding the third trilateral summit in
Tehran, have become key actors in coordination efforts
and political and security cooperation at the regional
and international levels. The Government of Equatorial
Guinea has taken note of the joint statement issued
following the summit in Tehran, in the light of which my
delegation would like to make the following comments.
We gratefully welcome the commitment of the
Astana guarantors to continue cooperating to eradicate
all persons, groups, enterprises and entities designated
as terrorists in Syria by the Security Council. That
position fully corresponds to that of the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, which is firmly
opposed to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Moreover, the resolve and commitment of the
guarantors to not prioritize a military solution to the
conflict and advocate for a negotiated political process
is to be commended. We believe that it is essential
that those two key provisions of the joint statement be
ensured and realized on the ground. That is predicated
upon all national and international parties abstaining
from military operations, which could transform Idlib
governorate into the target of intense bombings. At this
past Friday’s briefing (see S/PV.8345), we all were in
agreement in stressing the grave consequences that a
fierce military offensive would have for that area.
It is true that we must combat active terrorists in
order to restore peace and stability to Syria. As the
Iranian Chair pointed out at the summit, however, that
must be done without causing suffering for the civilian
population with a scorched-earth policy. While there
seems to be no obvious military solution to neutralize
the Idlib jihadists, it is also clear that a destructive
offensive should not be considered as the appropriate
response. Even if such an offensive succeeded in
defeating those groups on the battlefield, the jihadist
18-28115

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

threat would remain. We saw that scenario play out
last year in the Euphrates Valley region following
the territorial victory over and retaking of the city of
Deir ez-Zor by the Syrian army from militias from the
Islamic State. Remaining elements of jihadist militias
can continue waging an asymmetrical war in Syria and
beyond its borders in areas not under the control of the
region’s Governments. I therefore echo the words of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, who stated recently:
“Let us try to avoid that the last, probably major,
battle of the Syrian territorial conflict end in a
bloodbath. We ask all countries to maintain moral
pressure to avoid a drastic military option in Idlib
and provide additional time for negotiations”.
In that regard, we express our optimism regarding the
meetings that the Special Envoy held yesterday and
today with representatives of the Astana guarantors
with a view towards negotiations to pave the way
towards peace and the possibility of finding alternative
solutions for ending the impasse and the armed conflict
in Syria through the implementation of a Syrian-led,
inclusive constitutional committee.
While plans to combat armed and terrorist factions
in Idlib remain on the drawing table, the priority of
the Security Council must continue to focus on the
protection of the civilian population, of which almost
3 million people are already displaced and have no
place to go.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Allow me, Madam
President, first of all, to take this opportunity to
express our solidarity with the Government and the
people of the United States on this day, which marks the
commemoration of the tragic events of 11 September.
My country was among the first to face the scourges
of terrorism and knows at first-hand its devastating
effects. We in Ethiopia in particular cannot forget to
commemorate that horrific event, as it unfortunately
coincides with the celebration of the Ethiopian New
Year. Our thoughts and prayers will forever remain
with the victims and their families.
We thank the delegation of Russia for its briefing
on the outcome of the Astana summit. The importance
of that meeting was clearly underscored last week in
its role to finding a sustainable solution to the Idlib
situation (see S/PV.8345). With the civilian casualties
being reported, we continue to remain concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Idlib. As we have stated
repeatedly, further military escalation in Idlib could

S/PV. 8347

aggravate the humanitarian crisis and negatively affect
the humanitarian assistance programme upon which
millions of people depend for their existence.
We note that Iran, Russia and Turkey have agreed
to continue their trilateral coordination and decided
to address the Idlib situation in a spirit of cooperation
according, to the joint statement issued following
the summit. Conditions on the ground are difficult
and require urgent and coordinated action. It is vital
that the Astana guarantors continue to abide by the
de-escalation agreement and find a sustainable solution
that would protect civilians and civilian facilities.
Facilitating safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access remains critical to ensuring that
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners are
able to deliver aid to all in need.
The joint statement also underlined the fact that,
in the fight against terrorism, the separation of United
Nations-listed terrorists from the armed opposition
would be of the utmost importance. In that regard,
the proposal that Special Envoy De Mistura presented
on Friday could be considered positively, with the
objective of ensuring the safety of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We hope that this will be discussed in
the ongoing consultations with the Astana guarantors
in Geneva.
Finally, we stress that there is no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. Hence, all Syrian parties and those
States with influence should engage in and support
the continued efforts of the Special Envoy to establish
and launch the constitutional committee. Ultimately,
it is a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political dialogue,
facilitated by the United Nations, that could sustainably
address the suffering of the Syrians.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join my colleagues
in expressing our condolences and solidarity with you,
Madam President, your Mission, all our American
friends and the citizens of this great city of New York
for the losses of 9/11, and to all those countries that,
like my own, lost their own nationals in the attacks.
Speaking as someone who worked very closely with
the American and other Governments in the aftermath
of 9/11, I can say that I will never forget that day and
that we will never cease to stand alongside them in the
fight against terrorists and the unwavering campaign to
protect our societies and defend civilians.
The attacks of 9/11 came without warning out of the
clear blue sky. The horror of Syria has been unfolding

18-2811513/18

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

before us for more than six slow years. After 9/11,
Russia and Iran worked with us. We urge them to work
with us now to halt the attacks and protect the civilians
of Idlib. There have been many inflection points that
have come and gone on Syria. The Astana meeting, one
would like to think, was another inflection point that
would succeed. I think that it is very important that
we can have this discussion and this debate today. We
will soon hear from our Turkish colleague, whom we
welcome to the Council.
But I want to stay right at the start that we strongly
agree with President Erdoğan. This morning, he wrote
in The Wall Street Journal that Al-Assad’s solution to
countering terrorism is a false one. He said that the plan
to militarily attack Idlib will only create new hotbeds
of terrorism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
was an outcome and not the cause of what is happening
in Syria.
We face a choice between an Al-Assad/Russia
military assault on Idlib in which, as many colleagues
have said today, thousands of civilians will die — we
have seen in eastern Aleppo and eastern Ghouta what
that looks like: the killing of children; attacks on
schools and hospitals, even those in deconflicted areas;
the barbaric use of chemical weapons — or allowing
Turkey and opposition groups the support, space and
time to separate out the terrorists and tackle them
themselves. Turkey has a plan for Idlib, and it involves
reaching an agreement with the Syrian opposition
whereby the regime would refrain from attacking them
while they combat terrorism. That is what we should
be discussing today, but I think it was absent from the
briefing we received from Russia just now.
We would like also to talk about how we can get
together, through Astana or another grouping that
works, to work out how the regime can work with the
opposition to bring security and stability back to Idlib. I
would like to know why the Council cannot spend time
discussing how to build on the work of Astana to that
end. This would not only provide a plan to rid the area
of extremists, but would also provide the beginnings of
a model for discussing a political process to resolve this
conflict, which has gone on too long.
Every speaker today has talked about the
importance of there being no alternative to a political
solution. Of course we agree with that, but the United
Nations Special Envoy has told us that progress on a
political solution is impossible if there is a military
assault on Idlib, so I would like to know from Russia
14/18

11/09/2018

and Iran that they will heed those words, that they will
stop the military operations, and that they will come to
the Council and discuss with all of us, including Turkey,
how exactly we can build on Astana to engage seriously
in order to finally — six years after some of the worst
horrors we have seen in war since the Second World
War — bring that to an end and get a political process
under way in Syria. I will be grateful to hear from
Russia and Iran how exactly we can bring that about.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I want to start, obviously, by thanking all Council
members for their heartfelt condolences and wishes.
They are my brothers and sisters, and I think that is
why, when we speak about something like Syria, we are
all very passionate about it. We know what pain feels
like, we know what suffering is and we get frustrated
when we see things happening that we cannot control.
This meeting was called for the purpose of
discussing the Astana talks for a peaceful solution
in Syria. We welcome the opportunity to discuss the
prospects for a diplomatic solution in Syria, but let us
not waste time with the disinformation, distractions
and outright lies that the Al-Assad regime and its
Russian and Iranian partners constantly use to distort
this conversation. Let us talk about the facts on the
ground in Syria.
This month already, the world has seen a clear
military escalation in Idlib. The Russian and Al-Assad
regime air forces have launched over 100 air strikes.
They are using barrel bombs, rockets and artillery.
They are targeting hospitals and medical facilities.
They are conducting ruthless double-tap strikes on
civilian volunteers like the White Helmets. For those
listening who have not heard of double-tap strikes,
that is when pro-regime forces strike an area, wait a
few moments for first responders to arrive and then
strike again. It is a disgusting tactic of terrorists, not
professional soldiers.
According to the United Nations, over 30,000
people have already been displaced by ongoing air
strikes. We have heard a lot of talk today, but we have
not seen any actions to indicate that Russia, Iran and
Al-Assad are interested in a political solution. All we
have seen are the actions of cowards interested in a
bloody military conquest of Idlib. Turkey learned that
lesson last week when it met with Russia and Iran.
Turkey wanted them to agree to a ceasefire in Idlib,
18-28115

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

but Russia and Iran rejected Turkey’s request and the
Al-Assad regime continued its brutal attacks.
The United States is long past taking Russia and
Iran at their word that they are interested in protecting
civilians in Idlib from further violence. No matter what
type of weapons or methods are used, the United States
strongly opposes any escalation of violence in Idlib.
Every member of the Security Council should feel the
same. It is time for Russia to stop wasting our time
when it comes to peace in Syria. Russia and Iran have
had every opportunity to demonstrate their credibility
as constructive actors in Syria. But what have they
done with these opportunities? They created so-called
de-escalation zones throughout Syria, which they have
cynically, systematically and ruthlessly violated. In
February, they violated the de-escalation zone in eastern
Ghouta. In July, Russia blatantly broke a commitment
made by President Putin and President Trump to
upholding a ceasefire arrangement in south-western
Syria. Now, In Idlib, Russia and Iran are violating their
last remaining so-called de-escalation zone.
These are not the actions of good-faith parties
of peace. This is not how you demonstrate your
commitment to protecting civilian lives, and this
is not how you convince the United States and other
countries to fund reconstruction efforts in Syria. I
repeat that it would be absurd for the United States and
other countries to consider the demands from Russia
and its allies that the rest of the world should fund
reconstruction efforts in Syria as Russian air strikes
pummel Idlib in an escalation of a new military assault.
Russia, Iran and Al-Assad are demolishing Idlib and
asking us to call it peace. But the reality is that Astana
has failed. It has failed to stop the violence or to promote
a political solution.
We will know that the Al-Assad regime and its
enablers are serious about a political process for peace
in Syria not when they repeat empty promises but when
the violence stops; when the air strikes and the ground
offensives stop; when they allow the United Nations to
deliver life-saving humanitarian aid to civilians and
allow them the freedom of movement to escape the
impending siege; when they work with us to pursue
real terrorists, not to create more of them by targeting
innocent civilians; when we see irreversible progress
made through the United Nations-led Geneva talks
to reach a political transition in line with resolution
2254 (2015); and when we see Iran’s influence over
events in Syria completely extinguished. We will not

S/PV. 8347

allow Iran, through the facade of the Astana process,
to hijack the future of the Syrian people. Iran’s role
and Al-Assad’s murderous attacks on civilians will
not be ignored by the United States and the rest of the
international community.
I would also like to reiterate what I said last week
to the Al-Assad regime and anyone else contemplating
the use of chemical weapons in Syria (see S/PV.8345).
The United States followed through when it said that
it would respond to the use of chemical weapons. We
stand by that warning. Russia has the power to stop the
catastrophe looming in Idlib. It has the power to stop
the killing. It still has the power to match its words of
peace with deeds by working in Geneva to achieve a
political transition in Syria. We consider any assault
on Idlib to be a reckless escalation of the conflict. If
Al-Assad, Russia and Iran continue along the same
path, the consequences will be dire. The world will hold
them responsible and no number of Security Council
meetings will change that.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have listened carefully to the discussion
today. We have just as much interest in it as the other
member States of the Security Council. Many people
today have asked us to reveal our plans for Idlib. We too
would like the coalition to share its plans for Syria with
us, but frankly neither the plans announced by highlevel representatives of the coalition members or those
expressed during today’s meeting give us much hope.
We have heard concrete threats against both a sovereign
State and Russia that, incidentally, are actually not
directly linked to the possible use of chemical weapons.
When we discussed that issue here in the Chamber
on Friday, I could see that nuances in how our Western
partners expressed their positions had appeared. The
alarm bells sounded with the statement of the principle
that force could be used against the sovereign State of
the Syrian Arab Republic in response not just to the
alleged use of chemical weapons but also to the launch
of a military operation in Idlib. I would like to ask you,
Madam President, not to try to swap these terms. We are
talking about an anti-terrorist operation in Idlib, not a
military operation. There have been constant references
to the de-escalation zones, but I want to once again

18-2811515/18

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

emphasize that they were intended to be temporary, not
something that would be there forever. Sooner or later,
they were to be replaced by local truces, and where
that did not occur, by anti-terrorist operations. That is
what has happened in other de-escalation areas now
under the control of the Syrian authorities and to which
Syrian civilians are now returning.
Both today and on Friday, I have also seen something
else, which is that some of my colleagues have been
stubbornly trying to divide the Astana guarantors.
They will not succeed. Some of them would very much
like the Astana process to collapse, and my American
colleague said that the process has failed. Perhaps you
would like that, Madam President, but I must disappoint
you, because the Astana process is ongoing. And I am
sure that with its help we will achieve tangible results
in Syria.
I have said it before and I will say it again.
Everything that is going on, and all the invocations we
have heard about Idlib, are not so much out of concern
for the civilian population there — and, incidentally,
whose existence we are also aware of and about
which we are no less concerned than you, Madam
President — as they are attempts to find any way
possible to preserve the last major terrorist enclave in
Syria and thereby prevent the Syrian Government from
regaining full control of its own territory. We continue
to call on you to drop these attempts and work on the
real process of reaching a political settlement. And you
can be certain that we are in close contact both with our
partners in the Astana process and with those who are
in control of the situation on the ground in Idlib, so that
we can prevent the civilian population from suffering
as a result of an anti-terrorist operation as much as we
possibly can.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my condolences to the families and
friends of the victims of terrorism today.
The recent tripartite summit in Tehran took place
at a critical juncture. The Presidents of Iran, Russia and
Turkey, pleased with the contribution that the Astana
format has made to peace, security and stability in
Syria, discussed the way forward to durable peace in
the country. They conveyed a clear message through
their joint statement, reaffirming their continued strong
commitment to Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
16/18

11/09/2018

unity and territorial integrity, which are every State’s
inherent right, and Syria is no exception to that. They
should be strictly respected by all. The three Presidents
rejected all attempts to create a new reality on the
ground under the pretext of combating terrorism. That
explicit and clear-cut message must be heard. As a
victim of chemical weapons itself, Iran condemns in
the strongest possible terms any use of such weapons by
anyone, any time and anywhere. At the same time, we
warn against any attacks, including under the pretext
of the alleged use of such weapons by the Syrian
Government. At a time when Syria has destroyed all of
its chemical weapons under international supervision,
such allegations are mere fabrications in an attempt to
use force against it, and any such attempt would only
further complicate the situation.
Another clear and strong message from the summit
is that the Presidents are determined to continue their
cooperation in eliminating all terrorists, including
Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and all other individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities associated with
Al-Qaida or Da’esh, which have been designated
as terrorists by the Council. Of course, that must be
done while preventing civilian casualties. That is why
the Presidents reaffirmed their determination to work
towards protecting civilians. As President Rouhani
stressed at the Tehran summit, combating terrorism
requires a comprehensive approach by taking into
account all aspects of this unpleasant phenomenon.
From that perspective, the fight against terrorism in
Idlib is an integral part of the mission of restoring
peace and stability to Syria, but that fight must not
hurt civilians.
Likewise, improving the humanitarian situation by
facilitating rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to all Syrians in need was highlighted.
Those will be guiding principles with respect to
ongoing efforts to combat terrorists in Idlib.
Precisely for that reason, the Presidents underlined
the utmost importance of separating terrorists and the
armed opposition groups that joined, or will join, the
ceasefire regime.
Another concrete message of the Tehran summit
was that the Syrian conflict can end only through a
negotiated political process.
Against that backdrop, the Presidents stressed the
need for, and their resolve to cooperate in, advancing
18-28115

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process.
The right to determine the future of Syria belongs
exclusively to Syrians. To that end, cooperation towards
establishing and launching the work of a constitutional
committee is critical.
Parallel to such efforts, conducive conditions
should be prepared for the safe and voluntary return of
all refugees and internally displaced persons. That will
undoubtedly contribute to the ceasefire and national
dialogue and accelerate the reconciliation process.
To that end, convening an international conference
on Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons
is important.
While Syria is passing through a critical stage
in defeating terrorists and regaining its unity and
territorial integrity, the international community should
stand firm in breathing new life into the country. As
the Islamic Republic of Iran supported Syria to defeat
terrorists, so will it play its constructive role in bringing
peace and prosperity to the country.
Finally, with regard to the references made to my
country by the representative of the United States,
I should reiterate that Iran was invited by Syria to
fight terrorists. However, the United States military
operations in Syria are illegal and an act of aggression.
They are against the Charter of the United Nations and
should come to an end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): At the outset, I also would
like to pay homage to the memory of the victims of
9/11. Our thoughts and prayers are with their families.
We should never forget that tragic day or lower our
guard, and should always remain united in the fight
against terrorism.

S/PV. 8347

has been the establishment of the de-escalation zones.
The Idlib de-escalation zone, as a case in point, has
dramatically reduced violence in the province.
Idlib was the main agenda item at the Tehran
summit. The leaders agreed that the situation in Idlib
should be addressed in line with the principles and
the spirit of cooperation that characterized the Astana
format. Those shared principles, such as the preservation
of the territorial integrity of Syria and the need to find
a political solution to the conflict, are crucial for our
efforts to succeed in Idlib and elsewhere in Syria.
At the summit, President Erdoğan underlined the
need to preserve the de-escalation zone and called for
an immediate and complete ceasefire in Idlib. The
ceasefire, as highlighted by our Minister of Defence
yesterday, should include all air and ground attacks.
There can be no arbitrary hierarchy of death. While
condemning and warning against chemical attacks,
we cannot overlook the use of conventional weapons,
which continue to cause massive casualties. Our
calls for an immediate ceasefire include all military
operations, and Turkey will continue to work on that
basis. We invite the international community to vocally
and actively support our efforts to that end.
As pointed out by the members of the Security
Council, there is no doubt that an all-out military
operation would result in a major humanitarian
catastrophe. Such an operation would trigger a massive
wave of refugees and tremendous security risks for
Turkey, the rest of Europe and beyond. With all our
generosity, we have gone to extraordinary lengths to
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people, including
hosting approximately 3.5 million refugees, more than
any other country in the world. But let us face it: we
long ago exceeded the limits of our capacity.

The Permanent Representatives of the Russian
Federation and Iran briefed the Security Council
about the Tehran summit held on 7 September. Upon
instructions from my Government, I also would like to
share my country’s views on the outcome of the summit
and our position on the developments in Idlib.

We simply cannot allow a fait accompli in Idlib
that would endanger the lives of millions of innocent
civilians. That is our collective duty as the international
community. Today the people who are watching us with
worry in Idlib are not terrorists, but rather 3.5 million
civilians, 1 million of whom are children. We must not
fail them.

The Astana format was created in order to help
reduce violence across Syria and give impetus to the
political process. The importance of maintaining
our joint efforts to end the conflict in Syria through
a political solution were reconfirmed in the Astana
meetings. The most concrete outcome of the format

The Syrian regime seeks to legitimize its operation
on counter-terrorism grounds. Let us make no mistake:
such an operation would not achieve the stated goal.
In a complex place like Idlib, traditional counterterrorism methods would not yield the desired results.
On the contrary, they would create further suffering

18-2811517/18

S/PV.8347

The situation in the Middle East

and alienate and radicalize more Syrians. In that sense,
a military operation in Idlib would only play into the
hands of terrorists.
Only a viable ceasefire would allow the creation
of an environment to effectively fight terrorism. That
entails employing approaches that require time and
patience. That is what Turkey has been working towards
achieving through its separation efforts in Idlib. In order
for our efforts to succeed, guarantees must be given to
civilians and moderate opposition groups that they will
not be targeted once they separate from terrorists. That
is the underlying objective of the call for a ceasefire by
President Erdoğan.
In line with the Astana memorandum, Turkey
established 12 observation posts in the Idlib
de-escalation zone. Our observation posts have
prevented violations. Our presence has also contributed
to creating conditions for separating terrorists from
moderate opposition groups.
Furthermore, Turkey has been at the forefront
in the fight against terrorism, and we are resolved to
combat that scourge without discriminating among
terrorist groups. We have reinstated stability and calm
in the areas we cleared from terrorists in Syria. We
are pleased to observe that hundreds of thousands of
Syrians have voluntarily returned to their homeland
and that a responsible approach to counter-terrorism
can indeed win hearts and minds.
There should be no illusion: there can be no military
victory in Syria. A military solution cannot bring
about any legitimacy, or create a lasting settlement.
Legitimacy can be achieved only through a negotiated
political solution. The United Nations-led Geneva
process remains the main venue to that end, in line with
the resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). And the situation in Idlib will be
decisive for the fate of the political process.
At the Tehran summit, the three guarantors
reaffirmed their resolve to continue joint efforts to
advance the political process. They reiterated their
commitment to help establish and launch a constitutional
committee. In that framework, senior officials of the
three guarantors are currently meeting Special Envoy
de Mistura in Geneva to continue their discussions
to start the committee’s work. We attach the utmost
importance to the establishment of a constitutional
committee and creating the conditions for holding free

18/18

11/09/2018

and fair elections under United Nations supervision
without further delay.
As President Erdoğan stated in his article in The
Wall Street Journal yesterday,
“Idlib is the last exit before the toll. If the
international community, including Europe and
the United States, fails to take action now, not
only innocent Syrians but the entire world stands
to pay the price. Turkey has done everything in its
power to stop the bloodshed next door. To ensure
that we succeed, the rest of the world must set aside
narrow self-interest and throw its weight behind a
political solution.”
Today — with our partners in Astana, with
the Council under this roof and with the overall
international community — we face the moment of of
truth in defence of the values we stand for.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be brief, but
I want to thank the Turkish representative for again
setting out the Turkish plan. All of us have listened
very carefully to the Astana briefers. We do not want
to detract from the Astana efforts; we support any
move that gets the political process under way. But we
have heard only one plan today for trying to avert the
bloodshed in Idlib and actually make a difference on
the ground. I would urge all Security Council members
to rally around the plan that our Turkish colleague has
set out.
What worries me is that instead we have heard
a narrative that restoring full Syrian control over its
territory is synonymous with fighting terrorists. For
the people of Idlib that is not the equation. The people
of Idlib are going to suffer terribly if this military
assault goes ahead. It is precisely for these situations
that the doctrine of proportionality under international
humanitarian law exists.
I therefore hope that the Council can come together
over the coming days to talk further about how we can
maximize the political process, building on Astana’s
efforts but as well having a very serious discussion
about how we can avert an all-out military attack on
the people of Idlib.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

18-28115
