UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

245gth

MEETING:

NEW

29 JULY 1983

‘YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2458)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*......

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Niger to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Democratic
Yemen to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15890) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2458

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears, or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are Published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2458th MEETING
Held
President: Mr. LING

in New York on Friday,

29 July 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charg6 d’affahes a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
counciI (S/15890)

Qing (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:.
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of Ainerica, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisiona
1. Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2458)

of the agenda

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): In
accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings
on this item [2401st, 2412th to 2414th, ,2438th and 2457th
meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, the German
De~mocratic Republic, Greece, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Morocco,
Niger, Qatar, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber; I invite .the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council
table.

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1548 1);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15890).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan),
Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. AIAshtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Ott
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. Dountas (Greece), Mr.
Krishnan (India), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic
of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Fakhoury (Lebanon),
Mr. Zainal Abidin (Malaysia), Mr. Traore (Mali). Mr. Mrani
Zentar (Morocco),
Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr, Jamal
(Qatar), Mr. Sarre (Senegao, Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Kirqa (Turkey), Mr. Al-Qasimi (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. SaIIam (Yemen) and Mr. Golob (Yugoshrvia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took
a place at the Council table.

The meeting was called to order at 11.55 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): The
first speaker is the representative of Egypt, I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
3. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Egyptian delegation, Sir, is pleased to see China presiding over the Council. The friendship between Egypt and
1

China is deep and long-standing. The relationship between
our two countries was consolidated by the recent visit of
President Hosni Mubarak to China. In fact, he is the fist
Egyptian President to have visited China. I wish also to
express our deep appreciation for the wisdom you have
displayed in your guidance of the proceedings of the Council during the present month. This is in keeping with your
well-known competence.

of Al-Khalil;
fourthly, by spreading anxiety and fear
among those Palestinians who remain in order to make
them accept the existing repressive situation and
acquiesce in the colonizers’ demands; fifthly, by eliminating all attempts aimed at building pillars of coexistence
between the Jewish and Arab peoples and by rejecting all
measures conducive to building confidence between the
two parties. Israel goes so far as to undermine all channels
of communication, dismiss mayors and disolve municipal
councils, imprison defenceless inhabitants and impose
curfews.

4. I am pleased also to convey to your predecessor, the
representative of Zimbabwe, our congratulations on a job
well done as President of the Council during the month of
June.

8. The policy of building settlements in the occupied
Arab territories is parallel with trampling on the rights
of the Arab inhabitants of those territories, including
their human rights, at a time when Israel is constantly
paying lip-service to human rights in the East and the
West.

5. The Council is meeting again today to resume consideration of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories, a situation that has deteriorated owing to Israel’s
policy and the conduct of the occupation authorities in
those territories. We are confident that the Council, by
virture of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter
of the United Nations, will not disregard the plight of the
Palestinian people living under the yoke of Israeli occupation, especially in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. This
occupation is coupled with a far more serious phenomenon that has often been declared by the international community as violating international norms and jeopardizing
opportunities for peace; to put it more correctly, it is the
Israeli policy-planned,
signed and sealed-to build settiements, displace the Arab inhabitants, deport them from
their lands and homes and replace them with new settlers.

9. The sowing of seeds of malice, through these measures and acts, and the renewal of attacks against
defenceless civilians are mainly the result of Israel’s persistence in occupying Arab territories and its adherence
to the policy of establishing settlements, applying that
policy to the Arab inhabitants, who have no recourse
but to exercise their natural right to defend what remains
of their property, territory and homeland.
10. Their legitimate protests are called a “rebellion”,
and we see mayors dismissed and municipal councils
dissolved with a stroke of the pen. They are described as
“agitators” who deserve nothing from the occupation
authorities other than deportation, expulsion, displacement, curtailment of their livelihood, imprisonment
or
even worse. We have heard certain officials in Israel
describe the treacherous, armed ravaging of the Islamic
University of Al-Khalil as a terrorist act. However, we
also hear certain statements ascribed to official Israeli
sources to the effect that the arms in the hands of groups
of Israeli settlers are legitimate and legal.

6. The Israeli presence in the West Bank and Gaza is, as
is known, that of an occupying Power in Palestinian territories, an occupation that came about as the result of a
military invasion followed by an illegal occupation, in
1967. It is a situation that falls under the terms of Council
resolution 242 (1967), which emphasizes the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war. It also fails
legally under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949,’ regulating occupation situations. However, Israel
rejects both. It refuses to withdraw from the territories
and obstructs any action conducive to progress towards a
genuine settlement of the Palestinian question, a settlement which to be viable must be just, must be arrived at
by peaceful means and must restore to the Palestinian
people all their legitimate rights.

11. Egypt considers Israel directly responsible for the
act of aggression against the Islamic University of AlKhalil. Since it is the occupying Power, it is responsible
for acts of aggression against the security and safety of
the Palestinian people in the occupied. territories of
Gaza and the West Bank. We declare from this rostrum
that all States should alert Israel to this fact.

7. Not only is Israel not content with rejecting implementation of, or adherence to, the rules of the Geneva
Convention, but it also persists in carrying out its arbitrary policy in the Palestinian territories, as follows: first,
by annexing new territories to Israel, as in the case of
Arab Jerusalem; secondly, by colonizing other territories
and illegally establishing new settlements; thirdly, by displacing the Arab inhabitants overtly by repressive measures,- arbitrary actions and constraints imposed by the
occupation authorities which, ultimately,
compel the
Arab inhabitants to leave, or through terrorism carried
out by armed groups of settlers with impunity and without compunction, such as those who opened fire indiscriminately against the students of the Islamic University

12. I shall not be revealing a secret here if I draw attention to the fact that Cairo newspapers published in the
last two days contained ample references to an urgent
message sent on 27 July to Mr. Shultz, United States
Secretary of State, by Mr. Kamal Hassan Aii, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Egypt, in which the latter indicated to Mr. Shultz
Egypt’s point of view concerning the attack against AlKhaiil University. Mr. Kamal Hassan Ali called upon
the United States to assume its responsibilities within
the framework of its role in the peace process in the
Middle East.
2

13. Egypt has officially denounced the terrorist attack
against the students of Al-Khalil
University and the
ensuing arbitrary measures adopted by the Israeli occupation authorities. This shameful act of aggression confirms the incredible plight of the Palestinian people in
the occupied territories and the extent of the danger to
which they are exposed. Egypt calls for the taking of all
necessary measures to arrest the terrorists who are
responsible and bring them to trial to prevent the repetition of such actions.

that have been misappropriated by Israel as a result of
aggression. An ever clearer picture emerges of the scope
of the expansionist designs of Tel Aviv, whose ultimate
goal is to annex the Palestinian and other Arab lands
seized in 1967 and to render a just and comprehensive
solution to the Middle East problem impossible. It does
its best, as in Lebanon, to seize further Arab territories.
18. The Council cannot and should not remain indifferent to such illegal acts, which are systematically perpetrated by the Israeli aggressors on Arab soil.

14. The crux of the problem of the Middle East has been
and will always be the question of Palestine. It is obvious
that Israel is attempting to evade the question of Palestine
by masking it behind other priorities and questions in
order to try to distract attention from the oppressive
measures it is carrying out and its attempts to change the
characteristics of the Palestinian entity in the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank, falsely thinking that that will make
the Palestinians finaily submit to its authority. The holding of power will not lead to the establishment of the
peace which the international
community
so much
desires, and it will not change the reality of Palestinian
existence and the question of the Palestinian people. The
exercise of domination and power and the oppression of
defenceless civilians cannot be called peace. How many
actions have been committed in the name of peace?
Throughout history crimes have been committed in the
name of liberty.

19. The policies of the Israeli occupier have frequently
been properly evaluated in a number of Council resolutions. In connection with the item we are considering
today, we should in particular be mindful of the fact
that, in resolution 465 (1980), the Council declared that
the measures being taken by Israel to alter the physical
character, demographic composition and institutional
structure or status of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
have no legal validity. At that time, the Council called
upon Israel to rescind those measures, to dismantle the
existing settlements and, in particular, to cease, on an
urgent basis, the establishment, construction and planning of settlements in the Arab territories.
20. What was Israel’s response to those fair and, let us
be quite frank, clearly minimal demands? It was the
annexation of East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights,
further aggressive sorties against neighbouring
Arab
States and a vast and bloody invasion in Lebanon. It
responded by constructing dozens of new settlements in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, where it continues
methodically to carry out plans to locate thousands of
new settlers. Finally, Israel responded with an abrupt
escalation of mass terror and repression against the population of the occupied territories.

15. The deteriorating situation in the occupied territories requires explicit and decisive action by the Council.
The international community should hold Israel completely responsible. It should be questioned about its acts
by the international community, which sees its principles,
he basis of its conduct, and its laws flouted and trampled
upon. The Council has already pronounced itself on the
illegality of the policy of building settlements in the occupied territories and has determined that all measures
taken by Israel to change the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of
the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem, are null and void and a barrier
to peace [resolution 465 (1980)].

21. It must be perfectly obvious that the Israeli ruling
clique is pursuing an increasingly dangerous and more
irresponsible policy. By relying on brute military force,
Israel is impudently throwing down the gauntlet to the
international
community.

16. We call today on all the members of the Council
without exception to take a decisive position vis-d-vik the
settlement policies and practices in the occupied Arab territories so that the Council can assume its responsibilities
at this difficult stage. The Council must take a.position on
a situation that never ceases to worsen for the Arab
population.

22. All these are well-known facts. But it is even more
important to understand why Israel can, in fact, behave
in this manner. There is one reason: it is relying on the
support of poweful protectors and partners overseas. In
this context, the policies of Washington are year by year
and day by day becoming more and more clearly proIsrael in orientation. New facts attesting to this are constantly coming to our attention, facts that were until
quite recently kept secret.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub17. Mr. OVINNIKOV
lics) (interpretation from Russian): The question of the
situation in the occupied Arab territories, like other
aspects of the situation in the Middle East, has become a
permanent feature of the Council’s agenda. One fifth of
all the meetings of the Council have been devoted to these
matters. That is quite natural. Every day brings reports
from the Middle East about fresh atrocities and crimes
committed by the Israeli authorities in the Arab territories

23. It is now an established fact that when Israel’s
Prime Minister Begin made his first visit to Washington
in July 1977-precisely six years ago-he secured from
President Carter. the following promise, namely, that
President Carter would no longer publicly refer to
Israel’s withdrawing to the boundaries of 1967 “with
slight modifications**. And, in fact, since that time the
3

United States has remained silent on that point, as if the
cat had got its tongue.
24. It is now an established fact that when, in March
1978, Begin once again had talks in Washington with the
President of the United States, the President gave the following account of his understanding of Israel’s position to
that country’s Prime Minister, namely, according to the
President’s summary, that, fust, Israel was not willing to
retreat either politically or militarily from any part of the
West Bank and, secondly, that Israel was unwilling to
cease the construction of new settlements or to restrict the
expansion of existing ones. For his part, Begin told the
United States President that that was a rather negative
way of expressing the Israeli position, but that he did not
in fact deny the correctness of this understanding. Thus,
only five years ago the United States had a very clear idea
of what Israel wanted in the West Bank. Nevertheless, it
continued-and
it still continues-to
support Tel Aviv.
25. It is another established fact that, in September
1978, Begin told the Americans that he found the language of Council resolution 242 (1967) unacceptable
when it referred to the “inadmissibility
of the acquisition
of territory by war”. According to what Begin said to
Carter, the 1967 war gave Israel the right to alter the
boundaries. Begin told the United States President that
for that reason Israel would under no circumstances agree
to any document that included such language. As we
know,. that language was in fact entirely deleted by the
United States from the Camp David agreements.
26, This, therefore, is the reason for the growing arrogance of Israel. The United States gives in to every new
demand Israel makes, at the expense of the Arabs. A
further step in this direction is, the stated position of the

present United States Administration
that the Israeli
settlements on Arab lands are, in the eyes of the United
States, legal. After all that, the United States has gone
on to declare Israel its “strategic partner”. Those who
have ears to hear, let them hear, because these are incontrovertible facts.
27. There can be no shadow of a doubt that responsibility for the present tragedy in the Middle East and the
further aggravation of the situation in that part of the
world is borne equally by Israel and the United States.
28. As for the Soviet Union, its position is briefly as
follows: the Soviet Union has unswervingly supported
and will continue to support the just cause of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and their valiant struggle
for their inalienable legal rights. The Soviet Union firmly
holds that a genuine solution to the Palestinian question
and other problems of the Middle East can be achieved
only as part of a comprehensive settlement on the basis
of relevant United Nations resolutions. Only honest
efforts, only collective efforts with the participation
of
all parties concerned, including, of course, the PLO as
the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, can bring about a just and-for that reason-a
durable peace in the Middle East.
29. We-are convinced of the rightness of our position.
The future will prove it to be correct.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

NOTE ’

’ United Nations, Treugv Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT’ SE PROCURfi
LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIOSS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les apences d&x~sitaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous auplps de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK IlOJIYYMTb’ M3LIAHWR OPI-AHM3A!.lMM
OE%E~MHEHHbIX
HAilMti
M3namra Opratrrt3aumt O6aemweHnbtx HauHR MOXWO
~yns~b n ntmabix
5tara3miax
H aretiwzraax 80 acex paRottax hmpa. Haaonnre cnpaaKa 06 ii3natutnx n aatuext Kum~tio~t
Mara3HHe trntt nHtuHre no anpecy: Opratftt3auHn 06beRnHeHHbtX Hauttn. CeKulln no
nponaxre sr3nanuB. HbK)-HopK umi IKetreaa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIOhi
DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

-

90-60205-July 1991-2,050
